UNCLASSIFIED                               STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State        SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739832
Date: 05/13/2015                                                                                             RELEASE IN
                                                                                                             PART B6




              From:                            Mills, Cheryl 0 <MillsCD@state.gov>
              Sent:                            Friday, September 28, 2012 4:41 PM
              To:
              Subject:                         FW: DNI Statement




              From: Meehan, Bernadette (mailto:
              Sent: Friday, September 28, 2012 04:26 PM
              To. Nuland Victoria 3' Peiton, Erin;
                                         ; Schmaier, Tracy (OPA)                                                        Boyd,           B6
              Dean (NSD)
              Subject: FW: DNI Statement



                                                              September 28, 2012

                Statement by the Director of Public Affairs for National Intelligence Shawn Turner on the intelligence
                               related to the terrorist attack on the U.S. consulate in Benghazi, Libya

              In the aftermath of the terrorist attack on U.S. personnel and facilities in Benghazi, Libya, the Intelligence
              Community launched a comprehensive effort to determine the circumstances surrounding the assault and to
              identity the mpetrators. We also reviewed all available intelligence to determine if there might be follow-on
              attacks against our people or facilities in Libya or elsewhere in the world.

              As the Intelligence Community collects and analyzes more information related to the attack, our understanding
              of the event continues to evolve. In the immediate aftermath. there was information that led us to assess that the
              attack began spontaneously following protests earlier that day at our embassy in Cairo. We provided that initial
              assessment to Executive Branch officials and members of Congress, who used that information to discuss the
              attack publicly and provide updates as they became available. Throughout our investigation we continued to
              emphasize that information gathered was preliminary and evolving.

              As we learned more about the attack, we revised our initial assessment to reflect new information indicating that
              it was a deliberate and organized terrorist attack carried out by extremists. It remains unclear if any group or
              person exercised overall command and control of the attack, and if extremist group leaders directed their
              members to participate. However, we do assess that some of those involved were linked to gmups affiliated
              with or sympathetic to al-Qa`ida. We continue to make progress, but there remain many unanswered questions.
              As more information becomes available our analysis will continue to evolve and we will obtain a more
              complete understanding of the circumstances surrounding the terrorist attack.

             We continue to support the ongoing FBI investigation and the State Department review of the Benghazi terrorist
             attack, pmviding the full capabilities and resources of the Intelligence Community to those efforts. We also will
             continue to meet our responsibility to keep Congress fully and currently informed. For its part, the Intelligence
             Community will continue to follow the information about the tragic events in Benghazi wherever it leads. The
             President demands and expects that we will do this, as do Congress and the American people. As an Intelligence
             Community, we owe nothing less than our best efforts in this regard, especially to the families of the four
             courageous Americans who lost their lives at Benghazi in service of their country

                                                                    ###

UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739832                          STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015                SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.                STATE-SCB0045510
