UNCLASSIFIED                               STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State        SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739884
Date: 05/13/2015                                                                                                        RELEASE IN
                                                                                                                        FULL




             From;                              Sullivan, Jacobi <Sullivanii@state.gove
             Sent:                              Saturday, July 7,2012 12:31 PM
             To:
             Subject                           Fw: Libya intel from S


             Fyi


                 Original Message ---
             From: Stevens, John C
             Sent: Saturday, July 07, 2012 12:13 PM
             To: Sullivan, Jacob
             Cc: Jones, Beth E
             Subject: RE: Libya intel from S

             Jake - Thanks for this. Tracks with what we are hearing about elections and the weakness of the interim govt. Elections
             are going smoothly throughout most of Libya (Ajdabiya being the exception, where some ballots were sabotaged
             requiring voting in some centers to be postponed for a few hours). Factoring in time to tally votes and process appeals,
             the UN and the Libyan elections commission are anticipating announcing final results by late July. The expectation is
             that the TNC will remain in power until the new congress is seated.

             Sett McCain and I toured the new parliament this afternoon, where we encountered a TNC member, an engineer and a
             couple of UN experts reviewing progress on the interior decor of the main chamber. They are racing to get the chamber
             finished in time for the first session. The UN is offering technical assistance to the secretariat of the new congress,
             ranging from parliamentary procedure to legislative drafting. They're even helping to plot out the choreography of the
             first sessions.

            The atmosphere in Tripoli is very festive. The gov't declared today a holiday and people are driving around honking and
            waving flags and making peace sign gestures. We visited several polling stations where we found people patiently
            waiting in lines (gender segregated) lvlcCain was applauded and thanked for his support wherever we went.

            -- Chris

            -----Original Message
            From: Sullivan, Jacob
            Sent: Saturday, July 07, 2012 10:07 AM
            To: Jones, Beth E; Stevens, John C
            Subject: Libya intel from S

            Further info from friend of 5:

            SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as the highest levels of
            European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.
            1. As of the morning of July 6, an individual with access to the information stated in confidence that Libyan National
            Transitional Council (NTC) President Mustafa Abdel ialil remains committed to a transfer of power to a popularly elected
            government; however, he is prepared to extend the life of the NTC as a guarantor of stability for the Libyan people
            following the July 7, 2012 election for seats in a 200 member General National Congress (6 NC) Jail) realizes that 2.7
            million Libyans have registered to vote and are generally anxious to replace the increasingly unpopular NTC. That said,
            Jaill expects the voting to lead to a period of confusion and he will not abandon his authority until the results are fixed.

UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739884                          STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015                SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.                          STATE-SCB0045197
UNCLASSIFIED                               STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State        SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739884
Date: 05/13/2015



             2. Jalil is also frustrated by the fact that during its eight-month tenure of the administration of Prime Minister Made!
             Rahrnan el-Keib - who was appointed by the NTC — was unable to provide solutions for Libya's long list of needs: a
             functioning justice system, a reconciliation process for officials who served the old administration, the disarming of
             militia, building functional national security forces, rebuilding destroyed areas, and delivering basic services such as
             healthcare.

             3. At the same time, outside of the oil sector, much of Libya's economy is stagnant, and in the opinion of Western
             security officials, lacks the government's go-ahead to restart public sector infrastructure contracts. In addition,
             international advisers and foreign investors are reluctant to return to an environment where the government will not
             sign long term agreements and cannot guarantee security.

            4. (Source Comment: According to an extremely sensitive source, Jai continues to believe that this chaotic situation
            should not be surprising. He regularly points out that eight months is not a sufficient amount of time to build functioning
            institutions from the remnants of the regime of former dictator Muammar al Qaddafi. The old regime featured a
            dysfunctional bureaucracy, idiosyncratic rule, and anti-institutionalism. Additionally, Jalil now realizes that due to
            pronounced incompetence and a lack of will to take unpopular decisions the el-Keib government also failed to make
            progress in the few areas where it could have achieved meaningful change. The towns of Sirte and Tawargha are
            representative of the situation in the countryside where people lost their homes in the conflict and have been living in
            temporary camps with limited ability to register and vote in their home district. Jail' has been urged by contacts in the
            French and Italian Governments to guarantee the rights of people across the country. In particular, he has serious
            concerns as to whether or not supporters of former dictator Muammar al Qaddafi in his hometown of Sirte will be
            included in the future political processes of the new Libya; if they are not allowed to vote by local militiamen. At the
            same time, the fighting between Libyan Arabs and Tebu tribesmen in the Kufra area threatens to prevent any voting
            there. Jalil has been warned that the NTC regulations now state that members of the National Army are not allowed to
            vote or run for office, which is a disincentive for armed militia brigade members to become legitimate soldiers.)

            5. This well informed individual believes that despite these flaws, the new government created by the July 7 election will
            eventually have the mandate to take the difficult decisions that can create a reconciliation process. Jalil will work to
            maintain order in this transition period, and finally reach his goal of creating a situation where the government can
            rebuild homes and restore sufficient law and order; allowing those in Sine, Tawargha, Kufra, and throughout the rest of
            the country to live in their hometowns, establishing a situation where a true civil society can develop.

            6. Jail!, in conversations with the leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood (MB), and separately with liberal leader Ali
            Tarhouni, has acknowledged that the central government's top priority must be security and that the NTC has been
            unable to provide it. That said, JAI and Minister of Defense Ousama al-Juwali have pledged to provide 30,000 to 40,000
            security personnel for election day to prevent similar incidents to the July 1 attack on Benghazi's election headquarters.
            In that case eastern federalists entered the building, where ballot papers were burned and ballot boxes destroyed.
            Similarly, these federalist forces are suspected of the attack on July 5 that burned down Ajdabiya's main storage centre
            for election materials.

            7. In the opinion of this individual, although those responsible for the Benghazi attack were pro-federalist, it has not
            been proven that they were members of the self-appointed Cyrenaican National Council (CNC), whose military arm set
            up a roadblock in Wadi al-Ahmar on Libya's major east-west highway to demand that Cyrenaica get as many seats in the
            GNC as Tripolitania. Thus far, neither the CNC nor any other group has publicly stated that they intend to use violence to
            disrupt the elections. (Note: Under the current system Tripolitania will have 120 seats in the GNC, Cyrenaica (Barge) 62,
            and Fezzan in the South 18.)




UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739884                          STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015                SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.                             STATE-SCB0045198
