UNCLASSIFIED                              STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State       SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739809
Date: 05/13/2015

                                                                                                             RELEASE IN
                                                                                                             FULL



             From:                            Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivarill@state.gov>
             Sent:                            Friday, January 6, 2012 2:25 PM
             To:
             Subject:                              HRC friend


            FYI
            .       •
            From FeItrnan, Jeffrey D
            Sent: Friday, January 06,, 2012 1:55 AM
            To: Sullivan, Jacob J; Cret2, Gene A
            Cc: Bums, William 3
            Subject: Re: HRC friend

            Ill have to defer to Gene on this. It's a fascinating read, and some stuff mentioned has already happened (such as the
            appointment ofiuwaili as Minister of Defense Juwaili is close to the UAE, incidentally). But I simply do not know the
            ins and outs of the new Libyan politics in sufficient detail to give a view as to the accuracy of this report A few bits
            seemed off key (e.g, the reference that both the misrata and Zintan Brigades once reported "loosely" to BelHaj I don't
            believe is true, since Juwaili and the IJAE supported the latter and Qatar the former).

            The comment about Belhaj staying out of govt and thus retain the flexibility to carp and make trouble: Jake, you may
            remember that AbZ warned exactly of that danger in that weird mtg Qatar insisted upon on the margins of UNGA.

            Gene?
            Jeffrey Feltman


            From: Sullivan, Jacob 3
            Sent: Thursday, January 05, 2012 07:25 PM
            To: Feitman, Jeffrey D; Crete Gene A
            Cc: Bums, William 3
            Subject: HRC friend

            Another friend of HRC's offers the following assessment/report from a source. HRC interested in your views.

            SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as the highest levels
            of European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.

                   1. During the last week of December 2011, and the first week of 2012, Libya's Prime Minister
            Abdurrahim el-Keib and President Mustafa Abdul Jalil engaged in a series of emergency planning meetings
            attempting to deal with specific issues threatening the stability of the new National Transitional Council (N'TC)
            Government. According to extremely sensitive sources speaking in strict confidence, paramount among these
            issues are the questions of disarming and rewarding the regional militias who bore the majority of the fighting
            against the regime of Muammar al Qaddafi, as well as the related issue of finding ministers and senior
            administrators for the new government who are acceptable to these revolutionary forces. These individuals
            noted that on four occasions, beginning on December 23, 2011, groups or angry militiamen came to el-Keib's
            office and demanded better treatment, a clear message of support for the role of Islamic law, and the removal
            of former Qaddafi advisors from the new government.
                    2. (Source Comment: In the opinion of a very sensitive source, el-Keib is genuinely concerned that this
            situation could spiral out of control and threatens the regime. He also suspects that much of the unrest is being
            stirred by General Abdel Hakim Alamin Belhaj and his conservative Islamist supporters. By staying out of the
            new government, Belhaj has established a position from which he can criticize their action:3 and appointments
            without concern or control. That said, el — Keib has been told by his contacts in the Moslem Brotherhood (MB)
UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No F-2015-04841
Doc No C05739809                          STATE DEPT - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM
Date 05/13/2015                SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS NO FOIA WAIVER                         STATE-SCB0045123
UNCLASSIFIED                             STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State      SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739809
Date: 05/13/2015


             that even Belhaj has been surprised that the unrest in the militias has begun to manifest itself in fighting
             between groups that previously shared the same goals and operated under BeThais loose command. This is
             particularly true in the case of the increasingly violent conflicts between the Misrata and Zintan regional
             militias.)
                    3. In an effort to address these. problems el-Keib is making changes in his new administration, removing
             Minister of Economics Taher Sherkaz, who, as a former economic advisor to Qaddafi, was a particular target of
             the militiamen. In the opinion of well informed individuals, el-Keib's closest and most influential advisors are
             experts with economic backgrounds and experience dealing with Western firms and governments. The most
             influential of this group are Minister of Oil Abdulrahman Ben Yezza, Minister of Finance Hassan Ziglam,
             National Oil Company chief Nun Bemisien, and Ngeb Obeda from the Libyan Stock Exchange.
                    4. (Source Comment: In the opinion of a very sensitive source, el-Keib and Jail are also very concerned
            over growing criticism that these technocrats are puppets of various Western governments and firms. Belhaj
             and the militiamen appear intent on limiting the influence of these Western entities, using them as a weapon to
             weaken the el-Keib regime. This trend is also affecting national security, where, despite el-Keib's efforts to
             maintain a balance between the Islamists, regional commanders, and the national army, a potentially
            dangerous conflict has arisen over the position of Chief of Staff of the National Army. El-Kieb, according to this
            individual, believes that he must settle this matter in short order to avoid provoking security concerns among
            foreign allies and businesses contacts.)
                    5. According to a knowledgeable individual, in late December 2011e1-Kieb resisted efforts by General
            IChalifa Belqasim Hefter to establish himself as the Chief of Staff of the National Army. Hefter, who lived in the
            United States for many years and is believed by Belhaj and others to have a relationship with the U.S.
            Government, is using his popularity among the officer corps of the regular NTC army to support his claim to be
            Chief of Staff. This produced heated protests from militia leaders and in late December 2011e1-Keib named
            deputy Minister of Defense Colonel Yussef al-Mangoush, to be Chief of Staff. In the opinion of one source, this
            is a problematic choice, since el-Keib is replacing the supposedly pro-American Hefter with al-Mangoush who
            commanded one of Qaddafi's elite Special Forces units, even after the revolution began. This individual
            believes that el-Keib's decision was driven by personal animosity toward Hefter, and the influence of Minister
            of Defense Osama al-Juwali. The situation is far from resolved, as Hatter and his supporters, particularly in
            the Benghazi garrison, continue to claim that the General is the true Chief of Staff. El-Keib and al-Juwali are
            working to reconcile all of the elements in this conflict as quickly as possible, before the supporters of the two
            claimants begin fighting. In the meantime, el-Keib has stated in private that he fully expects Belhaj to attack
            al-Mangoush, but the Prime Minister believes that the Colonel is the only officer strong enough to disarm the
            militias and avoid a civil war.
                   6. At the same time, a very sensitive source added that el-Keib and Jalil are attempting to reconcile the
            fighting between Misrata and Zintan forces in Tripoli by naming Misrata leader Fa-wzi Abd Ali as Minister of
            the Interior and al-Juwali, who was commander of the Zintan militia, as Minister of Defense. To date,
            according to this individual, this effort has met with limited success, as the fighting has continued and the
            militias are refusing to disarm until their demands regarding living standards are met.
                   7. (Source Comment: One very sensitive source noted, that el-Keib is aware of the fact that he is
            running out of time to stabilize the situation in Libya. He believes that if he does not disarm the militias and
            meet their demands in the next six months there is a good chance of increased fighting among rival groups that
            could lead to civil war. In any event, he realizes that the ongoing instability will cause Western governments,
            firms, and banks, to hesitate before committing themselves to long term relationships with Libya. El-Keib
            believes that Belhaj and his advisors have made the same judgment, and are waiting to fill any vacuum created
            by this violence, by establishing a conservative Islamic Republic.)




UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739809                        STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015              SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.                STATE-SCB0045124
