UNCLASSIFIED                               STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State        SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739885
Date: 05/13/2015
                                                                                                                  RELEASE IN
                                                                                                                  PART B6



           From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
           Sent                               Tuesday, July 17, 2012 7:16 AM
           To:                                'Russorv@state.gov.
           Subject                            Fw: H: Libyan elections intel. Sid
           Attachments:                       hrc memo libyan elections intel 070312.docx


           Pls print.


           From:                                                                                                                                  B6
           Sent: Tuesday, July 03, 2012 07:08 PM
           To: H
           Subject: H: Libyan elections Intel. Sid




                                                     CONFIDENTIAL



                                                             July 3, 2012



          For Hillary
          From: Sid
          Re: Libyan election

          SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as the highest levels of
          European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.



                   1. Libyan National Transitional Council (NTC) President Mustafa Abdel Jalil expected the final days leading to the
          July 7, 2012 national elections to be complicated and sometimes violent; however, according to a knowledgeable
          individual, he is particularly concerned by the level of control exerted by regional militia's and political groups on the
          electoral process. In the opinion of this individual, Jalil and his advisors believe that, given the level of suspicion and
          frustration felt in the various parts of the country, it will be difficult for the new 200 seat General National Congress (GNC)
          to establish its authority, draft a new constitution, and establish new national government. With this in mind, Jalil stated in
          extreme confidence that the NTC may have to remain in power until the situation becomes stable and a new government
          is firmly in place. That said he still plans to have interim Prime Minister Abdel Rahman el-Keib step down after the
          election results have been certified. The NTC will then work with the GNC as it takes shape to choose a new Prime
          Minister and Cabinet. Jalil would like to keep several ministers from the el-Keib government in the new regime,
          particularly Minister of Defense Ousama al-Juwali.

                   2. According to this individual, Jalil wants to maintain a degree of security and stability in an effort to reassure
          foreign businesses and banks that Libya will not descend into civil war and chaos. At the same time, the NTC must deal
          with the regional issues that divide the country's three electoral regions: Tripolitania in the West, Cyrenaica (Barqa) in the
          East, and Fezzan in the South. In the weeks leading up to the election the failure of the NTC to resolve these differences
          has strengthened the federalist movement in Barqa while antagonizing the tribal leaders in the South. Both groups are
          calling on their followers to boycott the election while the Southerners are calling for the National Army to withdraw its
          forces from the area around the town of Kufra, where they are deployed to stop fighting between tribal militias. At the
          same time, on July 1 federalist supporters attacked electoral offices in Benghazi, protesting the influence of Tripoli and the
          Western region on the upcoming elections.

UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739885                          STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015                SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.                           STATE-SCB0045199
UNCLASSIFIED                               STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State        SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739885
Date: 05/13/2015



                     3. (Source Comment In the opinion of a knowledgeable individual, the division of the 200 seats in the GNC lies
           at the heart of this matter, with 120 seats allotted for the Tripolitania, 60 for Banta, and 18 for the Fezzan area. At
           present, the Libyan MUSlifIl Brotherhood (LMB) and its political arm, the Justice and Construction Party (JCP), are
           attempting to mount a national campaign, receiving discreet advice and technic.al support from the Egyptian Muslim
           Brotherhood (EMB). With this assistance, Jalil is convinced that the JCP is the party that operates most effectively
           throughout the country. JO has established ties to the EMB, from whom he has learned that JCP leader Mohamed
           Sowan and his associates are working with the leadership of the EMB.)
                    4, According to his sources, Jai believes that he can work with Sowan and the LMB/JCP; however, he is
           concerned that Mohammed Morsi, the newly elected EMB President of Egypt and EMB Supreme Guide Mohammed
           Bathe are focused on developing Egyptian influence in Libya. Jalil has been informed privately that these EMS leaders
           want to establish a strong position in Libya, particularly in the oil services sector as part of their effort to improve Egypt's
           economic situation. Libyan officials in Cairo and Jallfs own associates are warning him that the Egyptians may see the
           NTC as a potential barrier to their effort and are advising Sowan to press for an early withdrawal of Jalil and the NTC from
           Libyan politics. For his part, Jalil has attempted to avoided direct conflict with the LMB/JCP, focusing his attention, and
           that of the el-keib interim government on trying to deal with the unrest in the period leading up to the national elections.
                 5. According to a particularly sensitive source, Jalil believes that Sowan will need the assistance of the Libyan
            National Party (LNP), the Islamist group led by religious scholar All al-Salabi and former Islarnist militant
           General Abdel Hakim Alamin Belhaj to gain enough seats to control the GNC. While there are significant personal
           conflicts between Sowan and Bethel Jalii believes that the two groups could work together to gain control of the
           government. In this case, Jalil believes the new regime would move quickly to oust the RITC, and establish a more
           conservative Islamist regime. At the same time since the LNP is a Tn'poli based movement, Jalil fears that the tribal
           federalists in Barge might react violently to them gaining an important role in the new government. Since the Barge
           leaders are urging their followers to boycott the election, a strong role for the LNP in coalition with the LMB/JCB could
           lead to calls for Barge to secede from the Libya. (Source Comment: The LNP is dominated by the former leaders of the
           Libyan Islamic Fighting Group (AI-Jama'a al-Islamiyyah —LIFG), who according to sensitive sources, maintained ties to at
           Oalcia during their struggle with the forces of former dictator !Muenster at Qaddafi.)
                     6. Former interim Prime Minister Mahmotel Jibril is leading the National      Forces Alliance (NFA),
            an umbrella coalition of liberal parties that received Western support for efforts to overthrow the regime of Nluammar at
            Qaddafi. VVhile Jibril is not on the list of candidates, his presence in the NFA leadership is seen by Belhaj and other
           Islamists as an effort by the United States and Western Europe to manipulate the election. Jalil does not believe that the
           NFA can gain control of enough seats in parliament to play a significant role in the new government. According to this
           source, Jalil believes that former Oil and Finance Minister Ali Tanhouni also plays an important role in the NFA.
                    7, At the same time Jalil is watching the progress of a second moderate party, the National Front (NF), which is
           based on the work of a 1980s-era anti-Qaddafi exile organization. The party is led by Mohammed al-Magariaf, an exiled
           intellectual dissident leader from a prominent Eastern Libyan family, Jai's sources advise that the NF is also backed by
           the al-Sennusi tribe, the former Libyan royal family, who may be looking to play a role in a semi-autonomous or
           independent Barga. One particularly sensitive source noted that many of the NF leaders have ties to the United States,
           Italy and the United Kingdom, and at one point Jalil believed that the NF might be able to work with the NFA; however,
           personal differences between the leaders of the two parties made effective cooperation difficult.
                    8. (Source Comment: In the end, a particularly sensitive source stated in confidence that Jalil believes the
           LNIBIJCB will have a significant role in the new government possibly supported by the LNP. However; he points out that
           since accurate polling is nonexistent it is impossible to predict a victor with any accuracy. Jaill also noted that it is quite
           possible that no group will win a clear victory, which, when added to the boycotts and pre-election violence may require
           the NTC maintain control of the country for some time to come. Accordingly, he has instructed ahArwalii to prepare to use
           the National Army to maintain order. For his part Al-Juwali has warned that this will be a difficult task since the best units
           of the Army, including many of its armored forces are deployed in the kutra region of the Southeast, in an effort to control
           tribal conflicts, stem the flow of weapons into the country from South Sudan, and resist Qaddati loyalists amongst the
           nomadic tribes of the region.)




UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739885                          STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015                SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.                            STATE-SCB0045200
UNCLASSIFIED                                STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State         SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739885
Date: 05/13/2015




                                                             CONFIDENTIAL



                                                                    July 3,2012



                      For: Hilary
                      From. Sid
                      Re Libyan election


                      SOURCE: Sources .vvith direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as
                      the highest levels of European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security ser‘ices.




                             1, Libyan National Transitional Council (NTC) President Mustafa Abdel Jail expected
                     the final days leading to the July 7, 2012 national elections to be complicated and sometimes
                     violent however, according to a knowledgeable individual, he is particularly concerned by the
                     level of control exerted by regional militia's and political groups on the electoral process. In the
                     opinion of this individual, Jahl and his advisors believe that, given the level of suspicion and
                     frustration felt in the various parts of the country, it will be difficult for the new 200 seat General
                     National Congress (GNC) to establish its authority, draft a new constitution, and establish new
                     national government. With this in mind, Jalil stated in extreme confidence that the NTC may
                     have to remain in power until the situation becomes stable and a new government is firmly in
                     place. That said he still plans to have interim Prime Minister Abdel Rahman el-Keib step down
                     after the election results have been certified. The NTC will then work with the GNC as it takes
                     shape to choose a new Prime Minister and Cabinet. Jail would like to keep several ministers
                     from the el-Keib government in the new regime, particularly Minister of Defense Ousama al-
                     Juwal i



                             2 According to this individual, Jalil wants to maintain a degree of security and stability
                     in an effort to reassure foreign businesses and banks that Libya will not descend into civil war



UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739885                           STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015                 SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.                   STATE-SCB0045201
UNCLASSIFIED                               STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State        SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739885
Date: 05/13/2015




                    and chaos. At the same time, the NTC must deal with the regional issues that divide the
                    country's three electoral regions: Tripolitania in the West, Cyrenaica (Barqa) in the East, and
                    Fezzan in the South. In the weeks leading up to the election the failure of the NTC to resolve
                    these differences has strengthened the federalist movement in Barqa while antagonizing the tribal
                    leaders in the South. Both groups are calling on their followers to boycott the election while the
                    Southerners are calling for the National Army to withdraw its forces from the area around the
                    town of Kufra, where they are deployed to stop fighting between tribal militias. At the same
                    time, on July 1 federalist supporters attacked electoral offices in Benghazi, protesting the
                    influence of Tripoli and the Western region on the upcoming elections.



                            3. (Source Comment: In the opinion of a knowledgeable individual, the division of the
                    200 seats in the GNC lies at the heart of this matter, with 120 seats allotted for the Tripolitania,
                    60 for Barqa, and 18 for the Fezzan area. At present, the Libyan Muslim Brotherhood (LMB)
                    and its political arm, the Justice and Construction Party (JCP), are attempting to mount a national
                    campaign, receiving discreet advice and technical support from the Egyptian Muslim
                    Brotherhood (EMB). With this assistance, Jalil is convinced that the JCP is the party that
                    operates most effectively throughout the country. Jalil has established ties to the EMB, from
                    whom he has learned that JCP leader Mohamad Sowan and his associates are working with the
                    leadership of the EMB.)

                            4. According to his sources, Jalil believes that he can work with Sowan and the
                    LMB/JCP; however, he is concerned that Mohammed Morsi, the newly elected EMB President
                    of Egypt, and EMB Supreme Guide Mohammed Badie are focused on developing Egyptian
                    influence in Libya. Jalil has been informed privately that these EMB leaders want to establish a
                    strong position in Libya, particularly in the oil services sector as part of their effort to improve
                    Egypt's economic situation. Libyan officials in Cairo and Jalil's own associates are warning him
                    that the Egyptians may see the NTC as a potential barrier to their effort and are advising Sowan
                    to press for an early withdrawal of Jalil and the NTC from Libyan politics. For his part, Jalil has
                    attempted to avoided direct conflict with the LMB/JCP, focusing his attention, and that of the el-
                    Keib interim government on trying to deal with the unrest in the period leading up to the national
                    elections.

                             5. According to a particularly sensitive source, Jalil believes that Sowan will need the
                    assistance of the Libyan National Party (LNP), the Islamist group led by religious scholar
                    Ali al-Salabi and former Islamist militant General Abdel Hakim Alamin Belhaj to gain enough
                    seats to control the GNC. While there are significant personal conflicts between Sowan and
                    Belhaj, Jalil believes that the two groups could work together to gain control of the government.
                    In this case, Jalil believes the new regime would move quickly to oust the NTC, and establish a
                    more conservative Islamist regime. At the same time, since the LNP is a Tripoli based
                    movement, Nil fears that the tribal federalists in Barqa might react violently to them gaining an



UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739885                          STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015                SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.                STATE-SCB0045202
UNCLASSIFIED                               STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State        SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739885
Date: 05/13/2015




                    important role in the new government. Since the Barqa leaders are urging their followers to
                    boycott the election, a strong role for the LNP in coalition with the LMB/JCB could lead to calls
                    for Barqa to secede from the Libya. (Source Comment: The LNP is dominated by the former
                    leaders of the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group (AI-Jamala al-Islamiyyah —LIFO), who, according
                    to sensitive sources, maintained ties to al Qa'ida during their struggle with the forces of former
                    dictator Muammar al Qaddafi )

                            6. Former interim Prime Minister Mahmoud Jibril is leading the National Forces
                    Alliance (NFA), an umbrella coalition of liberal parties that received Western support for
                    efforts to overthrow the regime of Muammar al Qaddafi. While fibril is not on the list of
                    candidates, his presence in the NFA leadership is seen by Belhaj and other Islamists as an effort
                    by the United States and Western Europe to manipulate the election. Jalil does not believe that
                    the NFA can gain control of enough seats in parliament to play a significant role in the new
                    government. According to this source, Jalil believes that former Oil and Finance Minister Mi
                    Tarhouni also plays an important role in the NFA.

                            7. At the same time, Jalil is watching the progress of a second moderate party, the
                    National Front (NF), which is based on the work of a 1980s-era anti-Qaddafi exile organization.
                    The party is led by Mohammed al-Magariaf, an exiled intellectual dissident leader from a
                    prominent Eastern Libyan family. Jalil 's sources advise that the NF is also backed by the al-
                    Sennusi tribe, the former Libyan royal family, who may be looking to play a role in a semi-
                    autonomous or independent Barqa. One particularly sensitive source noted that many of the NF
                    leaders have ties to the United States, Italy and the United Kingdom, and at one point Jalil
                    believed that the NF might be able to work with the NFA; however, personal differences
                    between the leaders of the two parties made effective cooperation difficult.

                            8. (Source Comment: In the end, a particularly sensitive source stated in confidence that
                   Jalil believes the LMB/JCB will have a significant role in the new government, possibly
                   supported by the LNP. However; he points out that since accurate polling is nonexistent it is
                   impossible to predict a victor with any accuracy. Jalil also noted that it is quite possible that no
                   group will win a clear victory, which, when added to the boycotts and pre-election violence may
                   require the NTC maintain control of the country for some time to come Accordingly, he has
                   instructed al-Juwali to prepare to use the National Army to maintain order. For his part Al-
                   Juwali has warned that this will be a difficult task since the best units of the Army, including
                   many of its armored forces are deployed in the Kufra region of the Southeast, in an effort to
                   control tribal conflicts, stem the flow of weapons into the country from South Sudan, and resist
                   Qaddafi loyalists amongst the nomadic tribes of the region )




UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739885                          STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015                SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.               STATE-SCB0045203
