UNCLASSIFIED                           STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State    SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739789
Date: 05/13/2015                                                                                      RELEASE IN
                                                                                                      PART B6



            From:                                                                                                         B6
            Sent                         Thursday, January 5, 2012 12:26 PM
            To:
            Subject:                     H: latest int& libyan conflicts, leaders & rniittias, Sid
            Attachments:                 hrc_merno_libyan_leaders_kmilitias_010512.docx




                                               CONFIDENTIAL



                                                        January 5, 2012



            For: HRC
            From: Sid
            Re: Libyan leadership and militias


            SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as the
            highest levels of European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.

                   1. During the last week of December 2011, and the first week of 2012, Libya's Prime Minister
            Abdurrahina el-Keib and President Mustafa Abdul Jai engaged in a series of emergency planning
            meetings attempting to deal with specific issues threatening the stability of the new National
            Transitional Council (NTC) Government According to extremely sensitive sources speaking in strict
            confidence, paramount among these issues are the questions of disarming and rewarding the regional
            militias who bore the majority of the fighting against the regime of Muammar al Qaddafi, as well as
            the related issue of finding ministers and senior administrators for the new government who are
            acceptable to these revolutionary forces. These individuals noted that on four occasions, beginning on
            December 23, 2011, groups or angry militiamen came to el-Keib's office and demanded better
            treatment, a clear message of support for the role of Islamic law, and the removal of former Qaddafi
            advisors from the new government
                    2. (Source Comment: In the opinion of a very sensitive source, el-Keib is genuinely concerned
            that this situation could spiral out of control and threatens the regime. He also suspects that much of
            the unrest is being stirred by General Abdel Hakim Mamin Belhaj and his conservative Islamist
            supporters. By staying out of the new government, Belhaj has established a position from which he
            can criticize their actions and appointments without concern or control, That said, el — Keib has been
            told by his contacts in the Moslem Brotherhood (MB) that even Belhaj has been surprised that the
            unrest in the militias has begun to manifest itself in fighting between groups that previously shared
            the same goals and operated under Belhaj's loose command, This is particularly true in the case of
            the increasingly violent conflicts between the Misrata and Zintan regional militias.)
                   3. In an effort to address these problems el-Keib is making changes in his new administration,
            removing Minister of Economics Taher Sherkaz, who, as a former economic advisor to Qaddafi, was a
UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739789                      STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015            SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.        STATE-SCB0045107
UNCLASSIFIED                            STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State     SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739789
Date: 05/13/2015


            told by his contacts in the Moslem Brotherhood (MB) that even Belhaj has been surprised that the
            unrest in the militias has begun to manifest itself in fighting between groups that previously shared
            the same goals and operated under Belhaj's loose command. This is particularly true in the case of
            the increasingly violent conflicts between the Misrata and Zintan regional militias.)
                    3. In an effort to address these problems el-Keib is making changes in his new administration,
            removing Minister of Economics Taher Sherkaz, who, as a former economic advisor to Qaddafi, was a
            particular target of the militiamen. In the opinion of well informed individuals, el-Keib's closest and
            most influential advisors are experts with economic backgrounds and experience dealing with
            Western firms and governments. The most influential of this group are Minister of Oil Abdulrahman
            Ben Yaw, Minister of Finance Hassan Ziglam, National Oil Company chief Nuni Berrusien, and Ngeb
            Obeda from the Libyan Stock Exchange.
                    4- (Source Comment: In the opinion of a very sensitive source, el-Keib and Jalil are also very
            concerned over growing criticism that these technocrats are puppets of various Western governments
            and firms. Belhaj and the militiamen appear intent on limiting the influence of these Western
            entities, using them as a weapon to weaken the el-Keib regime. This trend is also affecting national
            security, where, despite el-Keib's efforts to maintain a balance between the Islamists, regional
            commanders, and the national army, a potentially dangerous conflict has arisen over the position of
            Chief of Staff of the National Army. El-Kieb, according to this individual, believes that he must settle
            this matter in short order to avoid provoking security concerns among foreign allies and businesses
           'contacts.)
                    5. According to a knowledgeable individual, in late December 2011e1-Kieb resisted efforts by
            General Khalifa Belqasim Haftar to establish himself as the Chief of Staff of the National Army.
            Haftar, who lived in the United States for many years and is believed by Belhaj and others to have a
            relationship with the U.S. Government, is using his popularity among the officer corps of the regular
            NTC army to support his claim to be Chief of Staff. This produced heated protests from militia
            leaders and in late December 20 ael-Keib named deputy Minister of Defense Colonel Yussef
            Mangoush„ to be Chief of Staff. In the opinion of one source, this is a problematic choice, since el-
            Keib is replacing the supposedly pro-American Haftar with al-Mangoush who commanded one of
            Qaddafi's elite Special Forces units, even after the revolution began. This individual believes that el-
            Keib's decision was driven by personal animosity toward Haftar, and the influence of Minister of
            Defense Osama al-Juwali. The situation is far from resolved, as Haftar and his supporters,
            particularly in the Benghazi garrison, continue to claim that the General is the true Chief of Staff. El-
            Keib and al-Juwali are working to reconcile all of the elements in this conflict as quickly as possible,
            before the supporters of the two claimants begin fighting. In the meantime, el-Keib has stated in
            private that he fully expects Belhaj to attack al-Mangoush, but the Prime Minister believes that the
            Colonel is the only officer strong enough to disarm the militias and avoid a civil war.
                    6. At the same time, a very sensitive source added that el-Keib and Jail are attempting to
            reconcile the fighting between Misrata and Zintan forces in Tripoli by naming Misrata leader Fawzi
            Abd Ali as Minister of the Interior and al-Juwali, who was commander of the Zintan militia, as
            Minister of Defense. To date, according to this individual, this effort has met with limited success, as
            the fighting has continued and the militias are refusing to disarm until their demands regarding living
            standards are met.
                    7. (Source Comment: One very sensitive source noted, that el-Keib is aware of the fact that he
            is running out of time to stabilize the situation in Libya. He believes that if he does not disarm the
            militias and meet their demands in the next six months there is a good chance of increased fighting
            among rival groups that could lead to civil war. In any event, he realizes that the ongoing instability
            will cause Western governments, firms, and banks, to hesitate before committing themselves to long
            term relationships with Libya. El-Keib believes that Belhaj and his advisors have made the same
            judgment, and are waiting to fill any vacuum created by this violence, by establishing a conservative
            Islamic Republic.)


UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739789                       STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015             SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.          STATE-SCB0045108
UNCLASSIFIED                               STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State        SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739789
Date: 05/13/2015




                                                          CONFIDENTIAL



                                                                  January 5, 2012



                     For: HR,C
                     From: Sid
                     Re: Libyan leadership and militias


                     SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as
                     the highest levels of European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.

                             1. During the last week of December 2011, and the first week of 2012, Libya's Prime
                     Minister Abdurrahim el-Keib and President Mustafa, Abdul Jafil engaged in a series of
                     emergency planning meetings attempting to deal with specific issues threatening the stability of
                     the new National Transitional Council (NTC) Government. According to extremely sensitive
                     sources speaking in strict confidence, paramount among these issues are the questions of
                     disarming and rewarding the regional militias who bore the majority of the fighting against the
                     regime of Muammar al Qaddafi, as well as the related issue of finding ministers and senior
                     administrators for the new government who are acceptable to these revolutionary forces. These
                     individuals noted that on four occasions, beginning on December 23, 2011, groups or angry
                     militiamen came to el-ICeib's office and demanded better treatment, a clear message of support
                     for the role of Islamic law, and the removal of former Qaddafi advisors from the new
                     government.
                             2. (Source Comment: In the opinion of a vet}, sensitive source, el-Keib is genuinely
                     concerned that this situation could spiral out of control and threatens the regime. He also
                     suspects that much of the unrest is being stirred by General Abdel Hakim Alamin Bell* and his
                     conservative Islamist supporters, By staying out of the new government, Belhaj has established
                     a position from which he can criticize their actions and appointments without concern or control.
                     That said, el — Keit) has been told by his contacts in the Moslem Brotherhood (MB) that even
                     Belhaj has been surprised that the unrest in the militias has begun to manifest itself in fighting
                     between groups that previously shared the same goals and operated under Belhaj's loose
                     command. This is particularly true in the case of the increasingly violent conflicts between the
                     Misrata and Zintan regional militias.)
                             3. In an effort to address these problems el-Keib is making changes in his new
                     administration, removing Minister of Economics Taher Sherkaz, who, as a former economic
                     advisor to Qaddafi, was a particular target of the militiamen In the opinion of well informed
                     individuals, el-Keib's closest and most influential advisors are experts with economic




UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739789                          STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015                SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.               STATE-SCB0045109
UNCLASSIFIED                               STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State        SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739789
Date: 05/13/2015




                      backgrounds and experience dealing with Western firms and governments. The most influential
                     of this group are Minister of Oil Abdulrahman Ben Yezza, Minister of Finance Hassan Ziglarn,
                     National Oil Company chief Nur Berrusien, and Ngeb Obeda from the Libyan Stock Exchange.
                              4. (Source Comment. In the opinion of a very sensitive source, el-Keib and Jail are
                     also very concerned over growing criticism that these technocrats are puppets of various Western
                     governments and firms. Belhaj and the militiamen appear intent on limiting the influence of
                     these Western entities, using them as a weapon to weaken the el-Keib regime. This trend is also
                     affecting national security, where, despite el-Keib's efforts to maintain a balance between the
                     Islamists, regional commanders, and the national army, a potentially dangerous conflict has
                     arisen over the position of Chief of Staff of the National Army, El-Kieb, according to this
                     individual, believes that he must settle this matter in short order to avoid provoking sec.urity
                     concerns among foreign allies and businesses contacts )
                              5. According to a knowledgeable individual, in late December 2011el-Kieb resisted
                     efforts by General Khalifa Belqasim Haftar to establish himself as the Chief of Staff of the
                     National Army. Haftar, who lived in the United States for many years and is believed by Belhaj
                     and others to have a relationship with the U.S. Government, is using his popularity among the
                     officer corps of the regular NTC army to support his claim to be Chief of Staff. This produced
                     heated protests from militia leaders and in late December 2011el-Keib named deputy Minister of
                     Defense Colonel Yussef al-Mangoush, to be Chief of Staff. In the opinion of one source, this is
                     a problematic choice, since el-Keib is replacing the supposedly pro-American Haftar with al-
                     Mangoush who commanded one of Qadclafi's elite Special Forces units, even after the revolution
                     began. This individual believes that el-Keib's decision was driven by personal animosity toward
                     Haftar, and the influence of Minister of Defense Osaina al-Juwali. The situation is far from
                     resolved, as Haftar and his supporters, particularly in the Benghazi garrison, continue to claim
                     that the General is the true Chief of Staff El-Keib and al-Juwali are working to reconcile all of
                     the elements in this conflict as quickly as possible, before the supporters of the two claimants
                     begin fighting. In the meantime, el-Keib has stated in private that he fully expects Belhaj to
                     attack al-Marigotish, but the Prime Minister believes that the Colonel is the only officer strong
                     enough to disarm the militias and avoid a civil war.
                              6. At the same time, a very sensitive source added that el-Keib and hill are attempting to
                     reconcile the fighting between Misrata and Zintan forces in Tripoli by naming Misrata leader
                     Fawzi Abd Ali as Minister of the Interior and al-Juwali, who was commander of the Zintan
                     militia, as Minister of Defense. To date, according to this individual, this effort has met with
                     limited success, as the fighting has continued and the militias are refusing to disarm until their
                     demands regarding living standards are met.
                              7. (Source Comment: One very sensitive source noted, that el-Keib is aware of the fact
                     that be is running out of time to stabilize the situation in Libya He believes that if he does not
                     disarm the militias and meet their demands in the next six months there is a good chance of
                     increased fighting among rival groups that could lead to civil war. In any event, he realizes that
                     the ongoing instability will cause Western governments, firms, and banks, to hesitate before
                     committing themselves to long tern relationships with Libya. El-Keib believes that Belhaj and
                     his advisors have made the same judgment, and are waiting to fill any vacuum created by this
                     violence, by establishing a conservative Islamic Republic.)




UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739789                          STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015                SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.                STATE-SCB0045110
