UNCLASSIFIED                               STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State        SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739859
Date: 05/13/2015                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                                 B5



            From:                               Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivanii@state.gov>
            Sent                                Tuesday, January 24, 2012 1:00 PM
            To:
            Subject:                           FW: Libya info


            FYI


            From: Cretz, Gene A
            Sent Tuesday, January 24, 2012 258 AM
            To: Sullivan, Jacob); Felteriare Jeffrey D
            Subject: RE: Libya info

                                                                                                                                                 B5

                                                                                                       The Benghazi protestors appear to
           be a pastiche of different groups of disaffected people including war-wounded, martyrs' families, transparency and
           accountability demendeurs, and those who believe the east is once again being neglected. So the source of this report
           attributing the whole thing to war-wounded does not jive, although they may have been the ones who carried out
           the violent acts. The Belhaj bogeyman is a bit overplayed-no doubt his military influence has waned but he does remain
           a player —one of many —looking to make political gain in this new environment The proposition that he is just lying in
           waiting to take advantage of the current stability to move in and establish an Islamic state appears a bit
           exaggerated. Minister of Labor Rajbani (who has his own axes to grind) said there is now a group of six ministers (I need
           to clarify whether this is with al-Keeb's knowelcige or not) who are serving as the "cohones" of the cabinet and taking
           decisions the others won't al-Keeb Is proceding cautiously (that is his strength and weakness) and that is the problem-
           this is really the time for a "war-time" cabinet not the cautious approach he appears to be taking does not suit this volatile
           time Let's see what the meeting today between the NTC and the government produces—the benghazi protests, the Bani
           Walid conflict and the various other incidents that have flared up in recent days point to the need for some real drastic
           movement in the DDR process and in the other issues that engender current dissatisfaction among the populace. I can
           really comment on the points regarding foreign contracts except to say it rings true given the current governments
           reluctance to make any significant decisions, especially regarding past or future issues of money. The Hefter piece also
           sounds a bridge too far given al-Keeb's disposition. But I do agree that it is not too late if this government can just
           organize itself and take some fundamental decisions to i mprove liquidity, get the real war-wounded good treatment and
           push the MOD and MOI to speed up the DDR process.


           From: Sullivan, Jacob
           Sent: Tue 1/24/2012 2:25 AM
           To: Crete, Gene A; Feltman, Jeffrey
           Subject: Libya info

           Interested, as always, in your views.

           SOURCE. Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as the highest levels of
           European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.

                   1. On the evening of January 22, 2012, according to an official with access to the leadership of the National
           Transitional Government (NTC), Libyan President Mustafa Abdul „late spoke at length with Prime Minister Abdurrahim el-
           Keib, stating in a heated exchange that el-Keib's government must take the steps necessary to address the complaints of
           the demobilized fighters from the 2011revolution. Jalil pointed out that the new government has been discussing this
           situation since it was formed in October 2011, and matters have now reached a crisis point, with a group of more than
           2,000 disgruntled veterans, supported by students, attacking the NTC offices in Benghazi on January 21, destroying
           computer equipment and NTC files. These demonstrators, some of whom threw Molotov cocktails at the NTC
           headquarters building, continue to demand better medical care, jobs, payment for their time in the revolutionary army, and



UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739859                          STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015                SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.                          STATE-SCB0045144
UNCLASSIFIED                              STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State       SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739859
Date: 05/13/2015
           a commitment to transparency on the part of the el-Keib regime; particularly the appointment of cabinet members and
           senior officials.
                    2. According to this source, when el-Keib replied, pointing out that demonstrators were camped outside of his
           office in Tripoli. He added that the government had to proceed in a measured and professional manner, Jalil stated in
           angry tones, that NTC staffers were beaten and could have been killed during the January 21 incident, pointing out that
          this is how the rebellion against Muammar al Qaddafi began in February 2011, Jaill also warned that Islamist leader
          General Abdel Hakim Alamin Belhaj and his supporters, particularly militia commanders from Zintan, Misrata, and other
          western regions, are anxiously waiting for the NTC government to collapse. Their goal, in the opinion of this individual, is
          to eventually move in and establish a strict Islamic state. Jan!, added that his contacts in the Egyptian Muslim
          Brotherhood had been in touch during the preceding week, warning that the threat from Belhaj is very real. El-Keib stated
          that he must press Minister of Defense Osama al-Juwali and Interior Minister Fawzi Abd All to be more efficient in
          administering their positions. According to this individual, el-Keib fears that al-Juwali, who was a western commander
          during the revolution, may be maintaining a secret relationship with Belhaj and his allies. In response, Jalil warned el-Keib
          to avoid trying to use the regular military forces posted around Benghazi under General Khalifs Belqasim Hefter in an
          effort to restrain the former militia troops as such a step could lead to civil war.
                    3. (Source Comment In the opinion of an extremely well placed individual, el-Keib is, in fact, increasingly
          frustrated by the inefficiency in his regime and the Inability of his ministers and administrators to arrange contracts with
          foreign firms. He complains that his principal advisors, Minister of Oil Abdulrahman Ben Yezza and Minister of Finance
          Hassan Ziglam, have been too timid in resolving the questions associated with contracts involving foreign firms, both old
          and new. At present it appears that whenever one official raises a question regarding an agreement the entire matter is
          put on hold and delayed. In the opinion of this source, el-Keib knows that without these agreements he cannot meet the
          demands of the veterans and the students. El-Keib stated in confidence, that he may have made a serious mistake in
          removing the former oil/finance minister Ali Tarhouni from the government. El-Keib also noted that JalIl is shaken by the
          January 21 attack on NTC headquarters and is searching for ways to appease the demonstrators. Most recently he
          asked Abdel — Hafidh Ghoza, his principal deputy and NTC spokesman to step down. Ghoza, who comes from the
          Benghazi area, was particularly unpopular with the western troops.)
                   4. Following the discussion with Jalil, el-Kieb ordered Ziglam and Ngeb Obeda, the head of the Stock Exchange,
          to move with all possible speed to address the issue of the foreign contracts and arrange for new vendors to provide the
          services demanded by the veterans and students. In this discussion he pointed out that if they cannot deal with this
          situation they will not have to worry about the national elections in 2012, Libya will be an Islamic Republic, with Belhaj as
          the ruler. El-Keib pointed out that foreign governments and large oil firms must be aware of this threat and that this will
          frighten them into meeting the conditions for foreign contracts set out by the NTC.
                   5. (Source Comment According to an extremely sensitive source, el-Keib spoke secretly with Haftar, stating that
          he, and those troops loyal to him, should be prepared to move to protect the government in the event of increased
          violence. This effort could include moving against Belhaj and attacking militia forces before they can unite and
          organize. El-Keib emphasized that this is for planning purposes only, and no action should be taken until el-Keib gives
          the order. He emphasized that he will do everything possible to avoid civil war, but he is now concerned that Jalil will be
          unable to deal with the level of hostility against the NTC, and cannot be counted on to take strong positions against Belhaj
          and his supporters. In the opinion of this individual, el-Keib cannot back away from his commitment to technicians in
          senior positions, but he will press them as hard as he can to have the government respond to the needs of the veterans
          and students. El-Keib believes it is not too late to address these problems, but they must move quickly.)




UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739859                         STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015               SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.                         STATE-SCB0045145
