UNCLASSIFIED                              STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State       SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739878
Date: 05/13/2015                                                                                           RELEASE IN
                                                                                                           FULL




              From:                           Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivanll@state,gov›
              Sent:                           Monday, April 23, 2012 8:40 PM
              To:
              Subject:                        FW: Latest from HRC friend


              FYI


              From Stevens, John C
              Sent; Monday, April 23, 2012 7:00 PM
              To; Sullivan, Jacob)
              Cc Cretz, Gene A; Fettman, Jeffrey
              Subject RE: Latest from HRC friend

              Jake- Interesting report. Gene is closer to the action and I defer to him on the latest Jail-ian thinking
              and machinations vis-a-vis the cabinet and INC. I hadn't heard about ENI-related corruption but
              wouldn't be surprised.

              On the federalism issue,. Jail is right to be concerned about eastern agitation for autonomy. A
              cabinet chance won't solve that problem, though. Nor will recruiting Belhaj and Islamist fighters to
              take on the Bardans. To the contrary, it would only lead to unwanted bloodshed - the large Obeid
              tribe still nurses a serious grudge against Belhaj and his ilk for the Islamists' presumed role in killing their
              beloved Gen. Yunis last July and would probably put up a fierce fight.

              The cabinet and INC need to have a serious discussion with the Bargans - if they aren't already
              doing so - about how power and resources are to be distributed in the new Libya. The Libyans held
              similarly heated debates on this very topic in the early1950s as they held their first parliamentary
              elections and drafted their constitution (there were actually violent skirmishes in connection with
              those elections, and Washington delayed the arrival of the first US ambassador until after things had
              calmed down). Hopefully the current leadership can negotiate these issues peaceably in the
              corning months. Of course, we and the UN and our other partners should encourage them to do so.

             - Chris




             SBU
             This email is UNCLASSIFIED,




             From; Sullivan, Jacob
             Sent: Monday, April 23, 2012 5:31 PM
             To: Stevens, John C; Cr, Gene A; Feltman, Jeffrey D
             Subject Latest from HRC friend



UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739878                         STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015               SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.                STATE-SCB0045185
UNCLASSIFIED                               STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State        SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739878
Date: 05/13/2015
             Let me know your thoughts:


             SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as the highest levels of
             European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.


                    1. On April 17, 2012 Libyan National Transitional Council (NTC) President Mustafa Abdel Jalil stated to a close
            advisor that he is considering when, or even if, to hold a vote of no confidence in the NTC regarding support for the
            government of Prime Minister Abdel Rahman al-Keib. According to a source with access to the NTC leadership, Jalil
            realizes that a majority of the Council members no longer support el-Keib and his cabinet of Western educated technical
            experts. Jaili continues to believe that, for the moment, the most important issue facing the NTC is the federalist
            movement toward a semi-autonomous state in the Eastern region of Cyrenaica (Barge in Arabic). This situation continues
            to complicate the NTC efforts to stabilize the country. With this in mind, Jalil expressed concern that a dramatic vote of no
            confidence for el-Keib will weaken the entire NTC by association. Instead, according to this source, Jalil is considering
            delaying a CiOCISI011, possibly putting it off until an elected legislature is in place in the late summer or early fall of 2012.

                    2. (Source Comment: In the opinion of this individual, the NTC has been able to reach a temporary
            understanding with the eastern federalists, allowing the separatists to administer their local regions, while deferring to the
            NTC for national and international issues. The complicating factor at this point lies in reaching a determination regarding
            who has authority over new contracts with oil companies and other international firms. As of the week of April 16, 2012,
            no decision has been reached on this point. The bulk of the NTC leadership is drawn from Barge, and Jalil now believes
            they can control the situation if they can establish an organized central government. In particular, Jalil, according to a
            sensitive source, is increasingly confident that the eastern roots of the NTC will allow him to balance the federalist
            movement against the need for a sense of national unity. In the opinion of this source, el-Keib's future depends on Jalil's
            opinion of his capacity to deal with this complex situation.)

                    3. Minister of Defense Ousama al Juwali is viewed by Jalil as the most important western Libyan in el-Keib's
            cabinet, and the President and the leaders of the NTC had hoped that he would be able to deal with the confused security
            situation in Tripoli. However, while he did receive assurances from General Abdel Hakim Alamin Belhaj regarding
            possible assistance from his Islamist troops if fighting broke out between the National Army and the militia's loyal to the
            eastern federalists. Unfortunately, from Jalil's point of view, this effort seems to have emboldened Belhaj and heightened
            tension between the eastern and western portions of the country. According to this source, after reviewing the federalist
            problem, Dr Abd al-Nasser Shamata, the head of the Crisis Management for the NTC, believes that el-Keib, al Juwali, Oil
            Minister Abdulrahman Ben Yezza, and the bulk of the cabinet should be replaced by people drawn from within the NTC,
            individuals who are in touch with the concerns of the Libyan people of all tribes and political groups. In the opinion of this
            source Jalil is factoring this position into his decision on el-Keib.

                     4. Regarding the existing relationships with international oil firms, Shamata told Jalil that for the most part the
            existing fields are continuing to produce and the owners have worked out security arrangements with local political and
            tribal leaders. However, since el-Keib and Ben Yezza have been unable to bring order to the national administration, it is
            difficult for firms to initiate new projects, since it is not clear who has the authority or the desire to sign such
            agreements. Shamata stated forcefully that the Prime Minister, whoever he is, must establish an orderly administration
            before full advantage can be gained from the oil fields. In the meantime, Shamata warns that his office has found
            evidence of corruption between local officials and international firms. In this regard, he stated that local representatives of
            the Italian national oil firm (ENI) have made problematic arrangements with local officials in the western part of the
            country, where their oil fields are located. He added that most of these ENI employees are Libyans, but he believes ENI
            management in Italy is aware of this situation. Shamata pointed out, without additional comment, that Ben Yezza is a
            long time senior official of ENI.

                    5. In the opinion this source, Shamata and Jalil are not planning to publicize these charges regarding ENI, at least
            until they decide how best to move forward on el-Keib, whether to allow the Prime Minister more time to address his
            problems, proceed with the vote of no confidence or quietly ask him to step down on his own.

                    6. (Source Comment: According to this source, el-Keib is under fire primarily as a result of his failure to bring
            order to the National Army, disarm independent militias, and establish security throughout the country. The leading
            opposition to el-Keib is based in the Political Issues committee of the NTC, and as many as 42 of the 73 active NTC
            members will vote against el-Keib if Jalil brings this matter to a vote. The source warns that these numbers are provided
            by members of this Political committee, who may have their own agenda. A two thirds majority is required for the no
            confidence vote, however; several senior members of the NTC are reluctant to take such a step until a constituent
            assembly has been elected. They do not want this to look like the decision of a small group of people.)


UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739878                          STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015                SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.                            STATE-SCB0045186
