UNCLASSIFIED                             STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State      SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739848
Date: 05/13/2015                                                                                           RELEASE IN
                                                                                                           PART B6



              From:                         Sidney Blumenthal                                                                     B6
              Sent:                         Wednesday, December 19, 2012 9:01 AM
              To:
              Subject:                      H: Sure you've seen all this info, but start on graph 5. Sid


              http://www.juancole.com/2012/12/benghazis-criticizes-consular.ht I

              Benghazi's Deep Throat fingers Islamist Leaders for
              Attacks as State Dept Criticized on Consular Security
              Posted on 12/19/2012 by Juan
             The report saying that security was inadequate at the compound that the US had adopted as its ad hoc
             consulate in 13enghazio Libya dominates today's headlines. That conclusion is obvious. The
             "consulate" was just a private residence taken over for this purpose by the US in the city, It was not
             constructed to be a US government building in a potentially hostile city.
             I met a person who worked there when I was in Benghazi in June, and she told me that it wasn't even
             clear if the consulate would be retained after the first of this year It was possibly temporary,
             depending on Congressional funding. (The Tea Party House hasn't been good on meeting requests for
             embassy security funds).
             The more interesting question than why ad hoc arrangements should have been made for a consulate
             during and after the Libyan revolution (the answer to which seems fairly obvious) is, who is
             responsible for the string of assassinations and acts of violence in the city, of which the RPG attack on
             the consulate on September 11 was only one? Benghazi, with a population of over one million in a
             country of 6.5 million, is Libya's second largest city and 1/1e'as the epicenter of the revolution against the
             government of Muammar Qaddafi in 2011.
             On November 22, Benghazi police chief Farej Darssi was assassinated. In October a police colonel
             barely avoided death— his car was wired to explode, A Libyan intelligence officer was killed in
             September. A general was assassinated in August. Some of these figures had worked for Qaddafi but
             had defected to the revolution. Qaddafi's security forces were responsible for the 1996 massacre of
             hardline fundamentalists at Abu Salim prison, and for making others just disappear, Likely the same
             shadowy cells that attacked the US consulate are behind the attacks on Benghazi police and army
             officers.
             There may have been a break in the case. Last Saturday, Benghazi security forces loyal to the elected
             government in Tripoli, captured a man they suspected of being involved with the groups behind the
             violence. And, he appears to have been willing to spill the beans. So let's call him the Libyan Deep
             Throat.
             Deep Throat is so knowledgeable about the conspiracies facing the city and so dangerous to those
             hatching them that the latter immediately attempted to spring him from jail.
             On Sunday morning, militants attacked the police facility next to the holding cell where the man is
             being detained. A policeman at that station died in a hail of bullets from the attackers, and they called
             for back-up. The police car that sped to the scene as ambushed and three policemen in it were killed.
             Still, the police stood their ground and fought off the assault, and they kept their valuable suspect in
             custody, with all his valuable testimony.
             Shortly after midnight, on Monday morning, small explosives were set off at the Garyounis police
             station in Benghazi, damaging a couple of automobiles but otherwise doing little damage. Then
             explosives were set off at al-Uruba police station, which also took sniper fire, but neither resulted in
             casualties.

UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739848                        STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015              SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.             STATE-SCB0045830
UNCLASSIFIED                            STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
U.S. Department of State     SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739848
Date: 05/13/2015


             The police became vigilant, and they apprehended a shady-looking man skulking around near the al-
              Hadaeg police station, finding him to have two rocket propelled grenades in his possession, which he
             was apparently intending to fire at the station.
             In other words, the capture of Libyan Deep Throat has set off a gang war on the police, who are being
             informed by bombings and shootings that they must let their informant go or risk their
             So what is Deep Throat saying? According to local journalist Mohamed Bujenah of the Libyan Herald,
             a senior figure in the Benghazi police told him that the informant had fingered as many as 7
             prominent Muslim fundamentalist leaders in connection with these attacks, of whom the police
             named 6 explicitly:
             1 Sufyan Ben Qumu, from the notoriously radical town of Derna, and a former prisoner at
             Guantanamo
             2. Ahmad Bukatela, leader of the ',Thai& Militia
             3. Muhammad al-Zahawi, head of the Ansar al-Sharia militia
             4. Muhammad al-Gharabi, a leader of the Rafallala al-Sahati Militia
             5. Ismail Sallabi, another leader of Rafallah al-Sahati
             6. Salim .Nabous, head of the Zawiya Martyrs' Brigade
             It is just a newspaper article. We don't know if the informant actually named these individuals or if he
             did so to escape torture, in which case we can't trust what he said. But if the allegations are true, there
             is collusion among several hardline militias in the city to create instability in hopes of taking it over.
             The new, elected, prime minister Ali Zeidan, has started asserting himself militarily. He closed the
             country's southern borders against instability in the Sahel. He may well have some risky house
             cleaning to do in Benghazi.




UNCLASSIFIED
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739848                       STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015             SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.            STATE-SCB0045831
