UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795141 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL




                                        CONFIDENTIAL



                                               March 8, 2012



  For: Hillary
  From: Sid
  Re: Egypt president: Army & MB agree on Amr Moussa


  SOURCE: Sources with access to the highest levels of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, The
  Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, and Western Intelligence and security services.


          1. In a series of meetings beginning in mid-February 2012 staff officers attached to the
  Egyptian Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) met with their established senior
  contacts in the Muslim Brotherhood (MB) to discuss the upcoming elections for the upper house
  of parliament and the office of President. Sources with access to the highest levels of both the
  SCAF and the MB stated that these discussions revolved principally around the role of the
  President and the national elections scheduled for June, 2012. In addition, MB Supreme Guide
  Mohamed Badie asked the MB representatives to clarify the SCAF view of the candidacies of
  two prominent military figures, Army General Hossam Khairallah, and Air Marshal Ahmed
  Shafik. Speaking on behalf of the SCAF commander and interim head of state, Field Marshall
  Mohammed Hussein Tantawi, these SCAF staff officers reported to their MB contacts that like
  Badie the SCAF expects former Minister of Foreign Affairs and Arab League chief Amr Moussa
  to be elected President in June 2012. Both groups believe that Moussa will be a good fit for what
  will be a largely ceremonial position under the MB dominated civilian government that is
  coming into power.

          2. In the opinion of knowledgeable sources with access to both the SCAF and the MB,
  Badie, and his senior advisors, along with their coalition partners from the Salafist al Nour party,
  believe that the new President will have nominal administrative authority over military, security,
  and foreign affairs, however, he must be prepared to defer to the MB/al Nour led parliament on
  all major policy decisions. The MB and SCAF officials agree that Moussa is best suited for this
  role, particularly given the fact that Moussa has a past association with the MB dating back to his
  days at university. The SCAF officials add that Khairallah, the longtime deputy for former
  President Hosni Mubarak' s Intelligence Chief, General Omar Suleiman is too closely associated



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795141 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795141 Date: 01/07/2016




  with the old regime. The SCAF officers also stated that Khairallah is running without the
  agreement of Tantawi, who was a longtime rival of Suleiman during the Mubarak administration.
  By the same token, they point out that Shafik was an Air Force officer, with a weak relationship
  to the senior Army officers associated with the SCAF, this despite the fact that he was Prime
  Minister under Tantawi.

          3. (Source Comment: A particularly sensitive source added that after thirty years of
  suppressing the MB, as Suleiman's deputy, Khairallah is viewed with real animosity by Badie
  and the senior leaders of the Brotherhood. They also believe that, while Khairallah and his
  advisors are convinced the rank and file Egyptians are looking for a strongman to lead them out
  of the current economic and political crisis, they are out of touch with the social and political
  reality of post-revolutionary Egypt. They do not consider Shafik to be a serious candidate, given
  his ties to Mubarak. These MB officials also believe that Tantawi realizes now that having a
  former senior military officer as President will allow the MB to blame any future economic or
  security problems on the military.)

         4. According to a sensitive source, MB polling in mid-February 2012 showed Moussa
  winning approximately forty (40) per cent of the vote nationwide, with Shafik in second place
  with ten per cent of the voters. At the same time, Badie and the leaders of the al Nour Party
  believe that, as was the case with elections for the lower house of parliament, they will control
  approximately seventy five (75) per cent of the upper house. Voting in this last round of
  parliamentary elections ends on March 11, after which the MB/al Nour coalition will begin
  organizing the first civilian government, which will take office in the fall of 2012.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795141 Date: 01/07/2016
