       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                         B6



From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                               Saturday, January 21, 2012 7:44 PM
To:                                 'sullivanjj@state.gov'
Subject                             Re: Max on Bibi's campaign v Obama



Yes.


From: Sullivan, Jacob J [mailto:SullivanJJ©state.gov]
Sent: Saturday, January 21, 2012 04:14 PM
To: H
Subject: RE: Max on Bibi's campaign v Obama

This is really fascinating. Does Beinart get into all of this?


From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Saturday, January 21, 2012 2:07 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Fw: Max on Bibi's campaign v Obama

Interesting reading.


From: sbwhoeop
Sent: Saturday, January z1, zulz iu:uu i in                                                             B6
To: H
Subject: Max on Bibi's campaign v Obama

http://english.al-akhbar.com/content/bibi-connection


The Bibi Connection
By Max Blumenthal




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016




13




US President Barack Obama (R) meets with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in
the Oval Office of the White House in Washington, DC, 20 May 2011. (Photo: AFP - Jim
Watson)

By: Max Blumenthal
Published Thursday, January 12, 2012
The US presidential election campaign that kicked off January 3 with the Iowa caucuses
was the subject of a curious article attacking President Barack Obama in the mass
circulation Israeli daily newspaper, Israel Hayom.
"US President Barack Obama is 'naïve' and needs to face up to the threat presented by
the rise of the Muslim Brotherhood across the Middle East, Israel's National Security
Council concluded during a strategic discussion several days ago," Israel Havom reported.
The Israeli National Security Council consists of Benjamin "Bibi" Netanyahu's closest
advisers. And Israel Hayom is not just another right-leaning Israeli tabloid. Referred to by
Israelis as the "Bibiton," or Bibi's mouthpiece, the paper is an instrument that gives him
extraordinary political leverage. The obviously planted article in Israel Hayom rang like a
bell sounding the start of Netanyahu's own campaign in helping the Republican Party oust
Obama from the White House.
Israel Hayom's genesis demonstrates the depth of Netanyahu's connections in
Republican circles. It was created by one of Netanyahu's top financial supporters, a Las
Vegas-based casino tycoon named Sheldon Adelson, who is also a major donor to the
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016




conservative wing of the Republican Party. Adelson's closest relationship is with former
Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich, a longtime ally of Netanyahu who has been running
a rancorous campaign for the Republican presidential nomination.
Netanyahu's less than subtle intervention has become an open issue in Israeli politics.
Opposition leader Tzipi Livni of the Kadima Party has criticized Netanyahu for damaging
the US-Israeli relationship. "Netanyahu spoke about consensus," Livni said in May, "and if
there is a consensus in Israel, it's that the relationship with the US is essential to Israel,
and a prime minister that harms the relationship with the US over something unsubstantial
is harming Israel's security and deterrence."
But Livni's warning has been ignored. Rather than hesitating, the prime minister and his
inner circle are moving full steam ahead in their political shadow campaign whose ultimate
goal is to remove Obama. Bibi's war against Obama is unprecedented. While Israeli prime
ministers have tried to help incumbent presidents, none have ever waged a full-scale
campaign to overthrow them.
Netanyahu has engaged enthusiastic allies in the Republican Congress, led by House
Majority Leader Eric Cantor, and within the right-wing media. His neoconservative allies in
Washington are launching a "Super PAC" to generate emotional attack ads against
Obama and any candidate that might be an obstacle to his policies. And his campaign has
even broadened into an attempt to discredit the New York Times, whose editorial page
and foreign policy columnists, Thomas Friedman and Roger Cohen, have been critical of
him.
Netanyahu's shadow campaign is intended to be a factor in defeating Obama and electing
a Republican in his place. He opposed Obama's early demand to freeze settlements on
the West Bank as a precondition for reviving the peace process, a process since the Oslo
Accord that Netanyahu has attempted to stall or sabotage, despite his signing of the Wye
Agreement under pressure from President Clinton. Since his adamant stand against the
settlement freeze, Netanyahu has undermined every effort to engage the peace process.
He appears dead set on consolidating Greater Israel, or what many Israelis call "Judea
and Samaria," and has signaled a strong desire to attack Iran.
By all accounts, Netanyahu's personal chemistry with Obama is toxic. Obama bristles at
his belligerence. But Netanyahu's hostility has reaped rewards from him, having stopped
the peace process in its tracks. The latest effort by the Quartet seems doomed to failure.
And Netanyahu's rejectionism has put Obama on the defense. Most of the US Jewish
establishment has remained a bulwark for Bibi's policies. Obama, meanwhile, has been
forced to declare America's "unshakable bond" with Israel, even as Bibi thwarts Obama's
initiatives and attacks him in the Israeli press.
As political strategy, by tainting Obama as less than full-throated in support of Israel,
 Netanyahu bolsters the Republican themes that the president "apologizes" for US power,
 is weak on national security, and is an agent of "decline." By depicting Obama as "weak"
 on Israel, Netanyahu's campaign excites right-wing Jews and evangelical Christians, who
 overwhelmingly accept the biblical claims of the Jewish state's historical right to Greater
 Israel, Judea and Samaria. Bibi's deepest attack line against Obama merges theology
 with ideology.
 His campaign against Obama is a high-stakes gambit that will almost certainly color US-
 Israeli relations well past Election Day. Already, Netanyahu has succeeded in polarizing
 the political debate, as his agenda is singularly aligned with the Republican Party. Yet
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016




Bibi's short-term objectives are rapidly turning the US-Israel relationship, at least under his
aegis, into a partisan issue, another litmus test of conservative ideology rather than
national interest.
The personal connection
Netanyahu's American orientation is partly rooted in his personal history. Raised in
suburban Philadelphia, his father, Benzion Netanyahu, was the former press secretary for
the godfather of right-wing revisionist Zionism, Zeev Jabotinsky. Benzion Netanyahu
(original name: Benzion Mileikowsky) spent his most consequential years in New York
raising money for Jabotinsky and the rightist lrgun militia in Palestine. When he returned
to Israel to launch a political career, the elder Netanyahu was rejected by Menachem
Begin, the Likud Party leader, who, as right wing as he was, considered him dangerously
extreme (Arabs are "an enemy by essence," the elder Netanyahu said recently). But the
son triumphed where his father failed, rising at first on his fluency in American political
culture, a frequent guest on ABC News' Nightline and other US broadcast news programs,
eventually winning the chairmanship of the Likud Party in 1992.
The following year, Netanyahu published a political manifesto in the form of a memoir, A
Durable Peace, edited with a helping hand from American neoconservative Douglas Feith.
The book was tailored to the sensibilities of an American audience, particularly one with
conservative Republican tendencies. In a revealing passage, Netanyahu warned readers
that the creation of a sovereign Palestinian state could lead Latinos to establish a "second
Mexico" in the American Southwest: "These [Latinos] would demand not merely equality
before the law, or naturalization, or even Spanish as a first language," he wrote. "Instead
they would say that since they form a local majority in the territory [which was forcibly
taken from Mexico in the war of 1848], they deserve a state of their own."
In 1996, when Netanyahu launched an underdog bid for Prime Minister against the grand
old man of the Labor Party establishment, Shimon Peres, he contracted the services of
Arthur Finkelstein, a reclusive New York-based Republican political consultant. Finkelstein
was infamous for orchestrating a come-from-behind victory in 1992 for Jesse Helms, a
radical neo-Confederate senator from North Carolina, by race baiting Helms' black
opponent. Finkelstein earned a fortune working for anti-gay candidates like Helms, even
while planning to marry his long-term boyfriend.
Netanyahu's campaign against Peres was defined by Finkelstein's trademark slashing
tactics. Frightening imagery flooded Israeli airwaves. Among Netanyahu's most successful
Finkelstein-crafted attack lines was, "Peres will divide Jerusalem." Even the positive
slogans had a negative subtext. "Bibi is good for the Jews," hinted darkly at the de facto
coalition Peres had constructed with Arab-based political parties. Finkelstein's media
 assault on Peres, with its suggestion that he and his assassinated predecessor, Yitzhak
 Rabin, had stabbed Israel in the back, propelled his client to a narrow victory.
 The new Prime Minister relied on a kitchen cabinet of advisers from neoconservative think
 tanks, especially the Washington-based American Enterprise Institute (AEI) and the
 Shalem Center. In 1996, two of these advisers, former Reagan administration Pentagon
 officials, Richard Perle and Douglas Feith, produced a document for Institute for Advanced
 Strategic and Political Studies, a once influential base of neocon activity, called "A Clean
 Break." The paper advocated overthrowing Saddam Hussein and attacking Syria "as a
 prelude to a redrawing of the map of the Middle East." (Feith was appointed a Defense
 Department official in the George W Bush administration and became a fervent defender
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016




of the Iraq invasion, leading the effort to fabricate evidence of Saddam Hussein's
operational links with al-Qaeda. General Tommy Frank, who led the invasion, called Feith
"the fk*king stupidest guy on the face of the earth.")
Backing down to Clinton
President Bill Clinton was, according to the American Israel Public Affairs Committee
(AIPAC)'s then-President Steve Grossman, "the most pro-Israeli [president] in America's
history" – and he was committed to fulfilling the Oslo Accords on his watch. He developed
an unusually close relationship with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, coming to see him as
something of a father figure. When Rabin was assassinated by a right-wing Orthodox
Jewish extremist, Peres briefly took over, but was soon defeated by Netanyahu. Clinton
demanded that Netanyahu begin to withdraw Israeli troops from small portions of land in
the occupied West Bank. With pressure mounting, Netanyahu flung himself into the
American political wars.
In January 1998, at the beginning of the impeachment scandal, Netanyahu appeared at a
rally organized by Reverend Jerry Falwell, a right-wing evangelical Christian icon, who
had produced an elaborate conspiracy video accusing Clinton of drug trafficking and
complicity in the murder of Vince Foster, his White House deputy legal counsel and old
friend, who had, in fact, committed suicide.
Standing beside Falwell before an audience of hundreds of evangelical activists and right-
wing Jews, Netanyahu vowed in his signature basso profondo voice never to "divide"
Jerusalem, and proclaimed that the "Jewish people" were being "vilified and scorned and
misrepresented." After the rally, Netanyahu shuttled between meetings with conservative
pundits and the broadcast studios of Fox News and right-wing Christian TV networks,
stirring up his support among America's most zealous opponents of the peace process.
The most prominent among Netanyahu's newfound conservative allies was then-House
Speaker Newt Gingrich, an instigator of the impeachment. That April, at a meeting of the
Jewish Federation of Los Angeles, Gingrich condemned Clinton's attempts to pressure
Netanyahu into land-for-peace concessions. "The idea that the President can propose a
US map [regarding Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank] for a country he does not know
is a disaster," Gingrich said. Then he complained, "The Clinton administration has not held
[Palestinian Authority Chairman Yasser] Arafat's feet to the fire."
But, by October 1998, Netanyahu had all but caved to Clinton's pressure. The man who
once mocked "advocates of capitulation" now clasped hands with Arafat after a protracted
conference at Wye, Maryland. Netanyahu agreed to redeploy Israeli troops from 13
percent of the West Bank, including most of Hebron. His sudden turnabout cost him key
support inside Likud, provoking a Knesset vote for early elections. His right-wing base
shattered, paving the path for a decisive victory for the Labor Party's Ehud Barak, a former
Israeli general favored and quietly supported by the Clinton administration.
 Suddenly in the wilderness, Netanyahu plotted his path back by cultivating the right-wing
in the US — the pundits, the Republican politicians, the big donors, Fox News. In 2007, he
 held a meeting with a small group of conservative activists emerging as key players in the
conservative blogosphere. Among those present was Andrew Breitbart, who became a
 notorious hatchet man staging wild stunts and whose myriad websites routinely carry
 conspiratorial, racially charged attacks on Obama. Other figures at the meeting included
 conservative bloggers Scott Johnson, Jim Hoft and Jeff Emmanuel. "At our meeting we
 talked mostly about the dangers of the Iranian regime acquiring a nuclear bomb," Johnson
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016




recalled, revealing his newly acquired foreign policy expertise. "It was a subject to which
Netanyahu had obviously devoted great thought."
Two years later, Netanyahu returned to the Prime Minister's office at the head of an even
more decidedly right-wing coalition than before government and was determined not to
repeat his previous mistakes of "capitulating" to the peace process at the behest of an
American president. Now he turned to the movement he had courted to help him
undermine and humiliate Obama.
Humiliating Obama
In March 2010, when Obama dispatched Vice President Joseph Biden to Israel in a futile
attempt to restart negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian Authority, Netanyahu
appeared in Jerusalem at a massive rally of 1,000 evangelicals organized by Texas mega-
church Pastor John Hagee, a leading Christian Zionist and sometime Holocaust revisionist
whose End Times theology committed him to the vision of Greater Israel. Seated onstage
beside Netanyahu was Israel's Ambassador to the United States, Michael Oren (a
neoconservative former Shalem Center fellow), and Deputy Foreign Minister Danny
Ayalon, who had just snubbed a visiting delegation of leading Democratic members of
Congress. Before the rapture-ready audience, Netanyahu proclaimed that Jerusalem
would remain "the undivided, eternal capital of the Jewish people."
At once, he authorized the construction of 1,600 new settlement units in occupied East
 Jerusalem over the stringent objections from the Obama administration. Though the move
 angered the White House, Ron Dermer, a top Netanyahu aide with close ties to leading
 Republicans in Washington, reassured the Prime Minister that Republicans would retake
 Congress. Netanyahu simply rejected Obama's plea to freeze settlements and then
 rejected overtures to restart the peace process. In the 2010 mid-term elections,
 Republicans gained control of the House of Representatives.
 While on a trip to New York days after the Republican victory, Netanyahu authorized
 another 1,000 more settlement units in East Jerusalem, a direct rebuke of Obama. That
 same day, Netanyahu held a meeting with the incoming House Majority Leader Eric
 Cantor, the only Jewish Republican in Congress, and a leader of the right-wing in the
 House Republican Conference. Cantor's office produced a summary of the meeting for the
 media that contained the remarkably crude statement: Cantor promised Netanyahu that
 "the new Republican majority will serve as a check on the [Obama] Administration and
 what has been, up until this point, one party rule in Washington."
 In April 2011, Republican Speaker of the House John Boehner personally invited
 Netanyahu to speak before a joint session of Congress. He was interrupted 36 times by
 standing ovations — more than Obama during his State of the Union address — despite
 making such mind-boggling false claims as that the "vast majority" of Israeli settlers live in
 "neighborhoods in Jerusalem and greater Tel Aviv."
 With a rancorous, multi-billion dollar US presidential campaign certainly looming on the
 horizon, Netanyahu continued his pattern of making friends in the radical right's media
 machine. Among them was Glenn Beck, a Mormon convert and former Fox News host,
 who had compared a major liberal Jewish religious denomination to radical Islamists and
 claimed that Obama has "a deep-seated hatred for white people." Beck was admonished
 by the Anti-Defamation League and other mainstream Jewish groups for his anti-Semitic
 rants against George Soros, a major funder of liberal and Democratic Party-related
 organizations. In July 2011, Beck traveled to Israel to deliver a diatribe against liberal
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016




Israelis demonstrating against Netanyahu's economic policies, labeling them patsies in a
secret Islamist-Communist plot.
When the right-wing Zionist Organization of America honored Beck this November with a
prize named after Sheldon Adelson and his wife, Miriam, Netanyahu displayed his
gratitude in a videotaped tribute. "Glenn, you can be sure that if Sheldon and Miri Adelson
put their name to something, it must stand for a lot. You stand for a lot...And I want to tell
you how deeply we appreciate this stand of courage and integrity."
Dear Sasha
In December, Thomas Friedman, the Pulitzer Prize winning New York Times' former
Jerusalem Bureau Chief and one of the few American columnists whose opinions
seriously register in the Israeli media, published an, uncharacteristically pointed critique of
Netanyahu's leadership. In Friedman's column were two lines that incited the wrath and
fury of the Prime Minister's office. "I sure hope that Israel's prime minister, Benjamin
Netanyahu, understands that the standing ovation he got in Congress this year was not for
his politics. That ovation was bought and paid for by the Israel lobby."
Neoconservative opinion makers exploded with orchestrated rage accusing Friedman of
being a self-hating Jewish anti-Semite. In response, the New York Times gave Netanyahu
an opportunity to respond on its opinion page.
But rather than accept the Times' offer, Netanyahu dispatched Ron Dermer, his key
emissary to the American political scene, especially to the conservative movement, now
serving as a senior advisor on his staff, to issue what amounted to a declaration of war
against the American newspaper of record. Dermer's letter was extraordinary in its
vitriolic, hostile and contemptuous tone. Nothing like it had ever existed before — a vicious
official attack from the Prime Minister of Israel on the credibility of the New York Times.
Perhaps only a little less surprising was that this major event received nearly no coverage
in the American press.
In his scathing letter, Dermer accused the Times of "cavalierly defam[ing] our country,"
claiming that 19 out of 20 op-eds published in the Times were "negative" (Dermer did not
challenge their factual basis). He concluded, "it would seem as if the surest way to get an
op-ed published in the New York Times these days, no matter how obscure the writer or
the viewpoint, is to attack Israel."
One of the remarkable aspects of Dermer's letter was that it was addressed, "Dear
Sasha." Who is Sasha? Sasha Polakow-Suransky, a staff editor at the Times editorial
page, is in charge of assigning pieces on foreign policy. Why did Dermer address his letter
to Polakow-Suransky instead of to Andrew Rosenthal, the director of the Times editorial
page? Was he singling out Polakow-Suransky because he revealed in his 2010 book, The
Unspoken Alliance: Israel's Secret Relationship With Apartheid South Africa, that. Israel
offered to sell nuclear warheads to South Africa's apartheid government, a bombshell
revelation that prompted furious denials from Israeli President Shimon Peres and Deputy
Prime Minister Dan Meridor, embarrassing a country that still refuses to discuss its nuclear
program in any public forums, and punishes those who do?
Netanyahu's attack on the Times represented a significant new stage in his shadow war.
He was drawing sharp new lines. By rebuking the paper, Netanyahu attempted to define
its liberal Zionist, pro-peace process editorial line as hostile to Israeli security needs. And
by default, he positioned Rupert Murdoch's Wall Street Journal, with its relentlessly anti-
Obama, pro-Bibi op-ed page, as the only respectable forum for true friends of Israel.
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016




Bibi's man in Washington
More than any other candidate in the Republican presidential contest, Newt Gingrich has
hewed to Netanyahu's line on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In an interview with the cable
TV Jewish Channel, Gingrich declared, "We've had an invented Palestinian people who
are in fact Arabs and are historically part of the Arab community and they had a chance to
go many places." He added, "I see myself as, in many ways, to be pretty close to Bibi
Netanyahu in thinking about the dangers of the world."
In May 2010, when Gingrich's presidential' campaign was no more than the subject of
guarded speculation, Israel Hayom, Bibi's house organ, provided Gingrich with a Hebrew-
language forum to assail Obama's policies. The tabloid splashed a full page photo of a
smiling Gingrich on its front page accompanied by the caption: "The former Chairman of
the House of Representatives attacks the blindness of the Western Elites: `Evading the
confrontation with Evil may bring a second Holocaust, the mistakes made by the White
House will exact a terrible price."
Israel Hayom's owner, Las Vegas Sands casino corporation chairman Sheldon Adelson, is
America's eighth wealthiest man. At the same time he was bankrolling Netanyahu's
career, Adelson also became Gingrich's leading financial angel. The casino kingpin was
introduced to Gingrich in 1996 through George Harris, a right-wing anti-tax activist and
Clark County, Nevada Republican chairman who helped Adelson block a unionization bid
at one of his casinos. Gingrich resigned from Congress in disgrace in 1999, forced out by
Republicans, hiding his extramarital affair with a congressional staffer. Adelson stepped in
as his financial godfather, pumping millions into the coffers of American Solutions for
Winning the Future, an independent political committee that covered Gingrich's
extravagant travel expenses.
When Gingrich embarked on the presidential trail, George Harris became his campaign
finance co-chair, representing Adelson by proxy. (Adelson's Sands corporation is currently
facing a federal criminal probe for allegedly bribing foreign officials). And when Gingrich
provoked a hailstorm of criticism for claiming the Palestinians were "invented," Adelson
publicly defended him. "Read the history of those who call themselVes Palestinians, and
you will hear why [Newt] Gingrich said recently that the Palestinians are an invented
people," Adelson told a group of American Jews visiting Israel on a program he funds,
Taglit-Birthright Israel.
Despite Gingrich's dismal finish in the Iowa caucuses, the opening contest in the
Republican contest, Adelson has staunchly remained on his side, donating US$5 million to
a Super PAC created to support Gingrich's campaign in the key primary state of South
Carolina, his Armageddon.
Bibi's Super PAC
When Gingrich quits the race, Netanyahu will not be without a candidate. He can count on
former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney to carry the neoconservative banner all the
way to Election Day. Of Romney's 22 campaign foreign policy advisers, 15 worked in the
administration of George W Bush, and six were original members of the Project for the
New American Century, the neoconservative group that called for regime change in Iraq.
Romney's own Super PAC, Restore Our Future, credited with destroying Gingrich's hopes
in Iowa through a relentless barrage of negative ads, is financed in part by Mel Sembler, a
Florida-based a multi-millionaire shopping mall developer and veteran Republican
fundraiser, appointed the US ambassador to Italy by President George W Bush. Sembler
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016




was mired in scandal when the federal government revoked the license of a chain of
adolescent treatment centers he founded after former teenage patients complained they
were sexually abused, psychologically tortured and humiliated during sadistic behavior
modification programs. Less well known is the financial largesse Sembler has bestowed
on neoconservative outfits supporting Netanyahu's policies. He is also a close friend of
Adelson.
In November 2011, President Obama and French President Nicolas Sarkozy
commiserated about Netanyahu, unaware that their voices were picked up by a live
microphone. "You're fed up with him, but I have to deal with him even more often than
you," Obama complained to Sarkozy. Romney seized on the episode as pi-oof of Obama's
disqualifying leadership and proof of his own fitness for office. "We have here yet another
reason why we need new leadership in the White House," Romney declared. (Joining the
chorus of pro-Bibi attacks on Obama were the Netanyahu-approved bloggers Breitbart,
Hoft, and Johnson).
In ramping up the effort to turn Israel into an anti-Obama wedge issue, a group of
neoconservative Netanyahu allies have started a independent political committee called
the Emergency Committee for Israel (ECI). The group's name was inspired by the
Emergency Committee to Save the Jewish People of Europe, an organization that
Netanyahu's father, Benzion, helped lead during World War II in part to raise money for
the right-wing Irgun militia in Palestine. The group's board comprises a Who's Who of
Washington neoconservatives. It is directed by Noah Pollak, a former assistant editor of
Azure, the in-house journal of the Adelson-funded Shalem Center, several of whose
fellows are now in Netanyahu's inner circle of adviserS. Pollak was credited with helping
the Israeli army launch a YouTube channel to rebut accusations that it committed war
crimes in the Gaza Strip and elsewhere.
This month, the ECI established a Super PAC in order to use unlimited corporate
contributions for political attack ads. The group's first major presidential campaign ad buy
targeted Representative Ron Paul (R-Texas), a fervently anti-war libertarian candidate
who has called for an end to the special relationship between Israel and the United States.
Scheduled to air in the key primary state of South Carolina, where the Republican
electorate is dominated by right-wing evangelicals, the ad features Gary Bauer, an ECI
board member, Christian right leader and failed presidential candidate staring into the
camera, warning that "Ron Paul's conservatism is isolationist and conspiratorial." (Bauer
endorsed former Senator Rick Santorum, a right-wing Catholic, who has declared, "All the
people that live in the West Bank are Israelis. They are not Palestinians. There is no
Palestinian. This is Israeli land.")
Jewish concerns
While Obama and the Democratic Party elite have kept silent in the face of Netanyahu's
American shadow war, its polarizing effects have prompted resistance from an
unexpected place: the Jewish-American establishment. Weeks of Republican attacks on
Obama for his supposed molly-coddling of Israel enemies caused deep discomfort in the
offices of mainstream Jewish groups, which have lobbied for decades to consolidate
support for Israel in both major American political parties. With Israel deliberately being
shaped into a campaign wedge issue, some Jewish leaders worried that rank-and-file
Democratic voters would begin to sour on the US-Israel special relationship.

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016




In October, two of the US's oldest and most prominent Jewish organizations, the Anti-
Defamation League and the American Jewish Committee, released a "National Pledge for
Unity" urging politicians, religious leaders and other Jewish groups aimed at preserving
bipartisan support for Israel. "We want the discourse on US support for Israel to avoid the
sometimes polarizing debates and political attacks that have emerged in recent weeks, as
candidates have challenged their opponents' pro-Israel bone fides or questioned the
current administration's foreign policy approach vis-a-vis Israel," declared Anti-Defamation
League national director Abraham Foxman. "The last thing America and Israel need right
now is the distractions of having Israel bandied about as a tool for waging political
attacks."
The Emergency Committee for Israel and the Republican Jewish Coalition, an Adelson-
funded, pro-Netanyahu group that claims to raise "tens of millions" of dollars for
Republican candidates each election cycle, not only rejected the unity pledge, but
accused its authors of attempting to suppress pro-Israel activism. In a defiant statement
by its chairman, neoconservative activist William Kristol, the ECI proclaimed, "This attempt
to silence those of us who have 'questioned the current administration's foreign policy
approach vis-a-vis Israel' will re-energize us." Thus the show went on. The effort to lower
the temperature only became another occasion for the pro-Netanyahu operation to raise
the heat. As their anti-Obama campaign intensifies, Israel is being merged seamlessly
with traditional right-wing wedge issues such as abortion, gay marriage and the menace of
immigration.
 The deepening wedge
 In his writings and in the company of his inner circle, Netanyahu has expressed almost as
 much disdain for liberal Jewish supporters of Israel as he has for the professed enemies
 of the Jewish state. His book, A Durable Peace, is filled with attacks on Israeli advocates
 of a negotiated peace with the Palestinians, accusing them of "cloying sentimentalism"
 and falling victim to the "relentless Jewish desire to see an end to struggle." Netanyahu
 was said to privately fume about Obama's Jewish senior advisor, David Axelrod, and his
 then-Chief of Staff, Rahm Emanuel, an ardent liberal Zionist whose father was born and
 raised in Israel. Netanyahu reportedly called them "self-hating Jews."
 After two decades of cultivating the culture warriors of the American right as allies against
 those seeking "an end to struggle," Netanyahu is beginning to see results. He initiated and
 propelled a polarization process that has enabled Republicans to use Israel as a cudgel
 for attacking their opponents, and did so over•the objections of powerful mainstream
 Jewish-American interests. Haim Malka, a senior fellow for the center-right Washington-
 based Center for Strategic and International Studies, predicted in a recent paper: "The
 partisan wedge is likely to deepen, posing considerable challenges to Israel and the US-
 Israeli partnership."
  In the past, America's Israel lobby sold the US-Israel alliance as a marriage of two vibrant
 democracies united by shared liberal values. In the current environment of heightened
  polarization, the special relationship is increasingly marketed to Americans as a united
 front of besieged bastions of Western civilization against an incipient Islamic onslaught.
  Rapture ready evangelicals, right-wing ultra-nationalists, and Republican Jews are far
  more likely to be attracted to this sort of alliance than cosmopolitan liberals. And this may
  be exactly the way Netanyahu wants it.

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016




But he is far from confident that he can dislodge Obama. Steeling himself for a possible
second Obama term, Netanyahu has signaled his intention to move up the date of Israel's
national election. Hanan Krystal, a political analyst for Israel Radio, explained Netanyahu's
possible motives to Reuters: "At the highest echelons, they have long been saying that if
Obama is elected for a second term, the carrot will be replaced by a stick."




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793511 Date: 01/07/2016
