     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795503 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                                          RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                          B6


From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                               Wednesday, July 25, 2012 5:15 PM
To:                                 'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                            Fw: H: Syria, Turkey, Hezbollah, Israel. Sid


Pls print.


From: sbwhoeop
Sent: Wednesday, July 18, 2012 08:30 AM
To: H
Subject: H: Syria, Turkey, Hezbollah, Israel. Sid


                                          CONFIDENTIAL


                                             July 18, 2012



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Syria, Turkey, Hezbollah, Israel


SOURCE: Sources with access to the highest levels of the Governments and institutions discussed below. This includes
political parties and regional intelligence and security services.
This is the initial report from a source with direct access to local security services, including those of Turkey and Israel.

        1. According to a source with direct access to the Turkish National Intelligence Organization (TNIO), speaking on
condition of secrecy, the continuing unraveling of Syria will degrade and possibly sever long established supply lines
between Iran and Hezbollah. This will have two effects on Hezbollah - a) make it more likely to try to pursue a more
populist path in Lebanon to shore up electoral popularity to compensate for declining military capability; and b) make it
more vulnerable to Israeli forces (both overt and clandestine) in Lebanon, and throughout the region, that do not face
resupply problems. As part of the pressure on Iran, the TNIO is concerned that Israel is likely to probe Hezbollah's
defenses in an effort to degrade their operational capability. The TNIO and the Lebanese Military Intelligence Directorate
also expect Israel to escalate the level of its threatening activity, while manipulating their clandestine penetrations of
Hezbollah to spread concern and damage morale.

        2. Taking all of this information into consideration, the commanders of the TNIO are reporting to the Turkish
General Staff and selected members of the political leadership that their intelligence reporting indicates that Israel will not
provoke an all out war on its northern border. These individuals note that sources with knowledge of the Israeli military
and political leadership believe at this time that such an action also would distract the attention of the United States and
other world powers, enabling Syrian President Bashar al Assad to play an anti Israel card and potentially move to
destabilize Lebanon.

         3. (Source Comment: In the opinion of this very sensitive source, while Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu is concerned about his political standing inside of Israel, his most senior military and intelligence commanders
are advising that Israel must avoid any public confrontation with Syria or any provocation that would enable Assad to
claim Israel was benefiting from, or responsible for the troubles there. At the same time, this individual believes that Israel
will attempt to use the uptick in hostility between Syria and Turkey to try to mend its own fences with Ankara.)

         4. Finally, this sensitive contact advises that if the Israelis can use the Syrian situation to reestablish a degree of
trust with the TNIO and the Turkish Army, Western governments should expect some covert help for secular Syrian rebels
to be channeled to them from Israel via the Kurdish Regional Government in Iraq and Turkey. This source cautions that

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795503 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795503 Date: 01/07/2016




such a course of action will only develop if the TNIO and the military and political leaders of Turkey agree to this course of
action. At the same time, a particularly sensitive individual added that Israeli Military Intelligence officers, in discussions
with their military commanders and the Office of the Prime Minister, have raised the possibility of trying to open covert
links to various rebel Syrian forces. This effort would be designed to collect intelligence and influence the policies of
whatever successor government emerges in Damascus. At present they are advising that these contacts should be
carried out in a very low key, clandestine level, with no direct military assistance or contact, which would work against the
interests of both the Israeli government and the Free Syrian forces.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795503 Date: 01/07/2016
