      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791947 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Saturday, February 26, 201111:42 AM
To:                                'sullivanjj@state.gov'
Subject:                           Fw: H: Q's scuds, Seif's private strategy, more. Sid
Attachments:                       hrc memo qaddafi scuds & strategy for holding on 022511.docx



Pls read--esp about reaching out to the revolutionary committees.


From: sbwhoeop             [mailto:sbwhoeop
Sent: Friday, February 25, 2011 01:59 PM
To: H
Subject: H: Q's scuds, Self's private strategy, more. Sid




                                                  CONFIDENTIAL




                                                 February 25, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Qaddafi's Scuds and strategy for holding on



On the morning of February 25, a former official of the government of Muammar
Qaddafi stated in confidence that he and other former members of the Qaddafi regime are
concerned by the knowledge that the soldiers and officers assigned to the Libyan Army's
Scud Missile Battalions remain loyal to Qaddafi. While the issue remains open as to
whether or not the Libyan government maintains small quantities of mustard gas and
other Weapons of Mass Destructio i, Qaddafi's forces can use these Scuds to carry
conventional high explosives, and launch random, but destructive attacks
against Benghazi, Tobruk or other towns under the control of anti-government forces.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791947 Date: 01/07/2016
          UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791947 Date: 01/07/2016




Source Comment: These sources repeated their earlier warning that Qaddafi would not
tesitate to use all of the resources at his disposal to attack civilian, political, and economic
argets if he feels he is on the verge of being defeated by anti-government troops.)


)uring the afternoon of February 25, Qaddafi's son, Saif al-Islam stated in private that his
kther is convinced he can hold power, if he can maintain control of portions of Tripoli for the
text ten (10) days. Saif al-Islam states that it is important to remember that his father is still the
lead of State in Libya, and that the UN and the major nations of the world are reluctant to
lepose a sitting Head of State. (Source Comment: The United States invasions of Iraq and
\fghanistan sere as the examples that prove the rule in this case.) The Libyan diplomats
erving abroad who remain loyal to Qaddafi have been instructed to press this point with other
;overnments. These diplomats are particularly active in sub Saharan African, and at this point
;aif al-Islam is pleased with what he considers the rather mild reaction of these states to the
riolence used by forces loyal to Qaddafi in suppressing anti-government activities in
,ibya. Saif al-Islam believes that while the leaders of countries like Chad, Benin, and Burkina
a.so must call for an end to violence, they will continue to stop short of statements supporting
he demonstrators. By the same token the Organization of African Unity (OAU), after delaying
ts response to the violence for several days, has limited its statements to an expression of
oncern.
The current President of the OAU is Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, the President of
F,quatorial Guinea, who, according to well placed sources, considers himself a friend and
.upporter of Qaddafi. Mbasogo received support from Libya when he seized power in a violent
nilitary coup d'etat in 1979, and he has remained loyal to Qaddafi over the years. Mbasogo
eceives technical and business advice from Libyan experts, particularly in managing Equatorial
3uinea's substantial oil resources.
;ince coming to power in 1969 Qaddafi has worked to establish strong relationships with the
leads of State in many sub-Saharan African nations. This support has included technical and
inancial aid, military support, and private payments to the various Heads of State. According
o Saif al-Islam, Qaddfi believes these African states will now continue support him as he deals

          UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791947 Date: 01/07/2016
            UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791947 Date: 01/07/2016




vith the rebellion in Libya. Well placed sources report that Mbasogo has received millions of
tollars in private payments from the Qaddafi regime.
;ince 1969, Qaddafi has been one of the only Islamic leaders in North Africa to seek out cordial
elations with the nations of sub-Saharan Africa. According to a former official of the Kenyan
;overnment, these African states feel that the Islamic nations of North Africa look down on
heir southern neighbors and focus most their attention on relations with the Arab states of the
vliddle East. Libya and Israel are the two countries of North Africa and the Middle East who
Lave invested substantial time, money and personnel resources in supporting these African
tates. For its part, Kenya has a history of conflict with Libya rooted in the Cold War, however,
his individual notes that even these relations improved after the 2003-2004 Libyan agreement
vith the Western powers regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction.
Source Comment: The leaders of the OAU states also fear that the wave of anti-corruption
arrest that is sweeping North Africa will spread south. This is particularly true in the case of
lictators like Mbasogo and Zimbabwe's Robert Mugabe. However, even elected leaders like
;outh Africa's Jakob Zuma must be concerned because of the economic downturn in their
:ountries and the rampant corruption that exists across Africa. It is highly unlikely that these
k.frican states will support any attempt by the UN, or NATO to organize some form of military
esponse to the Libyan situation, including the establishment of a no-fly zone over Libya.)
iolence continues throughout Tripoli, with those military, and Para military units still loyal to
dafi using deadly force against protesters. These forces are being supported by mercenaries
1- the sub-Sahara Africa. The           various tribal, civic and political groups continue to form
dutionary committees in an effort to begin to organize the parts of the country under the
-   rol of anti-government forces. According to a former government official, these
[mittees are hoping that the international community will            reach out to them and assist in
blishing a new government in Libya.




            UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791947 Date: 01/07/2016
