UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786883 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL




                                        CONFIDENTIAL



                                               July 14, 2011



  For: Hillary
  From: Sid
  Re: TNC


  You should be aware that there is a good chance at the contact meeting in Turkey the TNC
  ambassador to the UAE, a man you have not yet met, whose name is Dr. Neydah, may tell you
  the TNC has reached an agreement with a US company. The company is a new one, Osprey,
  headed by former General David Grange, former head of Delta Force. Osprey will provide field
  medical help, military training, organize supplies, and logistics to the TNC. They are trainers and
  organizers, not fighters. Grange can train their forces and he has drawn up a plan for taking
  Tripoli similar to the plan he helped develop that was used by the first wave of Special Forces in
  the capture of Baghdad.

  This is a private contract. It does not involve NATO. It puts Americans in a central role without
  being direct battle combatants. The TNC wants to demonstrate that they are pro-US. They see
  this as a significant way to do that. They are enthusiastic about this arrangement. They have held
  meetings with Grange in Geneva and Dubai this week, Tuesday and Wednesday, that concluded
  late last night (Wednesday). They have developed a good relationship. This is the group the TNC
  wants to work with. As I understand it, they are still working out funding, which is related to the
  overall TNC funding problems.

  Grange is very low key, wishes to avoid publicity and work quietly, unlike other publicity
  hungry firms. Grange is under the radar.

  Tyler, Cody and I acted as honest brokers, putting this arrangement together through a series of
  connections, linking the Libyans to Osprey and keeping it moving. The strategic imperative:
  Expecting Qaddafi to fall on his own or through a deus ex machina devolves the entire equation
  to wishful thinking. The TNC has been unable to train and organize its forces. The NATO air
  campaign cannot take ground. The TNC, whose leaders have been given to flights of fancy that
  Qaddafi will fall tomorrow or the day after, have come to the conclusion that they must organize
  their forces and that they must score a military victory of their own over Qaddafi that is not
  dependent solely on NATO in order to give them legitimacy.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786883 Date: 01/07/2016
