     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793781 Date: 01/07/2016

                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                  B6




From:                        Sidney Blumenthal
Sent:                        Tuesday, November 13, 2012 9:47 AM
To:
Subject:                     Re: More questions. Sid



Here's the ultimate Bengahzi conspiracy theory that wingers believe:
John Brennan, without a presidential finding, at the behest of the Saudis, created a covert CIA
operation at the Benghazi consulate to run arms secretly to the Syrian rebels. And the administration
covered it up to protect Obama in the election. In other words, a projection of Iran-contra and
Watergate rolled into one.
S




     Original Message
From: H <HDR22@clintonemailcom>
To: 'sbwhoeo
Sent:. Tue, Nos 13, 2012 9:23 am
Subject: Re: More questions. Sid
What was his "worldview" and why would he think hurting P furthered it? Why would Cantor want to
hurt P (beloved by Rs)?

From: Sidney Blumenthal [mailto:
Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2012 09:13 AM Eastern Standard Time
Subject: More questions. Sid

Read Washington Post report below...

More questions:

Who else in the Congress besides congressmen Reichert and Cantor knew of the Petraeus
investigation before it became public? How many congressional staffers were informed? What roles
did they play in deciding who to inform about it? What were their communications among themselves
and with others outside their offices if any? Did any of them discuss the matter with anyone in the
Romney-Ryan campaign?
Why was Cantor intent on informing FBI Director Mueller of the existence of an FBI investigation
that was already resolved? Cantor would have been keenly aware that his referral put Mueller on
notice that the investigation could not be contained, indeed, was already known, and put pressure on
him to tell James Clapper and to make it public as soon as possible.
What were the internal discussions between Cantor and his staff on his referral to Mueller?
Did Cantor refer the matter to Mueller in order to punish the rogue FBI agent, who informed Reichert
and Cantor? If not, why not?
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793781 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793781 Date: 01/07/2016




Did Cantor understand that the FBI agent was acting illegally? Is that why he did not leak the matter
to the press and instead referred it to Mueller in a transparent effort to pressure him?
Did Cantor inform Speaker Boehner? Did Cantor inform Congressman Mike Rogers, chair of the
House Intelligence Committee? Why did Cantor keep them in the dark? What discussions did he'
have with his staff or others about who not to inform, as well as who to inform?
When Mueller learned of the illegal leak to Cantor did he launch an internal investigation? Was the FBI
Inspector General informed? Is there such an investigation? If not, why not?
Was the supposedly rogue FBI agent, described in the Washington Post as motivated by his "worldview," acting
alone? Did he discuss the investigation with any individual either inside or outside the bureau before he went to Reichert
and Cantor?
Disclosure of an espionage investigation is a felony. Will a grand jury be empaneled by the Justice
Department?
When will Senator Patrick Leahy, chair of the Judiciary Committee and a former FBI agent, begin an
investigation of this matter?

http://www.washinqtonpost.com/politics/petraeus-told-biographer-to-stop-harassing-family-friend-officials-
say/2012/11/12/6ccb325c-2d00-11e2-a99d-5c4203af7b7a story. htm I

What remains unclear is why, after it was decided that criminal charges would not be filed, the FBI informed Clapper
about the investigation. Another question is why the notification was made on Election Day about a case the Justice
Department had declined to pursue weeks earlier.
At some point during the summer, the Tampa FBI agent whom Kelley had first approached for help was taken off the
investigation. Frustrated and concerned that an inquiry into what he thought may be a possible national security breach
had not progressed, he got in touch with the office of Rep. Dave Reichert (R-Wash.). Reichert passed the information on
to House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R-Va.).
"I was contacted by an F.B.I. employee concerned that sensitive, classified information may have been compromised and
made certain Director Mueller was aware of these serious allegations and the potential risk to our national security,"
Cantor said in a statement.
Cantor contacted FBI Director Robert S. Mueller III on Oct. 31, and a week later Clapper told Petraeus he needed to
resign.
"I don't know if it would have taken this course without Cantor," a person close to the inquiry said.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793781 Date: 01/07/2016
