UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL



                                                                                    CO/4241/2008
      IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
      QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
      DIVISIONAL COURT
                                                                           Royal Courts of Justice
                                                                                           Strand
                                                                             London WC2A 2LL

                                                                       Wednesday, 29th July 2009

                                               Before:

                                     LORD JUSTICE THOMAS

                                   MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES

                                             Between:
                                        BINYAM MOHAMED_
                                                                                         Claimant



         SECRETARY OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH AFFAIRS_
                                                           Defendant

                         Computer-Aided Transcript of the Stenograph Notes of
                                   Word Wave International Limited
                                 A Merrill Communications Company
                                 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2DY
                            Tel No: 020 7404 1400 Fax No: 020 7831 8838
                               (Official Shorthand Writers to the Court)

      Mr Ben Jaffey (instructed by Messrs Leigh Day & Co) appeared on behalf of the Claimant
      Mr Guy Vassall-Adams (instructed by Jan Johannes) appeared on behalf of the Guardian
      News and Media Ltd
      Mr Thomas de la Mare and Mr Martin Goudie (instructed by SASO) appeared as Special
      Advocates on behalf of the Claimant
      Ms Karen Steyn (instructed by the Treasury Solicitor) appeared on behalf of the Defendant

                                        OPEN PROCEEDINGS

                                           Crown copyright©
           (10.05am)

      1. MR DE LA MARE: My Lord, at the risk of incurring your enmity and probably the
          enmity of all of the law reporters here, can I make a request that we deal with some of
          the closed issues first. There are two reasons for that request. One is entirely personal:




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




             my wife was admitted to hospital last night and I would really dearly like to get out of
             court and be with her, thereby narrowing the issues so Mr Goudie can cover. The
             second is that it seems to me that clearing up some of the issues in closed in relation to
             the corrections, if any, to be made to the first open judgment --

      2.     LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: There are undoubtedly corrections to be made to the
             closed judgment.

      3.     MR DE LA MARE: Yes, that may well --

      4.     LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: It is only the form in which they are made that we have to
             discuss.

      5.     MR DE LA MARE: Indeed, my Lord. That may well have a bearing upon the open
             arguments about the rebalancing of the PII, because there may be certain factual
             matters that are disclosed, for want of a better word, as a result of those corrections that
             are thought material --

      6.     LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: How long is it going to take?

      7.     MR DE LA MARE: For my part about five minutes.

      8.     LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Ms Steyn?

      9.     MS STEYN: My Lord, without wishing to underestimate the closed hearing, I would
             be surprised if it was over within less than about 40 minutes.

      10.    LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Well, shall we say a hour. What we have done -- we
             have our own ideas about how we should amend the judgment and we shall go through
             those with you seriatim -- it may not take that long -- and, if there are problems, it may
             give an opportunity for instructions to be taken during the course of the day. We wish
             to amend -- obviously if an amended judgment can be made available, but there may be
             one or two problems, which all turns on partial amendment.

      11.    What do the others say?

      12.    MR VASSALL-ADAMS: In view of my learned friend's personal situation we would
             not oppose the application. We would just simply ask that the court is fairly draconian
             in terms of the timing --

       13.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Well, shall we say 11.15? I am sorry to everyone else.

       14. MR JAFFEY: It is the only sensible course, my Lord.

       15. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: OK, 11.15.

             (10.08am)

                                         (A closed session followed)
             (12.10am)


                                                      [2]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      16. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Mr Jaffey, we are in a position where we have got a
          substantial way through looking at changes we should make to our first judgments but,
          quite naturally, those sitting behind Ms Steyn want to have a look at precise wording
          and there may be one issue that may be difficult but we hope that can be resolved.

      17. MR JAFFEY: My Lord, what myself and Mr Vassall-Adams have agreed, with your
          Lordships' permission, is that he will go first and deal with general principles and then I
          will deal with the facts of the case, if that is acceptable to your Lordship.

      18. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: How very nicely put, Mr Jaffey, and are you going to
          leave us, Mr de la Mare?

      19. MR DE LA MARE: I am, if that is acceptable.

      20.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Of course, and we do hope that your wife is better soon.

      21.   MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES: Yes.

      22.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Mr Vassall-Adams, thank you very much for your
            submissions.

      23.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Thank you very much, my Lord. There are two further
            bundles to be passed up for your Lordships.

      24.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Let us just clear the decks for a moment.

      25.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: To add to your collection in this case. (handed)

      26.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes.

      27.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: And I today will be referring to this bundle, which I will be
            calling bundle B, and I will also be referring to the hearing bundle for 22nd April,
            which was the big thick bundle you have and I will be calling that bundle A.

      28.   Before developing my submissions, your Lordships, it is sometimes helpful to apply
            what one might call a common sense test, without the benefit of the law or the learned
            arguments of counsel, and in my submission the common sense test would approach
            this case as follows. The defendant's case is that disclosure of seven paragraphs of the
            court's own judgment, the contents of which are not themselves damaging to national
            security, would cause serious harm to US/UK intelligence sharing because the US
            would be so upset and shocked by this action of the court that they might seriously
            refuse to share vital intelligence with the UK in the future and, if one just steps back
            from that a moment, not thinking of it in a legal way, but just thinking a bit about the
            relationship between the US and the UK in matters of foreign affairs, and one thinks of
            the fact that the US and the UK fought alongside each other in World War II, were key
            allies throughout the Cold War, that the UK is a key ally of the US as a permanent
            member of the UN Security Council, then one mentions Iraq, Afghanistan, international
            terrorism and the acceptance that the UK is the US's key international intelligence ally,
            enjoying an exceptional degree of co-operation enjoyed by less than a handful of other



                                                    [3]
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            states, if you look at that case with a real world perspective and you ask yourself would
            the US jeopardise all of that for seven paragraphs of the court's judgment, moreover in
            a case that has already been very highly publicised, in my submission it fails the
            common sense test. It is a proposition that lacks all credibility and the key question
            therefore for the court is, and for the UK media, in its submissions today, is how has the
            defendant managed to construct an apparently credible legal case against disclosure and
            in my submissions the media's contention will be that the defendant's case is based on a
            series of propositions which, when closely examined, simply do not withstand scrutiny
            and I am going to take each of these in turn, but I am going to give your Lordship the
            list of those contentions advanced -- a list of these central aspects of the defendant's
            case.

      29.   Firstly, the defendant, we say, misleadingly advances a case of potential harm to
            national security on an entirely false premise, namely that the control principle applies
            and has been understood by the US to apply to UK courts of law. Secondly, the
            defendant's PII evidence completely overlooks the fact that the seven paragraphs did
            not contain any information damaging to national security, when in fact it is the crucial
            consideration. Thirdly, the defendant seeks to portray the position of the Obama
            administration on disclosure of the seven paragraphs as being the same in fact as that of
            the Bush administration. When properly analysed, this is not the case. Fourthly, the
            defendant presents a misleadingly incomplete picture of US/UK intelligence sharing
            which results in an exaggerated and unrealistic assessment of risk and fifth is the
            defendant's tendency to equate the disclosure of paragraphs of the court's judgment with
            disclosure of the underlying evidence on which the judgment is based, a confusion
            which we say is incoherent and has the consequence of failing to give insufficient
            weight to the specific public interest in disclosure of a court's findings of fact.

      30. Developing those submissions, my Lords, the first submission, the control is --
          Fhe heading the control principle and your Lordships will recall that the submission is
          the defendant misleadingly advances a case of potential harm to national security on a
          false premise and that false premise is that the control principle applies and has been'
          paderstood by the US to apply to UK courts of laW and, taking up my skeleton
          argument, your Lordships, at paragraph -- this, the section that deals with this, which I
          will develop more fully in my submissions, starts on page 7 at stage two of the analysis
          and in paragraph 21 of the skeleton argument the defendant's case is set out in the three
          PII certificates, and has been that if the court were to order disclosure of the 42
          documents and the seven redacted paragraphs, contrary to US wishes, that it would
          introduce a new element of uncertainty into intelligence sharing relationships that
          would cause the US and other UK analysts to doubt whether the UK could be trusted
          with sensitive information and thereby undermine the UK's intelligence sharing
          relationships and, turning to the first PII certificate, it is in your Lordships' bundle A,
          namely the 22nd April hearing bundle, tab 1. Page 1 is where the First certificate starts


       31. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Tab 1, page 1. OK.

       32. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: And, following through that certificate through to page 5 of
           the certificate, you will see paragraph 12 and the material parts are intelligence


                                                    [4]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            relationship with the United States is vital to the national security of the United
            Kingdom. It saves lives. It is essential that the ability of the United States
            communicating confidence with the United Kingdom is protected. Without this
            confidence, they simply will not share information in the open manner which is
            currently the case:

                  "It is important to me that the court understands the reasoning that would
                  inform such a change in practice. Exchange of information between the
                  US and UK is comprehensive but very strictly controlled. As set out in
                  the sensitive schedule, this strict control occurs in and to the benefit of
                  both countries."

            and this is the crucial passage:

                  "Disclosure by order of our courts would introduce a new, and in the
                  minds of our US partners..."

            Note, and in the mind of our US partners it is not contended apparently at this point by
            the Secretary of State that it would be introducing an uncertain dimension, but:

                  "... in the minds of our US partners, uncertain dimension into a set of
                  practices that rely upon certainty."

            And then it goes on to describe the implications that that would have and, at page 7 of
            the certificate, actually your Lordships will recall that those paragraphs were dealing
            primarily with the issue of disclosure of the 42 documents, but the issue of disclosure of
            the paragraphs, although they are never described as such in the certificate, is dealt with
            on page 7, paragraph 17 to 19, and it is implicit, although never stated explicitly there,
            that the Secretary of State is relying upon the same reasons in relation to opposing the
            disclosure of the paragraphs as he did in relation to the documents, but it is not
            explicitly stated there. However, in the second PII certificate, it is explicitly stated and
            that certificate starts on page 9 and on page 16 of the certificate, at paragraphs 29 to 35,
            are the crucial paragraphs in terms of setting out the Secretary of State's analysis, and,
            again, in the first instance here, they are directed to the disclosure of documents issues.
            The paragraphs I am particularly concerned with in this context are at 31 to 32 and I
            will give your Lordships a moment to read those through. But essentially they relate to
            the control principle. (pause)

      33.   It is not simply confidentiality and the secrecy of intelligence material that is in issue,
            however, but also the issue of the control that one government has over the intelligence
            information it shares with another government in expectation of confidentiality.

      34.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes.

      35.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: And, if your Lordships turn to page 21 of that certificate,
            you can see that here the court is explicitly dealing with disclosure into the public
            domain and is talking about the closed paragraphs of the court's judgment and in
            paragraph 48 deals with the second question, whether there is a likelihood of real
            damage to national security and international relations and it says, halfway through


                                                     [5]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            paragraph 48, the reasons for this assessment, ie for his assessment that there would be
            such damage, correspond to those set out and referred to in paragraph 29 to 35 above, ie
            the reasoning -- the arguments about the control principle, arguments he relies upon
            explicitly in relation to the issue of disclosure of the paragraphs.

      36.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes.

      37.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: And at paragraph 50, just turning very briefly to that on the
            following page, the final sentence of that paragraph, I emphasise again that it is not
            simply a question of the confidentiality and the secrecy of intelligence material but also
            one of the US expectation to be able to retain control of its intelligence information
            and, where disclosure is required, to handle this within its adjudicatory system and
            subject to its own protective measures.

      38.   The third PIT certificate is on page 39 of bundle B, the small bundle that I handed up to
            your Lordships a moment ago.

      39.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes.

      40.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: And it starts at page 7 of that bundle.

      41.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes.

      42.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: I apologise, it does not start at page 7. It starts at page 39 of
            that bundle and on page 7 of that certificate, which is page 45 of the bundle, the -- we
            get the national security assessment and you will see at paragraph 20 there is an express
            reference back to the assessment made in the second certificate and, quoting the
            passage that itself refers to paragraphs 29 and 35 as being part of the analysis, and then
            he says, paragraph 21, it explicitly refers back to paragraphs 29 and 35 of the second
            certificate in terms of his assessment and he describes "my judgment across those two
            certificates was the public disclosure of the information now in issue before the court
            would seriously harm the intelligence sharing arrangements between the United
            Kingdom and the United States, causing considerable damage to the national security of
            the United Kingdom" and so forth, and then paragraph 22 is the crucial paragraph:

                  "I have carefully reviewed my assessments and conclusions as expressed
                  in these early certificates, taking into account the further advice that I
                  have received. I consider that the judgments expressed therein were then
                  and remain correct. It is my continued view that real harm to the national
                  security and international relations interest of the United Kingdom would
                  be caused were there to be public disclosure of the seven paragraphs in
                  issue in these proceedings. The critical issue is the principle of trust and
                  the fundamental requirement of confidentiality that lies at the heart of
                  intelligence liaison relationships, an aspect addressed in greater detail in
                  the sensitive schedule."

            Then in paragraph 23 the Secretary of State refers again to:

                  "... the long established practice within intelligence communities that


                                                    [6]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




                  information passed along intelligence channels cannot be publicly
                  disclosed without the consent of the state providing it. Trust is of
                  fundamental importance to the intelligence relationships maintained by
                  the United Kingdom in protecting its national security. It is a custom
                  which has always to the best of my knowledge and preference been
                  respected by the UK courts."

      43.   Paragraph 24, halfway down:

                  "If the court was to disclose the seven paragraphs in the current
                  circumstances, this would cause a loss of confidence in the United
                  Kingdom's ability to comply with this custom, ie the control principle
                  custom, not only by the United States but also by other foreign
                  governments which would cause considerable damage to our national
                  security."

            Not a question of the United States merely taking umbrage, as it has been described to
            the court, but the United States and other foreign governments reevaluating the extent
            to which they believe they can safely provide the UK with information in the light of
            what would be a highly significant breach by the UK of the control principle. Failure
            of the UK legal system to respect and protect information disclosed in the intelligence
            relationship will have serious consequences for intelligence liaison.

      44.   Now, in paragraph 25 of my skeleton argument, I describe the control principle as
             being the principle that where government A provides government B with intelligence
              information, government A will expect government B not to disclose that information
             to anyone else without its prior consent, hence control of information provided to the
             recipient government always vests with the originating government and the essential
              point in relation to this is this, and it is dealt with in paragraph 26: )he control principle'
            p a rule of practice that governs intelligence sharing between governments. It does noti
              extend a power to an originating country to control dissemination by an independent
            Icourt of law in the receiving country and the problem -- and in our submission it is
              /fundamental problem with the whole way the Secretary of State has constructed hisl
             base on this point, is that it overlooks the basic constitutional principle of the separation
             lof powers, namely the separation of powers between the powers of the executive and
              the powers of the courts and that principle in itself lies at the heart of the exercise that
              the courts are required to undertake when reviewing Public Interest Immunity, and in
               this respect I rely on the case of Conway v Rimmer and it is at the third tab of your
               Lordships' bundle provided by -- the media bundle that I handed up this morning.

      45.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes. Which bit do you want to go to?

      46.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Bear with me, my Lord.

      47.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Do you want to just give us a reference?

      48.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Can I deal with it very quickly. I am aware that this was
            cited in arguments at an earlier stage in the case --



                                                       [7 ]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      49.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes, of course.

      50.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: -- but it is of some importance. The facts are dealt with in
            the headnote. The claimant was a former probationary police constable. He was
            accused of stealing a torch. He said he did not steal the torch. He was subsequently
            prosecuted. He was acquitted at trial but sacked from his job and he began a claim for
            malicious prosecution, sought access to various documents and the Home Secretary
            relied on Public Interest Immunity to seek to prevent him from having access to them
            and the essential holding can be seen from the headnote and it is one with which your
            Lordships will be familiar. But the essence of why I rely upon it in this context is that
            in Conway v Rimmer, the dicta of Lord Simon in Duncan v Cammell Laird were
            overruled and the court said the ultimate decision in a PII is not a matter for the
            minister but it is a decision that the court takes and that is because of the separation of
            powers: If I can deal with the relevant passages very briefly from the judgment of Lord
            Morris, because, although he was not the only one to refer to it, he deals with it most
            fully and it is at paragraph 954 of the judgment. It is page 954, it is the start of his
            judgment:

                  "My Lords, stated in its most direct form the question - one of
                  far-reaching importance - which is raised in this case is whether the final
                  decision as to the production in litigation of relevant documents is to rest
                  with the courts or with the executive. I have no doubt that the conclusion
                  should be that the decision rests with the courts."

      51.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I do not think Ms Steyn disputes that.

      52.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Nobody disputes it, but what -- but the significance I attach
            to it in this context is that the principle derives from the principle of the separation of
            powers and of the particular role in the constitution that the courts play and that is made
            very -- it is analysed in this judgment and in particular I rely upon the passages given
            on page 955 and 956 and I will turn to them very briefly. At 955E, Lord Morris says:

                  "We could have a system under which, if a Minister of the Crown gave a
                  certificate that a document should not be produced, the courts would be
                  obliged to give full effect to such certificate and, in every case and
                  without exception, to treat it as binding, final and conclusive. Such a
                  system (though it could be laid down by some specific statutory
                  enactment) would, in my view, be out of harmony with the spirit which in
                  this country has guided the ordering of our affairs and in particular the
                  administration of justice. Whether in some cases the law has or has not
                  veered towards adopting such a system is a matter that has involved the
                  careful and detailed review of the authorities which was a feature of the
                  helpful addresses of learned counsel."

            Then he goes on to analyse the possibility that there would be friction between the
            courts and the minister and he says, no, they both operate in the public interest:

                  "Some aspects of the public interest are chiefly within the knowledge of



                                                     [8]
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




                   some Minister and can best be assessed by him."

             And the court would obviously take those into account but ultimately someone has to
             make the final decision. He says at the bottom of the following paragraph "Should it be
             the court or should it be the executive?" and then he deals with the submission of the
             Attorney General, essentially to say -- which were to the effect that the primary duty to
             determine whether public interest rests with the government and essentially that the
             court, you can see further down, had no discretion:

                   "... to reject a statement of the executive government (if put forward in
                   appropriate form and in good faith and without mistake or misdirection)
                   recording a determination that the public interest requires that a document
                   be withheld. The court, he submitted, must give conclusive effect to such
                   a statement..."

             But Lord Morris says no at G:

                   "I am unable to regard these submissions as being acceptable. It is one of
                   the main functions of courts to weigh up competing evidence and
                   considerations. I see no peril in leaving such a process to the courts. They
                   are well qualified to [do so and so forth] ... It is said that a statement by
                   the executive to the effect that the public interest requires that a document
                   should be withheld is a statement upon a matter peculiarly within the
                   knowledge and competence of the executive government and must
                   therefore be accepted by a court."

             A court would always pay the greatest heed to such a statement and there are many
             matters upon which the executive will be likely to be best qualified to form a view:

                   "It will be easy for a court to recognise this and to give full weight to this
                   consideration. The court, however, will be in a position of independence
                   and will as a result often be better placed than a department to assess the
                   weight of competing aspects of the public interest including those with
                   which a particular department is not immediately concerned."

      53.    LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes. Right.

      54.    MR VASSALL-ADAMS: I will not take your Lordships to it in view of the indication
             your Lordships just gave me, but essentially the judgment in Conway v Rimmer was
             analysed in ex parte Wiley by Lord Woolf and essentially it was analysed in the terms
             that Conway v Rimmer established that the decision was ultimately a matter for the
             courts and that the basis of that decision was about controlling the balance of power
             between the executive and the judicial branches of government and the judgment itself
             is at your Lordship's tab 4. I am just going to see whether I can find the one specific
             passage. Yes, it is page 296, my Lords, 296 at G and H.

       55.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes.

       56.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: At G:


                                                      [9]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




                   "It should be remembered that the principle which was established in
                   Conway v Rimmer is that it is the courts which should have the final
                   responsibility for deciding when both the contents of a class claim to
                   immunity should be upheld..."

             And then the following passage:

                   "What was inherent in the reasoning of the House in that case was that,
                   because of the conflict which could exist between the two aspects of the
                   public interest involved, the courts, which have final responsibility for
                   upholding the rule of law, must equally have final responsibility for
                   deciding what evidence should be available to the courts of law in order
                   to enable them to do justice."

      57.    Now, why do we say all of this is relevant and important at this stage of the
             proceedings? In our submission, it has two implications for the defendant's case.
             Firstly, the defendant's case is unsound as a matter of law. The control principle does
             not apply to courts of law, discharged with determining Public Interest Immunity foril
             fundamental constitutional reasons concerning the separation of powers and the
             independence of the courts from the executive. Secondly, the defendant's case isi
             unsound as a matter of fact, because Conway v Rimmer has been good law in this'
             Country for 40 years and it is inconceivable that the US would not understand that thel
                  government guarantees of confidentiality are not absolute but are subject to review
             by the courts and, of course, there is evidence before the court on this point', I will take
             your Lordships to it very briefly but it is the evidence put in by the international media
             at the April hearing and the witness statement of Morgan Halperin in your Lordships
             bundle A. I will take your Lordships to it very briefly at tab 4 so you have the
             reference.

      58.    The statement itself is at tab 4, starting on page 2, and in this context I rely in particular
             on paragraph --

      59.    LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Tab 4 --

      60.    MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Yes. Sorry, my Lords. Tab 4, page 3.

      61.    LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes.

      62.    MR VASSALL-ADAMS: And, so I do not have to take your Lordships back to it
             again --

       63.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No, we have looked at that.

       64.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: -- perhaps your Lordships should read paragraphs 5 and 6,
             which describe the relationship between the UK and the US governments. I do not
             know whether your Lordships have noted the credentials of the writer.




                                                      [ 10 ]
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      65.    LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes, we read this on the last occasion and it is obviously
             someone -- what he is really saying, I think, is that the US government must have
             appreciated that the ultimate authority is in this court.

      66.    MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Indeed. That in a nutshell --

      67.    LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I doubt whether that could be contested.

      68.    MR VASSALL-ADAMS: In a nutshell that is it and, of course, this evidence has not
             been challenged --

      69.    LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: All this argument, Mr Vassall-Adams, I think goes to
             your point that, although the Foreign Secretary -- well, it is the difference between what
             the Foreign Secretary says may happen. The US documents by and large show that he
             could do this, you could do this, and your point is, well, no-one could ever conclude
             rationally that they would do it. Is that it? I mean, that is what this goes to, is it not?

      70.    MR VASSALL-ADAMS: I am sorry, I --

      71.    LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Sorry. Your argument is this: if we look at all the
             documents, although there are expressions of view couched in the documentation that
             there are of the principle of inviolability, if you look at it as (a) the US court must
             appreciate it, (b), you look at the kind of them and then you ask yourself at the end of
             the day could a Foreign Secretary reasonably conclude that they would do it, because if
             they would not carry out the threat or would not breach intelligence sharing
             relationships, then there is no doubt. That is your argument, is it?

      72.    MR VASSALL-ADAMS: That is where my argument leads to.

      73.    LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: And this is all part of that?

      74.    MR VASSALL-ADAMS: And this is all part of that.

      75.    LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: That really this is --

      76.    MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Of that analysis, because ultimately --

      77.    LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: It is all a statement of grand principle but, when push
             comes to shove, if this court makes these paragraphs available, it is not rational to
             conclude that anyone will do anything.

      78.    MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Exactly.

       79.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: That is it, is it not?

      80.    MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Well, that is where we get to. That is where we get to and, if
             I may deal with a third --

       81.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: What you are looking at, I think -- it is obviously clear
             from the cases which were dealt with at length -- is that we must accord the upmost




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            respect to the Foreign Secretary's view but, at the end of the day, if we were to
            conclude that his view was not one that could properly be sustained on analysis, then
            we ought to override it and the US government must appreciate that.

      82.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Indeed, and that is explicit --

      83.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I think it is much better to put it that way than to talk of
            irrationality, because no-one could ever -- it is a lawyer's term.

      84.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Indeed, and that much is conceded in paragraph 27 of our
            skeleton argument. We readily accept that the US and any other country providing
            intelligence to the UK is generally entitled to assume that the court will be highly
            deferential to the views of the minister and take them very, very seriously. But what
            they are not entitled to assume is that the decision will always fall one way.

      85.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes.

      86.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: A third aspect of the defendant's argument which is
            problematic, the control principle argument as it relates to this case, is that it has
            ignored what has happened in these proceedings, because clearly the court's first three
            judgments made it very clear that the court would have ordered disclosure of the 42
            documents to Binyam Mohammed's lawyers if the US had not made the concessions it
            did and clearly the US administration can have be left in no doubt, both of the court's
            powers and of its willingness to exercise them.

      87.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But that goes, I think -- there is no absolute principle.
            There is a reference, I think, in one of these documents to it being an inviolable
            principle, but if you subject that to analysis, it cannot conceivably be right, because, for
            example, if the US intelligence service has supplied to the United Kingdom
            Government information that showed -- or should I put it the Republic of Ruritania -- it
            is easier to do it in these terms -- supplied to the United Kingdom security services,
            through their security services, information in relation to some action that was to be
            taken by that government in the UK, it would be inconceivable that the UK
            Government was not free to disclose it to the general public. I mean, the principle of
            inviolability as an absolute cannot be right. Although it is mentioned, I think we would
            have to look at the context. So it is a balancing exercise.

      88.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: It is a balancing exercise, my Lords. I am just going to see
            which of my submissions I can cull --

      89.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Because I think at the end -- I am sorry I took you to the
            point. It is simply the really difficult issue in this case is the assessment of the Foreign
            Secretary's judgment. I think what you have said is that you have started this -- as you
            say, you stand back you and you have said, in the light of everything you have
            mentioned, it really is absurd to think that the United States administration would, if we
            put paragraphs into the public domain, that have absolutely no damage to anyone, that
            might be politically embarrassing to some, that they would do anything.

      90.   MR VASSALL-ADAMS: That is right, my Lord.


                                                    [12]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      91.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I think that is the argument and it is the question of
            reality of what -- I think the question is, looking at these documents very carefully,
            would the United States do something, that is the judgment that we have to examine,
            because the Foreign Secretary says, I think, that they would.

      92. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Indeed, and --

      93. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: And you say, well, no, the foreign Secretary was wrong,
          completely wrong, in reaching that view.

      94. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Indeed.

      95.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: OK. Well, that is quite a hurdle to overcome.

      96. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: That is the hurdle that we have to overcome and, if I may
          essentially summarise --

      97.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS,: I do not want to take you out of the order, but I think
            these sort of basic building blocks are clear. It comes to the very principal point, which
            is an examination of the material which is before us to decide whether we should
            accord due deference to the Foreign Secretary or conclude that he had no proper basis
            for reaching that decision given the change of administration of the United States,
            because I think there is -- in our earlier judgment we distinguished between a breach of
            the ordinary principle of confidentiality and any particular statements that might be
            made that would show that an action could be taken as a result of breach. There are
            two -- and think it was Dame Neville-Jones in their Lordship's house, or theiri
            Lordship and their Ladyships house, who can distinguish between the ordinaryl
            principle and consequences flowing from that and any special statement that may be
            'made over and above it!

      98. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Yes. I mean, in essence, I will take your Lordships, if I
          may, through those propositions that I set out at the outset, because they do ultimately
          lead to the conclusion that you are asking me to address. Now, the significance of the
          point that I have just been developing in relation to the control principle is this, that, if
          we are right that the defendant's case on the control principle is legally and factually
          unsound and it is in fact a smokescreen, the defendant's attempt to construct a general
          argument about the damage to national security arising from court order disclosures
          must fail and that takes us back to what we say should have been the exercise all along,
          namely focusing in on whether disclosure of this particular information would create a
          real risk of serious harm to national security in this case and in that regard we say, and
          this is my second heading, it is remarkable -- or perhaps not remarkable, it is
          noteworthy -- that the defendant's PII evidence completely overlooks the fact that the
          seven paragraphs do not contain any information damaging to national security and we
          say that is really the crucial consideration. What you would expect in a PII certificate
          in a case of this kind would be to look closely at what it was proposed to disclose and
          identify the damage that would actually arise from the disclosure of that information.




                                                    [13]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      99.   MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES: So would you say, Mr Vassall-Adams, that this is a
            class claim as opposed to a contents claim?

      100. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: We do say it is a class claim. It is a class claim in effect
           because what the Secretary of State is saying is, because this information was supplied
           in confidence by the United States under the expectation that we would not disclose it,
           therefore disclosing it would be harmful to national security, so it is because it falls
           within the class of that kind of document, rather than looking at the actual contents of
           the statement, as the court is required to do.

      101. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I do not think -- you make the point, I think, that there is
           nowhere suggested by the Foreign Secretary that anything in the seven paragraphs
           could of itself be damaging to the national security of anyone.

      102. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Nowhere. Not in -- one can go through the PII certificates
           line by line and there is not a single reference --

      103. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Well, Ms Steyn will obviously tell us if you have got that
           wrong.

      104. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Yes. So, turning back to my skeleton briefly, we say that
           the failure to -- this is at page 11. Paragraph 32 deals with the point your Lordship has
           just addressed, and notes the fact that the defendant has at no stage demurred from the
           court's previous finding that the disclosure of the paragraphs would not be harmful to
           national security, contained no specific information harmful to national security, and at
           paragraph 33, the -- we set out reasons why we say this is significant. Firstly, the court
           is required, when determining where the balance of the public interest lies, to look at
           specific information questioned and form its own judgment as to the likely harm to
           national security if disclosure is ordered and in that respect we rely upon Shayler. The
           relevant part of the judgment is set out at paragraph 35 of the skeleton argument.

      105. Now, why do we say this is relevant? Well, I do not propose to take your Lordships to
           Shayler. It is in your Lordships' bundle. Your Lordships will recall the context for that
           case. The court in that case was seeking to determine whether the Official Secrets Act,
           the prohibition of the disclosures under the Official Secrets Act, the absolute act was
           Human Rights Act compliant in terms of Article 10 and ultimately held that it was,
           because the backstop was always that a former member of the intelligence services
           could go to the High Court and challenge a refusal to make the disclosure which he said
           would be in the public interest and the argument was made judicial review is not really
           a very effective remedy, because the courts are so deferential when it comes to national
           security considerations and Lord Bingham dealt with that submission in the way that I
           have identified at paragraph 33. He says there are two answers to it, and the first is the
           court's willingness to intervene will very much depend on the nature of the material that
           it is sought to disclose:

                  "If the issue concerns the disclosure of documents bearing a high security
                  classification and there is apparently credible unchallenged evidence that
                  disclosure is liable to lead to the identification of agents or the



                                                   [14]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




                  compromise of informers, the court may very well be unwilling to
                  intervene. If, at the other end of the spectrum, it appears that while
                  disclosure of the material may cause embarrassment or arouse criticism, it
                  will not damage any security or intelligence interest, the court's reaction is
                  likely to be very different. Usually, a proposed disclosure will fall
                  between these two extremes and the court must exercise its judgment,
                  informed by article 10 considerations."

      106. Well, we say that is relevant because, although it is a different context, it is the court
           trying to weigh up the competing claims of national security and the competing claims
           of article 10 and Lord Bingham is very clear that one needs to focus in on the specific
           information that is sought to be disclosed.

      107. Secondly, at paragraph 36 of the skeleton, the point that your Lordships have already
           identified: our submission is that the defendant's inability to point to any specific
           information in the seven paragraphs, the disclosure of which would be harmful to
           national security, reveals the defendant's PIT claim to be in substance, if not in form, a
           class claim. The objection here is the disclosure of paragraphs, because they are based
           upon intelligence information provided by the US in confidence, a class, not because
           they actually contain information harmful to the national security, contents, and we say
           it is something of a throwback to the old law before ex parte Wiley in that respect and I
           will just give the reference, page 305E in ex parte Wiley, it is Lord Woolf saying that
           recognition of a new class based Public Interest Immunity requires clear and
           compelling evidence that it is necessary.

      108. The third, and perhaps, your Lordships might think, rather important, issue concerns the
           defendant's portrayal of the position of the Obama administration and essentially the
           defendant's case is this: the Obama administration's position is the same as that of the
           Bush administration and therefore you should come to the same conclusion as you
           came to in your fourth judgment and at paragraph 37 I refer to the fact that in the fourth
           judgment were various communications from the Burn administration. Much of the
           evidence was in closed but there were two important documents in open and if I may
           take your Lordships to them very briefly, because they do demonstrate, we say, a very
           significant difference of language. In, again, your Lordship's bundle A, at tab 1 --

      109. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes, page...?

      110. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Pages 24 to 25.

      111. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: The Bellinger letter.

      112. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: The Bellinger letter. It must be heavily marked by now, my
           Lords, but it is this famous first paragraph:

                  "We note the classified documents identified in your letters of June 16th
                  and August 1st 2008. We want to affirm in the clearest terms that the
                  public disclosure of these documents and the information contained
                  therein is likely to result in serious damage to US national security and



                                                    [15]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




                  could harm existing intelligence information sharing arrangements
                  between our two governments."

            And then there is the email from Mr Mathias. It is at page 32, where an extract from it
            is provided in the letter of Mr Bethlehem to the court of 27th August and, on page 33,
            one can see the 3rd paragraph of this email and the final sentence of which is as
            follows:

                  "Ordering the disclosure of US intelligence information now would have
                  only the marginal effects of serious and lasting damage to the US-UK
                  intelligence sharing relationship, and thus the national security of the
                  United Kingdom, and of aggressive and unprecedented intervention in the
                  apparently functioning adjudicatory processes of a longtime ally of the
                  United Kingdom, in contravention of well established principles of
                  international comity."

            Well, in our submission, the language there is clear and unambiguous. We would say it
            is a threat and it is interesting to see what the defendant himself said at the time. If we
            can turn back to the defendant's first PII certificate and page 4 of the same. So this is
            the defendant's position back in August 2008. Paragraph 10.

       113. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Paragraph 10.

       114. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Paragraph 10, page 4 of the certificate.

       115. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes, paragraph 10. Yes.

       116. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: "My officials and those of others in the UK government
            departments and agencies have worked very closely on this case. Their advice..."

       117. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I am sorry, paragraph --

       118. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Sony, paragraph 10, my Lord.

       119. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Sorry, we had gone to page 10.

       120. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Halfway --

       121. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: On page 5.

       122. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Sorry, it is my page 4.

       123. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Page 4, yes.

       124. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Paragraph halfway down, paragraph 10:

                  "My officials and those from others in the UK government departments
                  and agencies have worked very closely on this case. Their advice has
                  been clear and unanimous in my judgment. Disclosure of these
                  documents by order of our courts or otherwise by United Kingdom


                                                    [16]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




                  authorities would seriously harm the existing intelligence sharing
                  arrangements between the United Kingdom..."

      125. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: That is a would, is it not?

      126. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Yes, indeed it is, a would.

      127. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Because we have to look carefully.

      128. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: It is a would, not a could. In this case --

      129. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: This will become, as we will look in a moment, as a
           highly crucial difference.

      130. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Your Lordships are ahead of me and at paragraph 11 he
           says in reaching his assessment he has taken into account the fact, and this is the way
           he characterises the position of the US at the time:

                  "The US administration, on the basis of clear, consistent and forceful
                  communications, both written and oral, from senior officials, including at
                  the highest national security levels, please note, from all of the
                  departments and agencies concerned, have indicated that such damage
                  was likely to occur."

            That is the Secretary of State's assessment of the situation as it obtained under the Bush
            administration.

      131. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Bellinger talks of could, but you say the balance of this
           1                                                    .
            would. It talks about it could happen. The critical question that we have to ask,
             Ourselves, I think, is does the "could" become a "would", because you cannot decide,
           1
            that there is a risk unless you form a judgment that there is a real risk the "could" could
             become a "would"!

      Th. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Without getting caught up in language, there is
          'preliminary question, which is is the "would" still a "would", or is it now a "could", and
           in my submission it is now a "could". It has gone from being a "would" to a "could"

       133. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Well, we are not sure.

       134. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: -- on the Obama evidence but we say -- and that is the
            analysis I would like to now deal with.

       135. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: OK, let us come to that.

       136. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Turning back to the -- turning back to bundle B very briefly,
            if I may, page 47 of that bundle in the defendant's third PIT certificate. Paragraph 29:

                   "I have carefully considered, together with those advising me, whether the
                   recent US correspondence indicates a different approach to that indicated



                                                    [17]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




                  in the earlier US correspondence. It is my view and that of my advisers
                  that there is no difference in substance between the earlier and recent
                  correspondence."

            So that is --

      137. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: And that is a matter of great importance to the Secretary
           of State.

      138. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: That is a matter of great importance to the Secretary of
           State. Now, we submit otherwise, we will ask the court to make up its own mind and
           we invite the court first to take a close look at the CIA letter, as I shall now call it, as
           we now know it is a CIA letter, which is on page 117 in its latest version. Page 117 of
           bundle B, my Lord.

      139. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: We are told, because we wanted to be sure about this, bUt
           in the redacted parts of this there is no language that converts the word "could" to,
            would".

      140. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Thank you very much, my Lord.

      [141. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Otherwise -- we anticipated from your skeleton this was
            the argument you were going to make, but there is nothing in the redacted parts of this
            document that in any way change the balance of the "could" to "would"i
      142. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Thank you, my Lords.
                                                                                             —1
      143. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I think that is very -- we just wanted to check that was the
           'Secretary of State's position, because otherwise we would have to consider whether, in,
           the light of your skeleton, whether we would have to open more of this document up

      144. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Thank you very much, my Lord. I can deal with this
           relatively briefly. Paragraph 4 of the letter, I will give your Lordships a moment to
           read that --

      145. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: We have read it on so many times. I would not say it is
           inscribed in our hearts but we have read it on numerous occasions.

      146. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: I will just deal with my submissions. I will not take your
           Lordships to it in any great detail. What we say is the fourth paragraph is a generic
           objection to disclosure of classified information shared between two countries. It treats
           the proposed disclosure as if it was a disclosure by the UK government itself, shared
           between our countries, public disclosure of this information, which it clearly is not a
           disclosure by the UK government itself. The language used is could reasonably be
           expected to cause serious damage, "could" reasonably be expected to cause serious
           damage, not "would" cause serious damage to our intelligence sharing relationship.
           Following that, may result in a constriction of the US/UK relationship, as well as the
           UK relationships with other countries, and then it goes on to talk about the impact on
           the relationship with other countries, which certainly, so far as the open case is


                                                    [ 18 ]
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




             concerned, is not a matter that the Secretary of State has been placing particular
             emphasis on, but in any case most of this letter --

       147. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Well, you see, the problem is that in -- if the balance is
            up to us, one obviously has to take -- one would naturally take a difference between, in
            assessing the likelihood of what a democracy and all our tradition is likely to do as
            opposed to what the Republic of Ruritania might do, assuming Ruritania not to have
            those democratic traditions. That is why I think that is the relevance, is it not, that it is,
            in assessing the risk, the fact that the United States is a democracy and has longstanding
            issues of freedom of information, it goes to the judgment which we are going to have to
            make as to whether this Foreign Secretary's assessment of what will happen, subject to
            one matter to which we will refer you in a moment, is right.

       148. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Yes, my Lords, that is exactly it, and in the following
            paragraph I just note the fact that it is suggested -- there it is again dealing with the
            impact on public disclosure by the United Kingdom of information garnered from such
            relationships, would suggest that the United Kingdom is unwilling or unable to protect
            information or assistance provided by its ally. As a consequence if foreign partners --
            emphasis foreign partners, learn that information it has provided is publicly disclosed,
            these foreign partners could take steps to withhold from the United Kingdom sensitive
            information that could be important to its safety and security. Well, it is again
            expressed in the language of "could", but there is no suggestion there that the US could)
            let alone would, take steps to withhold sensitive information from the UK governmentJ,
            No suggestion there whatsoever, and, in the final paragraph of the letter, which is in a
            sense the sort of high point in the sense for the Secretary of State, public disclosure of
            the information contained in the seven paragraphs withheld from the High Court's
            earlier decision, as well as the documents from which the information is drawn, ie it
            runs the two together and does not consider the paragraphs separately, so it runs
            together the issue of the paragraphs, as well as the issue of the underlying documents,
            could, again could, likely result in serious damage to the UK and US national security
            and then this suggestion that it might have to review the sensitivity of information
            provided in the future and your Lordships have my submission at paragraph 40 of my
            skeleton argument about what we should understand by the use of the word review, that
            review is a term --

       149. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: All of this is a judgment and what we were disclosing --
            obviously if we were putting into the public domain, you know, the name of a lot of
            agents who were in foreign power, one could well understand it --

       150. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Of course, absolutely.

       151. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: -- if anyone would ever do such a thing. It is all a
            question of this very careful balance of actually what we are doing in the context of the
            democracy that is taking this line.

       152. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Indeed, and the use of the word review we say is an
            interesting choice, because it is the phrase the governments like to adopt when they
            want to imply that they might possibly take some action but not commit themselves to



                                                      [ 19 ]
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            doing anything in particular. That is essentially what it is. It is not a commitment to
            doing anything. The review could be discharged by simply reading the court's fifth
            judgment and asking whether it changes anything, to which the only rational answer
            could be, we submit, it does not. It is an application of well established principles on
            the very unusual facts of this case.

       153. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Well, your submission really is, I think, if we have'
            'understood this, that all of this is very carefully couched in terms of "could" and if you'
            then stand back and ask yourself the question, in the light of what the Obama
            administration has disclosed in relation to the practices of the CIA, is it remotely,'
            'credible that, if we describe what happened to one individual, that they will stop
            intelligence sharing in relation to the protection of the British public and that is the'
            Ultimate question that has to be asked.r

       154. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: That is the ultimate question that has to be asked.

       1'155. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: And the Foreign Secretary's view that it is and is thai
              view one that a reasonable -- you know, for which there is credible evidence, if the
              United States government will act as it will. That, I think, is the issue. That is the
              attack you are making),

       156. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: That is exactly the attack that I am making.

       157. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I thought we had understood. I just wanted to make
            certain we had understood it, because I want to take you in a minute to one paragraph
            of the certificate which you have overlooked and I think because it contains the word
            "would".

       158. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Very well.

       159. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Can we go back to the certificate?

       160. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Which one is this, my Lord?

       161. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: The recent one.

       162. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: The third certificate.

       [163. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes, and if you go to paragraph 27 and read it, there are
             "woulds" in that sentence and not "coulds"J

       164. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Where --

       165. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Paragraph 27, page 47.

       166. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: I am on page 47, my Lords.

       167. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Page 47, paragraph 27.

       168. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Paragraph 27.


                                                     [20]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




       169. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: If you read it, you will see that the words would are in
            that, not could.

       170. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Please bear with me, my Lord, I am trying to find the
            particular part --

             LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Just read it through. (pause)

       P2. The source of that statement is the understanding of the conversation of the Foreign
            ,Secretary with the Secretary of State, because she says the US Secretary of State,
            indicated further that public disclosure in this case would, not could

       173. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Yes.

       [174. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Now, I do not know the -- now does that not -- does no
             the statement of Secretary of State Hilary Clinton make it clear that this is not a "couldni
             lease, but a "would" case!

       175. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: No, my Lord, it does not, for this reason: you have to look,
            extremely carefully at what is actually being said here, look at the language, and you
            have to turn back to paragraph 26!

       176. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes.

       1177. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: US correspondence accords with the position OI the'
            'administration communicated to me in the more general terms, important, by US
            Secretary of State Clinton on 2nd March 2009 in my discussions with her. She was
            'elm then that the position of the new administration on the disclosure of US
            intelligence material had not changed. That is what we are talking about, the positior!
            of the US -- of the new administration on the disclosure of US intelligence material '
              ndicating an inviolable principle that one state should not publicly disclose the
             intelligence information shared with it by a liaison partner. So this is simply a!
            'reaffirmation of what we already know to be US policy!

       [178. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: She is not talking about -- because obviously if MO
            Secretary Clinton was taking the view that disclosure of these seven paragraphs would,
            affect the intelligence relationship and if she told Mr Miliband that, as we have nO,
            doubt, that would obviously undermine your argument.

       179. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: It would be a serious matter counting against mei

       180. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But you say this paragraph should be read as no
             referring to the seven paragraphs and then presumably we have to ask ourselves the
             q uestion, if it is not clear, and we will obviously have to hear Ms Steyn on the subject)
            'what did MB Clinton mean. Is it to be inferred that she meant, if we disclosed these
            1
              paragraphs, that it would affect the intelligence sharing or is she meaning that if we
             disclosed real intelligence it would affect you!




                                                      [21]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




       181. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Well, in my submission, your Lordships cannot read intO,
            those paragraphs words that are not there. There are no references to the court's
            judgment, there are no references to the paragraphs of the closed judgment. This is an
            indication that they are -- they, stand by the control principle and they do not want
            information being disclosed by their allies without their ermission. That is the public
            Position of the United States.,r

       182. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But is she taking the position that indicates further publici
            disclosure in this case "would", because she actually says "would" affect, it is not a
            question of "could", and as she is a very senior official of the Obama administration, is,
            she meaning that -- because this is what troubles us about your argument. But if she
            does mean that -- if she is talking about the paragraphs, then her position is really mi
            different to that of the Bush administration to which you earlier referred, or was she
            referring to the disclosure of the broad intelligence. Presumably we have to ask the
            question what do we think she meant, which is not a very -- which is not a question
            really that we are really happy, to dor

       183. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Can I make the submission in this way, my Lord. This
            certificate is directed to the issue -- this certificate was produced in relation to the
            disclosure of the court's paragraphs. If that matter had been discussed with Secretary of
            State Clinton and she had expressed a view on it, it is inconceivable that that would not
            have been said in terms in this certificate. The words have been chosen extremely
            carefully to leave it ambiguous, as to what the US -- what the Secretary of State was
            actually talking about and what -- the words actually used are the public disclosure of
            US intelligence information in this case. Well, my Lords, I think your Lordships would
            be surprised if it was suggested that paragraphs of your own judgment are US
            intelligence information. They are not. They may be based on it but they are the
            court's findings of fact in relation to the evidence, they are not the evidence, and so --

       184. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No, I think what you really say is that, what we are not H
            'that if there is nothing in it that is of an intelligence nature, then that is not the
            'disclosure of intelligence information of the kind she is referring to. But it is very
             )
             Flifficult -- what the Secretary of State meant in this discussion is -- it is unfortunate we
             have reached this position in this case that we do not know she really -- you say it is
             clear what she meant. It is pure intelligence

       185. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: It is, and in my submission it really would have been best
            'evidence if the Secretary of State could provide it, if there had been a letter from
            Clinton saying we would seriously review UK intelligence sharing if this information'
            i
            were to be disclosed, but of course there is not evidence

       186. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No, it is not to review it. It would affect it.

       187. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Would affect it.

       1188. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I mean, the words are not reviewing it. This is much',
            c\ learer. What the Secretary of State is saying is public disclosure would affect the,
            'intelligence sharing and so it is not -- whose intelligence sharing, of course, it lies open



                                                      [22]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            itoquestion, but this rather crucial sentence has -- in the context of your argument ha
            turned out to be rather importanti

       189. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: My argument does not only, respectfully, hinge on the
            difference between would and could, there are a number of stages of the analysis, and
            you have to look at the totality of the evidence, including the CIA letter and the very,
            very careful language that is adopted in that. In relation to this matter, our submission
            is that these words will have been drafted with great, great care and if there had been
            comments specifically corrected to this court making public aspects of its judgment,
            those would have been recorded. That is our submission.

       190. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: So you are saying what we should interpret Secretary
            Clinton to be saying is it is public disclosure of what is intelligence information in its
            true sense and not information that is a very bland summary of the treatment of an
            individual, which may have been derived --

       191. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Well, there are two ways of interpreting it. One is the way
            your Lordships has just identified, that it is directed towards true intelligence
            information and not towards the -- and the other is that this is still in the context of the
            disclosure of the underlying documents as opposed to the parts of the court's judgment.

       192. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: OK. It is unfortunate that it is ambiguous.

       193. MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES: It might be said, Mr Vassall-Adams, that the only
            disclosure proposed in this case is of the seven paragraphs.

       194. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: It is.

       195. MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES: In which case, what else can it refer to?

       196. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Well, if only it was that straightforward.

       197. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But what it would mean is that what you have in
            'Secretary of State Clinton is a very serious statement which we would have to take intni
             al ccount, that she was saying that if we did it it would affect intelligence sharing and
              that your argument therefore that it is inconceivable that the Obama administration
              would cut off intelligence if we made seven paragraphs public, becomes more difficult
                o sustain

       198. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Well, I am entirely with -- I share your Lordship's concerns


       199. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I am sorry, I did not know whether you had picked this
            up, but it is in the light of --

       200. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: The ambiguity, but I have no doubt whatsoever that, if there
            had been explicit discussion of the court's judgment that that would have been faithfully
            recorded and would have been at the forefront of the Secretary of State's case, not as in
            fact happens, not mention the Secretary of State's case --


                                                     [23]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




       201. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: OK. Yes, Ms Steyn?

      202. MS STEYN: My Lord, I just wonder whether I could slightly shorten this point Ell
           'saying that this point has been checked. The statement made, as recorded, was made in
           relation to the seven paragraphs.'

      203. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: So the position is very clear, that Mrs Clinton is saying
           'that if this court discloses these documents -- these seven paragraphs -- 1 mean, it is d
            very, very serious thing to say, because it comes from the US Secretary of State. If we'
                                                                                                       I
            'disclose these seven paragraphs it will affect the intelligence sharing. It is no question
            of issue could any more, it is would.'

      204. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Well, my Lord, let me put it like this. It is entirely'
           unacceptable for evidence to be given through counsel on a matter of this kind

       205. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Well, obviously this is not a matter --

       206. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: -- at this stage of the hearing.

      207. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Well, no doubt Mrs Steyn can confirm this after lunch in!
           6 letter or something signed by a responsible official or the Foreign Secretary, that that
           was the best of his recollection, because it is critical -- this is central to your argumet4
           because it goes back to the decision we made, initially in January, that there is one
           'which I think Dame Neville illustrates quite clearly that it is general -- Dame Pauline
             mean, Neville-Jones, distinguished between the ordinary principle and some specifiC
           statement and what we are here in this open paragraph, have a specific statement that it
           'would affect it. This is not theory any more. It is the actuality of the statement by
           Secretary of State Clinton.!

      208. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Well, it would be --

        09. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Well, it is a matter for the Foreign Secretary to clarify
            What it means

      210. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: It is.

       pi 1. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But it does make a very, very real difference to youii
             arguments, because, if the Foreign Secretary is told by the Secretary of State that it
             would have the consequence2 how can we possibly say that he was not right in reaching
             the view that he did.!

      212. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Well, if you regard it as a hollow threat, it might be that he
           should not have regarded it as high as --

       213. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Let us not call it a threat, because that may be an emotive
            term, but a statement of consequences, which may be a more palatable expression than
            a threat, but we are not certain what it is, the difference, but, if you look at this
            question, this is why we have raised this, because we have read your argument, we have
            raised this question here, and it is -- I am afraid, Mr Vassall-Adams, over the luncheon


                                                    [24]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




             adjournment you had better think about this, because this makes your argument, with
             respect, rather difficult.

       214. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Well, my Lords, we would like -- we would wish to indicate
            that if it is the defendant's contention that Secretary of State Clinton specifically
            referred to the seven paragraphs in this context, we would wish to see that in evidence
            in a sworn witness statement in the usual way. Regrettably, it has been the case in these
            proceedings that counsel, through their submissions, have effectively given evidence
            and it is not acceptable.

       215. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Well, no doubt Ms Steyn will have the lunchediii
            adjournment, we might give her a few more -- but this is absolutely central to the
            decision in this case and, you know, this is now a statement -- this is a public statement
            as recorded here, by a very senior official of the US government about which there cat
            be no doubt to which we should have very great regard. It takes us back to the way -]
            fortunately on this occasion this is in the open, so it is easy to look at it, as to what is on
            the face of it a very clear statement and the Secretary of State's position

         6. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Well, if it is directed toward the seven paragraphs, if indeedi
              is, it is clearly inconsistent with the CIA letter, which is the latest evidence on which,
            the defendant relies. But we would take a lot of persuading on this side of the court that
            that indeed is the positioni

       p17. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: We have to look at the evidence and if there is evidence'
             'by someone who is, you know, closely -- at the centre of the US administration, it
             very difficult for us to say, surely, that the Foreign Secretary was not entitled to pay the
              highest regard in reaching his judgment to what he was told by the US Secretary of
             State. He may be surprised at what she was told, or what his recollection on the
             lq uestion was. That is not a matter for usi,

       218. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: No, I --

       219. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: And we just have to gone on this very important
            paragraph in this certificate.

       220. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Indeed, my Lord, well --

       221. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Would it be sensible if we were to break now, to enable
            you to look at this, and Ms Steyn, because we are actually quite anxious to give -- also
            to sort out so we can give to the Secretary of State at least a version of the open
            judgment which we need to correct, so if there are any issues we can resolve those
            today. You are not going to very much longer, are you?

       222. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: I am not going to be very much longer. I am essentially
            coming towards the end of my submissions.

       223. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: And then, Mr Jaffey, maybe you could think about this
            issue, and then we start again at 2 o'clock. Thank you.



                                                       [25]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            (12.51am)

                                      (The luncheon adjournment)
            (2 o'clock)

       224. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Ms Steyn, Mr Goudie, we have produced drafts along the
            lines we discussed this morning. There are three copies in one for Ms Steyn and two
            copies for you. If you do want other copies, Ms Steyn, could you please let us know
            and we can get some more run off, but we thought if we gave you three that might be
            enough. But if you want more.

       225. Yes, Mr Vassall-Adams?

       226. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: My Lords, addressing the points that your Lordship raised
            with me just before the luncheon adjournment, may I deal with it by way of looking at a
            chronology of events and explain why we say this is significant.

       227. Your Lordships will see that paragraph 26 of the third PIT certificate makes reference Col
            'two meetings with the Secretary of State. The first was on 2nd March 2009 and thel
            sl econd was on 12th May 2009. In relation to the first meeting, two days later the UK
             media wrote a letter to the defendan and it is at your Lordship's bundle A. Tab 2 --

       228. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Sorry, this is the big bundle, is it not, bundle A?

       229. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: It is, my Lord.

       230. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes, page...?

       231. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Page 24 to 25 at tab 2 and in that letter, which is postdating
            the first meeting with the Secretary of State, the UK media explicitly asked the
            defendant whether the issue -- question number 3, has the US government ever been
            asked by the UK government to consider the specific question of whether the seven
            paragraphs should be redacted from the court's judgment of 21st August 2008. That
            was the question we asked on 4th March and then, at page 39 of the bundle, we got the
            defendant's response, a very short letter:

                   "I am writing further to your letter of 4th March 2009 to my colleague
                   David Mackie concerning the above proceedings. Your questions do not
                   appear to have any bearing on any matters currently in issue and our
                   clients therefore do not propose to answer them."

       232. So the defendant was specifically invited, immediately after the meeting with the
            Secretary of State, to address the question of whether that issue had specifically been
            canvassed with the US administration and at that point declined to provide any answer
            at all. Then, following on the sequence, the defendant's third PII certificate, your
            Lordships will note, is of course dated 15th May and so that certificate came three days
            after the second meeting with the Secretary of State.

       233. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes.


                                                    [26]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      234. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: But your Lordships will recall the slightly unhappy history
           of what -- of the defendant's response to the court's ruling that the identity of the
           sending entity and the receiving entity should be disclosed and, of course, the defendant
           sought to open that up and the defendant did so in a letter which is at page 94 of your
           Lordship's bundle and is actually highly relevant, it turns out, to the issue that we are
           now being called upon to consider.

      235. MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES: Sorry, page 94 of --

      236. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Sorry, in the small hearing bundle for today, bundle B.

      237. Now, what the defendant was doing here was seeking to anticipate the claimant's
           argument made at the previous hearing that a letter from the CIA would not reflect the
           views of the administration as a whole, or may not reflect the views of the
           administration as a whole, and so he defendant was in contact with the US and this'
           following letter arrive& It says:

                  "Following the court's indication of your second paragraph that your
                  Lordships proposed to make, in light of the court's reasons the defendant
                  sought fresh confirmation from the US government that an understanding
                  stated in his third PII certificate that the communication of 30th April
                  2009 reflected the views of the US government, was accurate. A
                  response to this request was received late yesterday afternoon in the form
                  of an open letter from General Jones, national security adviser to the
                  President, to Simon McDonald, foreign affairs adviser to the Prime
                  Minister, see copy attached hereto."

            In the following paragraph:

                  "The only issue to which the identity of the entity from which the
                  communication [and so on and so forth] was said to be relevant was the
                  question whether the views set out therein reflected the views of the US
                  administration.     If, despite the Secretary of State's clear and
                  uncontroverted statement that it did indeed reflect the views of the US
                  administration as a whole..."

            ie the Secretary of State had already said to the defendant the CIA letter reflected the
            views of administration as a whole:

                  "... there was any room for doubt, the question has been addressed
                  definitively in the letter from General Jones. There is no rational basis on
                  which any of the parties could seek to maintain the argument that the
                  communications of 30th April 2009 does not reflect the views of the US
                  administration as a whole."

      238. And then if you turn to the actual letter of June 29th 2009, at page 96 of your
           Lordships' bundle, two pages on:

                  "Dear signer,


                                                   [27]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




                   The FCO has informed members of my staff in this case. The court has
                   questioned whether the 30th April 2009 letter from a senior United States
                   official appointed by President Obama is indeed the official position of
                   the United States Government. Members of my staff reviewed that letter
                   prior to its despatch and have been following this in the court's actions
                   closely.

                   The author and recipient of the former letter were chosen because they
                   were best able to recognise and articulate the concerns and potential for
                   damage to the national security of both of our countries in the event the
                   court refuses to protect the information at issue.

                   I wish to thank you and your government for taking all necessary steps to
                   help protect US information. To allow United Kingdom officials to
                   correct any misperception that the court and parties in this case may hold,
                   allow me directly and emphatically to affirm that a senior United States
                   official appointed by the President indeed speaks on behalf of the United
                   States government."

       239. So this is a letter from the assistant to the President for national security affairs. Yoh
            iwill see at the bottom it CCs in the Secretary of State. There can be absolutely no
            doubt from this letter that the CIA letter represents official US policy in relation to this
            Matter. Whatever the Foreign Secretary and Secretary of State Clinton may have
             Idiscussed, whatever views she may have expressed back in -- earlier on in May, b))1
            !lune 2009 the US administration had firmly, unequivocally and emphatically placed on
             the public record the fact that the CIA was what represented US policy in relation to
              this issueJ,

       240. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: So what you say is that, whatever this may mean, we do
            not pay a great deal of attention to it, because the views of the CIA -- the view of the
            administration are those of the CIA.

       241. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: On this occasion the CIA has been articulated because they
            are best able to recognise and articulate the views of the administration as a whole.
            They are the views of the administration as a whole. When we saw this letter, we knew
            that was the end of the argument, the potential argument, that had been canvassed
            earlier on in these proceedings.

       242. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Is therefore what you say about paragraph 27 that it is t,-;)
            be read as referring — to make it consistent, to be read as referring not to the seven
            Paragraphs but to the general principle
       243. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Indeed. Indeed, and, you know, what we would say in
            relation to the PII certificate as well is that, you know, it is by far from being an
            unambiguous statement. It is completely unclear what it means. It is second-hand
            hearsay and it predates the decision of the US administration to put on the record
            beyond any reasonable doubt that it is the CIA letter that represents official policy in
            relation to this matter. There is simply no other way of reading General Jones's letter.



                                                     [28]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




       244. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: So you say what we should do is to read this letter
            being "coulds" only

       245. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: I am sorry, my Lord, being...?

       246. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: We read the letter from the CIA as a "could" letter an
             we then have to assess whether it was reasonable to interpret that as -- although it is full
               "coulds", in the light of all circumstances, whether the Foreign Secretary, within the
            margin that must be accorded to him, was reasonable in concluding that the "coulds'
            w
            / ould become "woulds"

       247. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Indeed, my Lord.

       248. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: OK.

       249. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: I believe I can deal with my further submissions very
            shortly.

       250. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: OK.

       251. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: And I am going to ask your Lordships -- sorry, the fourth
            heading was that the defendant presents a misleadingly incomplete part of the US/UK --
            a picture of US/UK intelligence, resulting in an exaggerated and unrealistic assessment
            of risk. I have dealt with that in my skeleton argument -- in my written submissions
            and essentially the emphasis throughout the defendant's case -- and I do not propose to
            take your Lordships to the documents that back this up unless your Lordships wish me
            to do so. I can provide the references -- but the emphasis throughout the defendant's
            case is on UK reliance on the US and the references are first P11 certificate, A1(4),
            paragraph 10, and see also paragraph 12, and the second PII certificate at A1(17),
            paragraph 32, and so the emphasis is how dependent the US is on the UK intelligence --
            sorry, the UK is on US intelligence. But, of course, that is only half the picture. The
            US also benefits greatly from the UK sharing its intelligence. It is a two way street, not
            a one way street, and that is dealt with in the evidence of Morgan Halperin, again,
            which has never been challenged by the defendant, and the reference there is bundle A,
            tab 4, page 3, the two crucial paragraphs being paragraphs 5 and 6, which I have
            extracted in my skeleton argument for the court at paragraph 41 and none of this is
            evidence that has been contested, that:

                    "The relationship between the US and UK governments, in particular on
                    matters relating to intelligence sharing and co-operation, is unprecedented
                    in its interdependence and depth of over 60 years of security
                    communications(?) from a statement of mutual trust and the commitment
                    to open dialogue and communication. Intelligence sharing between these
                    two nations is far more extensive than with all but one or two others,
                    which are also part of the same sharing arrangements. The benefits from
                    this relationship with the United States are as great as they are to the UK.
                    These benefits are well understood by senior US officials would who
                    would be loath to lose access to shared intelligence. Any contention that



                                                      [29]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




                  the UKJUS intelligence relationship could be jeopardised by the reasoned
                  determination of the British court that the public interest demands
                  disclosure of information concerning the individual known to have been
                  in US custody, that to a great deal is already publicly known, lacks
                  credibility on its face."

      252. Now, we say that the significance of the fact that the defendant has always emphasised,
           if I can put it like this, the one way street rather than the two way street, is that an one
           sided portrayal lends itself better to the defendant's case that disclosure would create a
           real risk of serious harm and in fact the genuinely objective assessment of the risk of
           intelligence sharing being withheld, we would have to ask what the US would have to
           lose by withholding intelligence sharing from the UK and so the problem, my Lords, is
           again that, if you start with an unrealistically one sided picture of the US/UK
           relationship, that inevitably, in our submission, leads to an erroneous and/or misleading
           assessment of the degree of risk, ie you end up with an exaggerated and unrealistic
           assessment of risk.

      253. The fifth submission relates to the defendant's tendency to equate the disclosure of
           paragraphs of the court's judgment with disclosure of the underlying evidence on which
           the judgment is based and we say that that is incoherent and it means that the Secretary
           of State inevitably gives insufficient weight to the public, the specific public interest, in
           disclosure of a court's findings of fact. We submit it is significant that nowhere in any
           of the three PII certificates does the defendant state that a relevant factor that he is
           taking into consideration is that the paragraphs represent the court's own findings of
           fact. On the contrary, there is a general tendency in them to treat the judgment as if it
           was the same thing or paragraphs of the judgment as if it was the same thing as the
           underlying information on which it was based and that becomes very clear, if I just take
           your Lordship's briefly, in tab A -- sorry, bundle A, at tab 5.

      254. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: This is the big bundle again.

      255. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Yes, it is the big bundle again.

      256. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Tab 5. This is Mr Rose's contribution.

      257. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Sorry, no, it is not tab 5, I am sorry, my Lords, it is tab 3.
           Bear with me a moment. Sorry, my Lords, tab 3, page 9, and this is the statement put
           out on behalf of the -- in fact the statement made to the House of Commons on 5th
           February, immediately after the fourth judgment was handed down, and at the bottom
           of that page one can see:

                  "As anyone who has read the judgments will appreciate, in circumstances
                  in which Mr Mohamed's access to the information relevant to his defence
                  has been secured, the sole question for my consideration concerned the
                  publication of classified material received from a foreign intelligence
                  service, in this case the US."

            Well, one would get no indication whatsoever from this public statement that what in



                                                    [30]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            fact was before the court's fourth judgment was paragraphs of the court's own closed
            judgment and the statement then goes on to "Our intelligence relationship with you
            United States is vital", and so on and so forth, and it sets out the control principle,
            again, and then at the very bottom it says:

                  "The issue at stake is not the content of the intelligence material but the
                  principle at the heart of all intelligence relationships that a country retains
                  control of its intelligence information and that it cannot be disclosed by
                  foreign authorities without its consent. The issue at stake is not the
                  content."

             Well, that goes directly to my Lordship's point about class versus context. We rely
             upon it in that context as well. But specifically in relation to this issue, there was
            'debate in the House of Commons and, on page 16, you now have part of the transcript
            ipf that debate and the final -- above Mr Edward Davey, the final comment of the
             Foreign Secretary in relation to -- in relation to this matter, he saysd

                  "To that extent, this case hinges not on the content..:9

       258. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Sorry, where are we now? Which pagel

       t59. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: I am sorry, my Lord, it is page 16, in the same tab. So thi
             is the debate in the House of Commons on 5th February that followed the making of the
             'statement which I just read out to your Lordships!

       260. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Above Mr Davey!

       '26 I . MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Above Mr Davey:'

                  "To that extent, this case hinges not on the content of the redacted
                  paragraphs but on their nature, which is that they are American
                  'paragraphs — American evidence — in the same way that our
                  intelligence sources are our property. We have approached the issue or
                  that basis, which is the only basis on which to preserve the confidentiality
                  andd trust on which such a relationship depends."(

            (Well, 1 hardly need to pass comment on the nature of those observations to indicate that
             this -- the defendant appears utterly to have failed to appreciate the fact that the
            'disclosure in this case concerns a court's findings of fact based on underlying evidence
            'and obviously that there is a particular status that a court's finding of fact has and, put
             simply, there is a far stronger public interest in disclosure of the court's reasons in a
             judgment than in disclosure of specific bits of evidence on which those findings were
             Made.,

       262. My Lords, I can now deal briefly with the public interest factors which we say favour
            disclosure in this case, and I am just going to give your Lordships a list, if I may.

       263. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes.




                                                     [31]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




       264. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: I refer briefly, but I am not going to take your Lordships
            through it, to paragraphs 40, paragraphs -- my apologies, it is paragraphs 14 to 16 of my
            skeleton argument, where I set out the general Article 6 and Article 10 reasons why
            open judgments should be given and so forth and I rely upon some of the factors that
            the court has identified as general reasons why judgments should be given in public.
            But what I want to identify here is the reasons specific to this case, why we say there is
            a particular public interest in disclosure of these redacted paragraphs. One, they would
            help the public to understand why the court was prepared to order disclosure of the 42
            documents to Binyam Mohamed in its first judgment. So they put the first judgment in
            its proper context.

       265. Two, it is a summary of the information in possession of the Security Service before its
            decision to get involved and puts in context its own apparent failure to secure
            assurances regarding Mr Mohamed's treatment. Three, it is directly relevant to public
            understanding of why officer B's case was referred to the Attorney General and then to
            the DPP and now is the subject of a police investigation. Four, it is directly relevant to
            the Intelligence and Security Committee's decision to reopen its inquiries into this case
            in the light of earlier assurances on behalf of the Security Service that they had no
            information at the material time to believe that US detainees were being ill treated.
            Five, it is directly relevant to the Prime Minister's decision to revise guidance to the
            intelligence services regarding the treatment of detainees. Sixth, the court's findings of
            fact relate to allegations of torture and inhuman and degrading treatment, particularly
            significant crimes under both UK and international law. I rely on the relevant parts of
            the fourth judgment. Seven, such conduct was contrary to UK policy and indeed the
            prevention of such conduct is an integral part of the UK strategy in terms of countering
            radicalisation.

       266. My Lords, my concluding submissions are these. This case is not about the disclosure
            'a intelligence documents or American evidence. It is about disclosure of parts of theI
            Court's own judgment. In our submission, the stakes are high. If the paragraphs stayl
            Out of the public domain now, they will probably stay out of the public domain foli
             g ood. The Foreign Secretary in his PII certificate, and I will just give you the
            'reference, it is the third certificate at B50, paragraphs 33 and 34, makes reference to the
            fact that the underlying documents could be applied for in the US, without saying
            anything about what the prospects of success there would be in relation to that. Bui
            Obviously no legal process in the US could hope to achieve disclosure of part of this
            (         judgment. In our submission, if the defendant's case was accepted, it would
            rend a very unfortunate signal. There can be no expectation by the CIA or the Uk
            send
                           or anyone else that the UK courts will seek to suppress embarrassing
             information about unlawful conduct by the UK's allies when, that information is not
             itself inherently damaging to national securityr

       267. The PH procedure exists to prevent real damage to the public interest; see the Attorney
            General's written statement from 1997 at tab 6 of the media authorities bundle for
            today. It does not exist to give perpetrators of human rights abuses a veto on adverse
            findings of fact entering the public domain. My Lord, we respectfully invite you to
            restore the redacted paragraphs.



                                                     [32]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      268. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Thank you. Yes.

            (2.30pm)

      269. MR JAFFEY: My Lords, I can be brief, if I may. Most of the time, those on this side
           of the court sort of spend our time stumbling around in the dark wondering exactly
           what is actually going on in this case and there are moments when occasionally the
           blindfold is taken off and two of the moments in this case when that happened are first
           of all when we received the CIA letter and secondly when we received the judgment,
           and it is when those two documents are put together that it suddenly becomes clear
           what in fact is going on here, particularly when those two documents are prepared side
           by side with what the previous US administration have relied on: the Bellinger letter
           and the email from Mr Mathias.

      270. What I propose to do is very briefly cover two topics. First of all, and very briefly,!
           'ecause Mr Vassall-Adams has already covered it, deal with what I call the Clinton'
           issue, which is whether or not the comments in the Public Interest Immunity certificate)
           which are referred to by the Secretary of State, represent the views of you United States'
           government reporting on his conversation with the US Secretary of State or whether thei
            best guide to the actual position of the US government is in the CIA letter as
           ,u nderstood once the Jones letter is read alongside it) The second issue, which I propose
           to deal with, again, briefly, is to take your Lordship to the CIA letter again, hopefully
           for the last time, at least on this side of the court, and the way in which I will ask your
           Lordships to approach the construction of that letter is not that it is a document
           designed to assist the court, which deserves a generous and liberal construction, but it is
           a document which has been very carefully prepared by diplomats and intelligence
           experts to have many meanings which is deliberately and calculatedly ambiguous,
           designed for that particular purpose, and it is only by understanding that that it is
           possible to work out in my submission what on earth is actually going on in this case,
           because il n my submission the key feature of the CIA letter, as we are calling it, is that
           contains a limitation and the limitation is, as your Lordship referred to this morning)
           ('could" not "would". There is a boundary which the United States government has
           made clear in that letter that it will not cross.,r

      271. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: You take the same point, that if you stand back and ask
           yourself the question is it conceivable that if we put these paragraphs into the public'
           'domain that the United States government would stop intelligence sharing, the answell
           is no. That is your submission)

      272. MR JAFFEY: Precisely.

      273. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: And the fact that it is drafted in terms of could is strongly
           indicative of that answer.

      274. MR JAFFEY: Absolutely.

      275. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I thought that was -- it is the same --

       276. MR JAFFEY: It is a very simple submission, I hope, my Lord.


                                                   [33]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      277. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No, it is the same as Mr Vassall-Adams'.

      278. MR JAFFEY: Indeed it is, and it is notable and it is possible to get useful insight into
           what is going on from comparing the previous administration's documents which were
           provided to the court, which your Lordships in their fourth judgment characterised as
           threats, with the documents that have been produced by the new administration,
           because, of course, it would have been the simplest thing in the world to simply say
           "see the letter of Bellinger, that is our position too", and that is not the position which
           this US administration has elected to adopt. They have chosen to reword the matter in
           their own terms and it is the terms of the drafting of the CIA letter which I submit is the
           proper guide to the issue before your Lordships.

      'p 79. Can I just briefly deal the with Hilary Clinton point, before returning to raise a couple
              Of points on the letter. Just a little background context, which is that the last time thisl
              'court was given evidence on instructions by counsel it was to the effect that the position'
              under the Obama administration had not changed, nothing had changed, and you
              Lordships saw that submission in the skeleton argument, which I think dates from,
                                                                                                         )
              think, last December, and your Lordships accepted that as the position and your)
              Lordships relied on it in the judgmentl

              _,Now, that statement was made on an incorrect and false basis. The true position was',
                that no-one had thought to ask the incoming Obama administration what their position
                was and that led very unfortunately to your Lordship's reopening their fourth judgment,
                in this matter and, if a precedent is needed, that is a most unhappy precedent in this case
                 s to why this court, on matters of international relations, should be very cautious
               ,indeed, in my submission, before accepting statements made on instructions at speed b31
               Oounsel. The best guide which the court is likely to have to the actual position of the
                US administration are the documents which the US administration has produced
                 pecifically for the purpose of the court's consideration in this case.

      t' 81. My Lord, let us assume for the sake of argument that that evidence is produced by .1\4 1
              teyn this afternoon and that she is able to satisfy your Lordships that what IVIp
             Miliband was saying in his Public Interest Immunity certificate and his position is that,
             he was told by Secretary of State Clinton that there would be an effect on securityi
             intelligencp co-operation if these seven paragraphs were released into open by youp
             Lordships.'

       282.    Now, the consequences of that are the consequences that have been identified by Mr
                 Vassall-Adams. 'The US administration has since the date when that conversation tool
               'place been asked by the Secretary of State to clarify in writing what the position of th
               'administration as a whole is and it has done so on request. No doubt great thought was,
                 given to the CIA letter and we do know that the drafting of the CIA letter was first of
               al11 considered by officials working for the national security council under the guidance'
                     the President -- we were told that in General Jones' letter -- and we are also told that
                 the letter was copied to the Secretary of State, Secretary of State Clinton. Now, it
                 would be surprising if Secretary of State Clinton in those circumstances found this,'
                 letter landing on her doormat out of the blue. Inevitably, it will have been the subject
                ,I qf cross departmental consultation and discussion because the purpose of this letter was


                                                        [34]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            to set out the final considered position of the United States government as a whole.1
              his is what was meant to be put before the court for the court to consider what to do
            relation to these seven paragraphs. So in my submission it is the CIA letter that,
            provides the source of the evidence before your Lordships and, of course, there is,
            nothing in the PII certificate which would change that conclusion in my submissioni

      283. My Lords, can I turn now and deal, I hope briefly, with the CIA letter itself. I know
           your Lordship have it at page 117 and possibly in many other places.

      284. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes.

       285. MR JAFFEY: Can I pick it up at paragraph -- I have numbered my paragraphs. I do
            not know whether or not your Lordships have. I have numbered them from one to
            seven. Can I pick it up at the third paragraph and the third paragraph, of course, deals
            with the document that I think we call the torture memos, which are the memoranda
            which your Lordships have seen on a previous occasion and in paragraph 3 in the first
            line, there is a nod to the fact that the Obama administration released those four
            memoranda and, of course, as we know, it was the President who personally approves
            the release of those particular documents.

      286, Then, underneath that, it says in the fourth paragraph, there is the words that we have
                                                                                                  )
           'all paid quite a lot of attention to and that is the word "could". It is said that the
            Publication of the seven paragraphs could be expected to cause serious damage to thei
            United Kingdom's national security and what the United States government are doing
             ommenting on UK national security interests is not entirely clear, but there we go:

       287. It raises two issues. The first issue is the constriction of the United States and the
            United Kingdom relationship and it also raises the UK's relationship with other
            countries and then the theme of discussion about third countries is continued in
            paragraph 5, because what the author of this letter does is there is an attempt to
            distinguish between the United States and the United Kingdom and what are called
            other foreign governments and it talks about the possibility of foreign intelligence
            partners -- and by foreign intelligence partners it must mean parties other than the
            United Kingdom or the United States -- withholding sensitive information. That is
            developed again in paragraph 6, where we get more clues about what the author of this
            letter is going on about and what the United States government say is that, when the
            torture memos were released, no reference is made to the identity of any foreign
            government that might have assisted the United States.

       288. So, if there is a concern up to and including paragraph 6, the concern of the United
            States government seems to be a concern about the position of other foreign states and,
            in the context of this case, other foreign states must of course mean the position of
            Pakistan, because it was the state of Pakistan that, as can be seen from your Lordship's
            previous open judgments, held Mr Mohamed incommunicado and held him unlawfully,
            mistreated him in a manner which your Lordships found amounted to cruel, inhuman
            and degrading treatment and possibly to torture and then handed him over to the United
            States authorities for the purposes of his extraordinary rendition.




                                                   [35]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      289. But all of that, of course, is already in the public domain. It is already public and it is
           simply too late in respect of embarrassing Pakistan because the horse has bolted and
           that of course is no doubt the reason why the Secretary of State's Public Interest
           Immunity certificate in this case does not rely on the response of the Pakistani
           government to the disclosure of the seven paragraphs.

      R9O. So where that leads us, my Lord, is the very carefully worded paragraph 7. The first
          Ipentence of the final paragraph, paragraph 7, is very interesting because it is a sentence
           that elides two matters. It elides the seven paragraphs and the underlying documentsi
          1What it says is public disclosure of the information contained in the seven paragraphs,1
           ,.vithheld from the High Court's open decision, as well as the documents from which the,
           information was drawn, could likely result in serious damage to UK and US national,
          slecurityi

      R91. What is not suggested, and of course it would have been the easiest thing in the world,
           'to do so, is that disclosure of the seven paragraphs alone would lead to potential
           aldverse consequences and the reason why I say it is the easiest thing in the world is
            because that point was made very clear in the Bellinger letter and it is worth comparing
            and contrasting the twc■,. If I can just ask your Lordships to take it up briefly. I think it
            is bundle A, the large bundle, at page 24.

      292. Your Lordships can see in the first substantive paragraph of Mr Bellinger's letter, and
           the second line down, he says:

                  "We want to affirm in the clearest terms that the public disclosure of these
                  documents, or of the information contained therein, is likely to result in
                  serious damage to the US national security... [and so on and so on]."

            A point that is made clear in Mr Bellinger's letter that has not been made clear in this
            letter. In my submission that is not an accident.

      293. It is also not as if the US authorities and the UK authorities have not had fair warning
           of this concern about what the CIA letter means, because we raised this concern as soon
           as we received an earlier draft of what we now know to be the CIA letter and if I can
           just briefly show your Lordships the relevant bits of correspondence. It is at page 12 in
           bundle B.

      294. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes.

      295. MR JAFFEY: If I can ask your Lordships to turn on to page 15 where the relevant
           paragraph is, and it is the paragraph in the middle of the page, starting the second
           paragraph, and what is said is that that paragraph is unclear. It commences by stating:

                   "Public disclosure of the information contained in the seven paragraphs
                   withheld from the High Court, as well as the documents from which the
                   information was drawn, could likely result in serious damage to the UK
                   and US national security."




                                                     [36]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




       296. This sentence elides the seven paragraphs and the underlying intelligence documents.
            The US government does not suggest that the disclosure of seven paragraphs alone by
            an independent court would lead to any harm, either to the UK or US national security,
            and then the letter goes on and deals with other points.

       297. My Lords, we know that this is a letter that was read with some care by those acting on
            behalf of the Secretary of State and the reason we know that is because it was
            responded to and other points in the letter were not dealt with, so, for example, the
            words which have previously been redacted relating to the judicial system of England
            and Wales were added as a result of another point made in this letter.

       298. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes.

       299. MR JAFFEY: But no attempt was made to deal with this point, to go back to the US
            government and ask for further clarification of it. It was deliberately ambiguous. It
            was spotted, the deliberate ambiguity. It must have been drawn to the attention of the
            US government, but no further clarification was forthcoming.

       300. My Lord, in opening my submission, it is what I called the limitation on this document.
            The wording respects the limits of how far the United States government is prepared to
             go in conveying to this court what its response will be if the seven paragraphs are
            disclosed. This ambiguous wording really only makes any sense at all once it
            Understood that there is indeed that limitation on what the United States government is,
            /prepared to do. They are not in fact in reality going to withdraw or reduce security and
             intelligence co-operation with the UK and, in order to maintain diplomatic wriggle
            'room or room for manoeuvre, it is necessary to have ambiguous wording like this in the
            "letter to maintain their position) It is the process which has taken place all throughout
            this case. It is not the first occasion in this case on which I have made that submission.

       301 My Lord, then there is the final sentence of the CIA letter, which, again, I know your
           'Lordships are wearingly familiar with and the question is what your Lordships are to
            / akes of that: the consequence is that the United States government will review with
            m
            the greatest care the security and intelligence co-operation relationship) Now, of
            course, it is notable that, even after all of this time, it is not actually said that there will
            be any reduction in intelligence sharing and that is quite interesting because it would be
            easier for them to put it a bit higher and say, look, we have been over this before, we
            have had months and months to think about this, as have you, but we have seen the
            seven paragraphs and if your independent judges decide that what they are going to do
             is to publish those seven paragraphs, this is exactly what we are going to do about it
            and then you will be sorry, or polite words to that effect. Or, to put it more simply, they
            could have just used the word "would", which they have against expressly chosen not
            to, in distinguishing the approach taken by Mr Bellinger on behalf of the previous
             administration.

       —..,What, in my submission, the court should be interested in is the court shouldbeI
       302.
              interested in the question of whether or not there will in fact be any effect on security
            1
             and intelligence co-operation and in my submission there is nothing in this letter which'
              indicates that there will be such an effect or even that there is any real risk of such/



                                                       [37]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            !Consequencesi What is being contended for here, as Mr Vassall-Adams have said, and I
            do not go over, is a class PIT claim over all documents emanating from the US
            intelligence agencies and that, if it is determined that the UK authorities are unable to
            protect such information from public disclosure by independent courts, a review will be
            triggered.

      303. Now, I think my final submission to your Lordships is how should your Lordships
           approach that further careful bit of diplomatic language. Your Lordships are fortunate
           that in this case the answer to what will happen if information is disclosed by the UK
           courts is in fact already known because this point has already been put to the test in this
           case at least on two occasions. The first point, the first time it was put to the test was in
           the first Public Interest Immunity certificate which was produced by the defendant to
           your Lordships, and I know you have been shown that this morning, but I can show
           your Lordships one other part and your Lordships have that in bundle A, I think page 6,
           and the relevant passage I wanted to draw your Lordships' attention to was paragraph
           15. As your Lordship will recall, this is the Public Interest Immunity certificate that
           was served by the foreign Secretary immediately after your Lordship's first judgment in
           this case and, in dealing with the question of whether or not versions of the relevant
           documentation should be provided to Mr Stafford Smith and Lieutenant Colonel
           Bradley only on the basis that such documents were necessary for Mr Mohamed's
           defence before the military commission and, as your Lordships will also remember, in
           the nick of time the United States authorities decided to voluntarily disclose those
           documents to Mr Stafford Smith and Lieutenant Colonel Bradley on the basis that they
           were disclosed no further and the passage with the part of paragraph 15 which I rely on
           is the Foreign Secretary's comments on what he might have done if that decision
           relating to voluntary disclosure had not been made by the US authorities and he says he
           may well have been inclined to reach a different conclusion on the balance of the public
           interest were the US authorities not to have made the commitments to make the
           documents in question available --

       304. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: That merely shows you cannot have a class claim.

       305. MR JAFFEY: It does, but what it also shows is that, forget the wording in the CIA
            letter about your judicial system, this is the principal Secretary of State for Foreign and
            Commonwealth Affairs making it abundantly clear in an open PII certificate that he
            may well have ignored the supposedly inviolable control principle and handed over
            documents to Mr Mohamed's lawyers had the US not done so voluntarily. Mr Miliband
            could not have put the true nature of the control principle more clearly, that even the
            Secretary of State is prepared to ignore the control principle in appropriate cases and
            appropriate circumstances. It is not an absolute.

       306. Now, that PII certificate dates from August 2008 and if the United States government
            had really thought that Her Majesty's Government and the British courts treated the
            control principle as utterly inviolable and sacred, they would have been thoroughly
            disabused of that false notion at the latest by last summer, when they saw that open PII.
            Yet to date no review, no reconsideration. The sky does not yet appear to have fallen.




                                                    [38]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




       307. Now, of course, in those circumstances, it is very difficult to give very much credence
            indeed to the last sentence of the CIA letter. The CIA already know well what the
            relevant principles are as a matter of English law. There are no class claims.

       308. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: What you are saying really is that, as Mr Miliband has
            said what he has said, that he might hand it over.

      309. MR JAFFEY: Yes.

      310. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Then why have they gone on supplying us with
           intelligence for the last eight years.

      311. MR JAFFEY: Indeed. In those -- eight months. In those circumstances, how on earth
           can the CIA say there is some fundamental principle when Mr Miliband has told them
           himself that he is prepared to breach the control principle himself; let alone worrying
           about the independent courts doing it, if Mr Miliband judges it is appropriate and
           necessary to do so in order to ensure that the individual has a more fair trial before a US
           military commission.

      312. MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES: You would say that the only thing which is different is
           the competing obligations.

      313. MR JAFFEY: Indeed. The only dispute in this case is the fact that the balance of
           public interest as contended for by client is different from the balance of public interest
           as assessed by Mr Miliband. The principle remains the same.

       314. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes, but this evidence here goes to the credibility of Mr
         • Miliband's assessment, because, if he was prepared to do this, how can he creditably
            state -- I mean, it goes to Mr Miliband's creditability.

       315. MR JAFFEY: It does. It goes to two points --

       3i6. ,LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Have I -- I am just trying to make sure I have understoodl
              the point. Are you saying that, if Mr Miliband is prepared to say here I will hand the
             documents over, how can he credibly say that really the roof will fall in if you -- and wei
             will not get any information if they know that the information is likely to be handed
             ol ver. Is that the point, Mr Jaffeyi

       317. MR JAFFEY: That is the first point which I make, your Lordship, but there is a second
            point, and it also relates to the credibility of the last sentence of the CIA letter, which is
            that, if it is determined that your service is unable to protect information we provide to
            you, even if that inability is caused by your judicial system, we will necessarily have to
            review with the greatest care the sensitivity of information that we can provide in the
            future. My Lords, that pass was solved, if indeed in ever existed, in August 2008 and
            yet nothing has happened. So those are the two points which I make in relation to the
            first PII certificate. First of all --

       318. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: OK.




                                                     [39]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      319. MR JAFFEY: Your Lordship has the point. My Lord, the same applies of course to
           your Lordships' decision to disclose that the sender of the letter was indeed the CIA.
           That is information which it appears the US government wanted to be withheld, that the
           US government believed had been provided in confidence to Her Majesty's
           Government and it was therefore a breach of the control principle for Her Majesty's
           Government to disclose that information. But, again, the court ordered that that be the
           case for reasons relating to relevance and, again, it is not suggested by any further PIT
           certificate that the sky has fallen.

      320. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But is that right? It cannot be control of intelligence as to
           who writes a letter. I mean, that is why the whole claim is completely absurd in the
           first place.

      321. MR JAFFEY: But nonetheless it was the US government's position that it did not
           consent --

      322. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But that is different. That is the control of intelligence.
           That was taking an absurd point on confidentiality. It is a different point.

      323. MR JAFFEY: It is a different point and it does not go, of course, as far as the first PIT
           certificate, but it is a further example where the inviolable control principle simply does
           not exist and the consequence of that must mean that at least part of the third PII
           certificate cannot be maintained, insofar as it takes that point; that what the court should
           do is it should reach its own PIT balance, having considered the first PII certificate in
           the context of the submission in which I and Mr Vassall-Adams

      324. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS?: But we can only do that, Mr Jaffey, surely on the basis of
           Lord Hoffman's observations in Rehman if we conclude that there is no reasonable
           basis for the Secretary of State's conclusion. But I think you are inviting us to say–We
           had no reasonable basis for reaching the views he die—

      p25. MR JAFFEY: Indeed, I doi,
      326. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Well, we have to come to that view, do we not, that hell
           had no reasonable basis for believing there was any -- that if we think -- you are really,
           saying there is a Foreign Secretary who had not formed a reasonable view that, if we
           publish these paragraphs, the Obama administration would cease to -- would takes step,
           Whereby the provision of intelligence information was constrictedJ

      327. MR JAFFEY: I do not accept that that is the correct statement of the test, because
            ultimately the decision on the PII balance, even in a case involving national security, is
            a decision for the court and the court alone. The court, however, will accord the
            Foreign Secretary considerable deference on the question of the assessment of national
            security risk to the United Kingdom.

      328. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But we would have to say he somehow got it wrong.

      329. MR JAFFEY: Indeed.



                                                    [40]
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      330. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: We would have to. We cannot escape that.

      331. MR JAFFEY: Of course not, and I do not suggest your Lordships should escape that.
           My submission to your Lordship, as your Lordships know, is that on the very unusual
           facts of this case, it was a case where the Public Interest Immunity certificate on this
           narrow point, the seven paragraphs, should be rejected, for the reasons I have given to
           your Lordship.

       332. Unless I can assist your Lordships any further, those are my submissions.

            (2.55pm)

       333. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: You are not going to say anything now, Mr Goudie, are
            you?

       334. MR GOUDIE: Not at this stage, no.

       335. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Ms Steyn?

                                         Submissions by Ms Steyn
       336. MS STEYN: My Lord, before I go on to the question of the seven paragraphs, there
            was a question that your Lordships raised in an email which I think the intention had
            been to deal with it at 10.00am this morning. It related to whether or not there had been
            sufficient argument about what had been put in open --

       337. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But in view of what you said this morning, that there is
            nothing in the redacted version upon which you rely that is germane to the issue, there
            is no point.

       338. MS STEYN: No, and -- well, in my submission, in any event, it actually was a point
            that was dealt with in the open hearing on the last occasion.

       339. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: OK,

       340. MS STEYN: So, turning then to the seven paragraphs, the application to reopen the
            fourth judgment was made on the ground that the claimant and the media parties
            questioned whether the US had threatened the UK, as the court put it in its judgment,
            over intelligence co-operation and whether the defendant's submission that the factual
            position remained the same following the change of US administration. Now,
            obviously at this stage the court had not yet explained its reasons for deciding to reopen
            the fourth judgment, but the defendant proceeds on the basis that the court must have
            accepted one or both of those two grounds.

       341. So the primary question for the court is therefore whether, as a result of any factual
            change, less weight should be given to the risk of serious damage to the national
            security than the court accorded to that factor in its fourth judgment and in my
            submission, in reaching its view on that at this stage, the court must apply the legal
            principles set out in the fourth judgment.




                                                    [41]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      342. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes.

      343. MS STEYN: And the first point is, as the court acknowledged, applying the approach
           laid down by the House of Lords in Rehman and also more recently in the Corner
           House Research case, that under our constitution issues of national security are issues
           of judgment and policy for the executive branch of the state and not for judicial
           decision. $o the question whether there is a real risk that disclosure of the material on
             he question would cause serious harm to national security or international relations is
           I natter, as your Lordshi said, in which the Foreign Secretary, not the court, is the
           'expert and that --,

      344. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But experts have to act on facts and if it was our vieWI
            that he got it wrong and that -- you know, you have to -- as I think I put to Mr Jaffey,
            has to be persuaded that -- I think the test should be -- that he had not reached d
           'decision which on the facts was open to him and the principal argument advanced, asi
           iyou have heard, is that, stood back and analysed, it is fanciful to think there is a threatr

      345. MS STEYN: Well, I have heard that argument but what I am saying is that, in
           assessing whether this court -- whether it is open to this court to say that the Secretary
           of State's assessment of the likelihood of harm is simply unsustainable, the court has to
           have regard to the fact that he is the expert on this matter. He is the one, together with
           his advisors, who has had conversations about this with --

      346. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But they are all in the open now, so we can examine
           them.

       347. MS STEYN: Well -- but clearly neither of the other parties nor the court is in the same
            position as the individual who makes --

      348. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No, but I do not agree with you, Ms Steyn. The Foreign
           Secretary has put the evidence before the court and the court must reach its judgment
           land the judgment -- you know, you might persuade us we should interpret letters in al
             ertain way but you cannot say that now the material is not before us to make e
           judgment.1-

       349. MS STEYN: My Lord, I am not saying that. What I am saying is that, in assessing the
            weight that needs to be given to the view of the Foreign Secretary, the fact that he and
            his advisers are the ones who have relationships with those individuals, whose views
            are being interpreted and who were there and were able to make assessments of what
            was meant and who have an expert understanding of what the US administration, what
            it intends or is likely to happen in this case, those are all matters that have to be taken
            into account in deciding whether it really is open to this court to say that what the
            Foreign Secretary has said is unsustainable and in my submission both the likelihood
            and the severity of harm are preeminently matters on which the court should accept the
            Foreign Secretary's assessment.

       350. There are, as I say, two elements to the assessment. There is the likelihood and the
            severity. Taking the latter first, there is no dispute as to the severity of the harm. The



                                                     [42]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            Foreign Secretary's first certificate explained that national security considerations
            weigh more heavily in the case of our relations with the United States than with any
            other country. Our level of co-operation is unique and our reliance on that co-operation
            to protect the security of British citizens is very great indeed and there is a reference to
            that in the first PII certificate at paragraph 10, a paragraph that has been incorporated
            by reference into both the second and third PIT certificates.

      351. The court itself acknowledged in its fourth judgment the grave consequences of a
           reduction in the information supplied by the US under the shared intelligence
           relationship. That is at paragraph 24.

      352. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I do not think there is any dispute -- I do not any eitheij
             Mr Vassall-Adams nor Mr Jaffey have sought to argue that if intelligence sharing wa
            ireduced, it would have a dramatic effect. That is not their argument. Their argument
             that, actually, when you look carefully at the CIA letter and General Jones's letter, there
             is in reality no risk or

      353. MS STEYN: I will come on, of course, to likelihood, but it is, I think, important to
           have it clear that the severity is something that the Secretary of State has made an
           assessment and there is to dispute about it and it has been suggested that the
           intelligence sharing is a two way street. Of course, it is, but there is no suggestion of
           any risk of going the other way in terms of any reduction of the material that the UK
           would be providing to the US.

      354. So, turning then to the likelihood of harm occurring, the Foreign Secretary's view, as he
           very clearly expressed in his third PII certificate, is that public disclosure of the seven
           paragraphs would seriously harm the existing intelligence sharing arrangements
           between the UK and the US to cause considerable damage to the national security of
           the UK. He has set that out at paragraphs 20 to 22 of the third PII certificate. In
           addition, it is his assessment that disclosure may damage international relations with the
           UK more generally and liaison relationships with third parties. It was suggested by Mr
           Vassal-Adams that the reference to liaison relationship with third parties was a new
           point. It is not. It has been in every one of the PII certificates. Throughout it has been
           clear that there is also that risk involved here and the Secretary of State has made
           absolutely clear that in his view the risk remains as set out in his earlier certificates; in
           other words, it is just as grave now as the court accepted it was in its fourth judgment.

      p55. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes, but do not forget the evidence before and there are
           'two quite separate points, that there is the point -- is there an explicit statement that iff
           the paragraphs are disclosed there will be harm, which is the view we reached on thei
           Iast occasion, or is there somehow a breach of a principle which will cause harm, even
           If the information disclosed is of no consequence. They are two quite different points.'
            If there is an explicit statement of consequences, which I think is a very neutral term,'
            then it is easy, but if there is no explicit statement of consequences, then one is mall)/
            back to the question of the breach of principle. I mean, is it likely that if the principle'
           lof the provision of information being kept confidential is breached in an exceptional
            case that some harm will result, some serious harm will result'




                                                    [43]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      356. MS STEYN: Well, my Lord, we can obviously have a look in a moment at the
           question of the extent to which there is an explicit statement of the consequences, but
           my primary argument is that, if there is, as Mr Jaffey was suggesting, any ambiguity
           about the statements that have been made by the US, that is preeminently a situation in
           which your Lordship's should defer to the assessment of the Foreign Secretary.

      p57. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: You mean he reads "could" as if it means "would", to pui
            )t bluntly

      358. MS STEYN: Well, my Lord, he has made an assessment.
      p59. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No, can you answer that. When we read "could" he
            'Fneans "would". It is written in this coded diplomatic language which, being a Foreign'
            Secretary, he can understand and which we cannot!

      360. MS STEYN: He has made an assessment

      361. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No, but is that not right? Is that not in effect what yOnl
           are saying, that where they say "could" he realises that means "would")

        62. MS STEYN: In short terms, yes, but his assessment is not simply based on a reading di
            'that particular letter, it is based on more than that and ultimately what matters is his
            'assessment based on the understanding that he has -- and the advice that he has received
            from those who are in a better position to understand what was being said in the CIA1
            rletter and in my submission it is rather bizarre for the court to be being told on the one
              and that the CIA letter is ambiguous and on the other hand that the view of the
            Secretary of State as to what it means is unsustainable. In my submission, those are,
            just inconsistent submissions)

      363. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But let us go back to it, Ms Steyn, because the Foreign;
            pecretary last time quibbled with our use of the word "threat". Let us use a neutral,
             term: if you do something it will have certain consequences. What in effect Mii
            )Miliband is saying is that, if we put the paragraphs into the public domain, the United
               tates -- the consequence that would follow is that the United States would restrict the'
              ntelligence sharing relationships or there is a substantial risk that they will do so. He,
             inust be saying that.

      '364. MS STEYN: Yes, my Lord!

       3-65. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Therefore, the Obama administration, if we do this, are
                                                                                                     i
             'making the position clear that, if these paragraphs are put into the public domain, the
             'direct consequence is either they would or there is a real risk they would restrict the
             intelligence sharing relationship!

       C366. MS STEYN: Yes.

       367. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: That is what I thought.




                                                    [44]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      368. MS STEYN: And in reaching his assessment the Secretary of State at paragraph 4 cec
           the third Pll certificate has made it clear. He says in undertaking these assessments I
           understand and fully accept that the threshold of whether there is a real risk of serious,
           harm to the national security and international relations interests of the United
           Kingdom is high. He is not putting that low, but not only has he held that that level, thei
           real risk level, is a high one, he understands that, but it should be emphasised that he,
            ias gone further. The Foreign Secretary has assessed that in this case it is not merely O
            t

           real risk, but it will happen. He has said that that is what he believes would happen)
           There would be considerable damage

      369. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: So there is no two words about it. The Foreign SecretarYI
           'believes if we put these paragraphs into the public domain President Obama's
            'administration would constrict the provision of information that could save British'
            'Pves. I mean, that is effectively what you are coming to, is it not?

      370. MS STEYN: Yes!

      371. My Lord, your Lordships refer to the CIA letter as saying that it says "could". One
           'point that is important to understand is firstly it says "could reasonably be expected to
           'cause serious damage". It also goes on to say "could likely result in serious damage tizil
            t.11( and US national security" and it also refers in the sixth paragraph -- the first
           sentence says "quite distinct from the significant harm to US/UK partnership if the
           'seven paragraphs and underlying documents are released", and so it is effectively
           'saying there that the significant harm is a matter of fact, in my submission, and the
           'references to "could likely result" and "could reasonably be expected to cause harm" is,
           'significantly stronger than simply saying could cause damage. I

       372. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But I think it has to be -- I mean, why what Mrs Clintori
                reported as saying is so important is that actually, as the Foreign Secretary
            understood her, that she says public disclosure would affect the intelligence, ie the way
            ite has read everything else, but actually, whatever the careful drafting of the letter may
                  he believes that actually the consequence of our putting it in the public domain'
            'would be to restrict intelligence sharing and that is how he reads the letter and I thin
             that is what I always thought this statement from Secretary Clinton• is so -- his
             understanding of what Secretary Clinton says. This is very important because we were'
            1criticised on the last occasion that a threat was made. What you are saying is that the'
            !consequence -- take the word threat out, but the Foreign Secretary believes thel
            !consequence to this country of our doing it would be a reduction in the intelligence'
             'sharing relationship which everyone would recognise would be very serious for the,
             United Kingdom    r
       373. MS STEYN: Yes!,

       374. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes, that is what I thought!

       p75. MS STEYN: That is right!
       376. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: That is your case!



                                                     [45]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      77.   MS STEYN: That is my cased

      78.   LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: take the word threat out, Would have the consequence.,
            That is neutral and people can characterise it as they like!

      379. MS STEYN: Yes, and the conversations that he has had with the US Secretary of State
           'are obviously part of the information that he has taken into account in forming that
           'assessment. •He has also, as he says at paragraph 29 of the third PII certificate, carefullyi'
           'considered, together with those advising him, whether the recent US correspondence
                                                                                                         I
           indicates a different approach to that indicated in the earlier US correspondence, which,
           was before the court when it delivered its fourth judgment:

                      is my view; and that of my advisers, that there is no difference in
                   substance between the earlier and recent correspondence."

            'So he himself has done the exercise with his advisers of looking very carefully at the
              IA letter and assessing what it means along with the other information that is before,
            him and his view is that the position is precisely the same as it was before!

       380. The UK media have in part based their submission that the Foreign Secretary's
            assessment of likelihood of serious harm is irrational on the evidence of Mr Halperin
            and his statement was obviously written for when the more recent communications
            from the current US administration report were put before the court and without sight
            of some of the communications from the former US administration. But Mr Halperin
            has stated that it is impossible for him to believe that the US government would
            withdraw from its intelligence sharing relationship with the UK government in response
            to the disclosure of information by a British court. Now, firstly, in my submission that
            is seeking to put up a straw man. It has never been suggested that there would be no
            relationship left

            LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes, but there would be a substantial impairment. Asi
            'you put it, British lives might be put at risk!

       382. MS STEYN: Yes, but there is obviously a distinction --

       383. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: It is that serious, because we were criticised by the
            Foreign Secretary for saying on the last occasion there was no threat Well, all right)
            take the word threat out, but the consequence is very cleari

       384. MS STEYN: The consequence is very clear, yes, but the point I would simply make is
            that, yes, the consequences are very serious, as the Secretary of State has said, but for it
            to be put in terms of there being a wholesale withdrawal of any intelligence sharing
            relationship, that is not how the case has ever been put --

        85. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No, but sufficiently serious, because it has to be
            sufficiently serious to pass the test that it would damage, cause serious damage to, the
            'security of the United Kingdom. It cannot be just, well, I am very sorry, we will not
            'come and see you tomorrow, but it is that real danger would be caused to it!



                                                     [46]
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      p86. MS STEYN: Yes, and the assessment is that it is'the same as the court recognised if,
           ivas at paragraph 74 of the fourth judgment, that a reduction in intelligence sharing
            vould itself put the British public at risk and that is how the court put it and that is still
           the position)

      387. So the -- Mr Halperin --

      b88. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Because I wanted to be Clear about this, it goes beyond --II
           because if we go back to Dame Pauline Neville-Jones' position, there was a distinct
            different between an ordinary breach of the principle of confidentiality, which might
           have caused a little fluttering in the dovecots, and this position of the Bus
           'administration, now the Obama administration, is they regard this as so serious that
            t
            they would -- it is the Foreign Secretary's judgment that, you know, it would damagql
           senously national security because it has that additional consequenceJ

      389. MS STEYN: The next point made on behalf of the UK media, supported by the
           claimant, is the point in relation to the control principle and this echoes a point already
           made to your Lordships last year by Ms Rose. It is not in fact a new point. Mr
           Halperin suggests that, because the US government is aware that the disclosure decision
           would have been made by an independent court, no harm would in fact result and it was
           suggested by Mr Vassal-Adams that the Secretary of State has, as a matter of law,
           firstly, misunderstood the control principled.

      390. Well, in my submission, the control principle is not a legal or constitutional principle, it
           is a real life principle --

      391. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: It is an exercise of naked political power --

       392. MS STEYN: -- exercised on a day to day basis. Yes, it is not --

      393. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I mean, it is an exercise of naked political power. It is if
           we give you information and if you tell anyone else about it you will not get any
           information any more. That is not constitutional, it is use of naked political power.

       394. MS STEYN: Well, it is an understanding between those who share intelligence and
            there can be no question of there being some legal misinterpretation of what it is.

       395. It is further suggested that it has been misunderstood as a matter of fact, but, far from
            there being no evidence contrary to that of Mr Halperin, as the UK media suggest, the
            Foreign Secretary himself has stated that he disagrees with that view. This is set out at
            paragraph 34 of the PII certificate, which is page 46 of bundle E. He says:

                   "I am advised that it has been suggested in evidence before the court that,
                   because the US government is aware that the disclosure decision is to be
                   made by an independent court, no harm would in fact result if the court
                   decided to exercise its power to disclose. I do not accept this view.
                   Although in a case such as this one the UK courts have the power in
                   principle to disclose information provided by a foreign liaison service or
                   derived from such information without the consent of the provider and


                                                      [47]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




                 even, as it would be here, against the express will of the provider, it
                  would be extraordinary to do so."

           And he has clearly expressed his view, and your Lordships have read this already
           today, that in his view disclosure in this case would be regarded as a highly significant
           breach by the UK of the control principle.

      396. MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES: Ms Steyn, could I ask you how the control principle
           works in circumstances where the recipient of the information does not have absolute
           control, absolute power over the dissemination or publication, but where the power
           ultimately lies with another body, the court.

      397. MS STEYN: Well, how it works is that the provider will assess the degree to which it
           can trust and expects that information it provides will in fact remain confidential to
           those to whom it has been provided and that will be no doubt an ongoing assessment
           and, of course, there is a recognition that the UK courts have the power in principle to
           order disclosure of information provided by foreign liaison services but, as the Foreign
           Secretary has said at the end of paragraph 23 of his third PII certificate, the custom is
           one which has always to the best of his knowledge in practice been respected by the
           UK courts and so one has the situation where, yes, of course in principle the court has
           the power to disclose the information, but in my submission there is a gulf between
           having that power in principle and the provider realising a court has actually done so
           and if that actually happens then there would inevitably be a reassessment of the
           material that can be provided to the state that has been unable to control it and --

      398. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I mean, what the state does, presumably, if it does not
           want the information disclosed, it says in words that cannot be misunderstood if you
           disclose it there will be consequences, which is effectively what is being said in this
           case.

      399. MS STEIN: Yes.

      400. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Not may be -- you know, this is the could and would.

      401. MS STEIN: In my submission, for the court to in fact take the step of disclosing
           information provided by a foreign government which they have expressly made clear
           should not be disclosed, it would be extraordinary and all the more so in this unusual
           context where the defendant has no option of, for example, discontinuing a prosecution.
           The most usual situation with PII is that the defendant would actually have an option
           which would enable it to protect national security. But we are in an extraordinary
           situation here where there is no such option and so, for it to be said that the US
           administration will simply know that this is within the court's power, yes, of course, in
           principle, but in my submission there really is a huge difference between that principle
           and actually this ever happening in practice and, if it happens in this case, the Secretary
           of State's assessment is that that would lead to serious harm and, equally, the letter from
           the CIA itself makes clear that, even if the inability to protect information is caused by
           the judicial system, they have said that disclosure would suggest that the UK is
           unwilling or unable to protect information or assistance provided by its allies which



                                                   [48]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            may  constrict, and may result in a constriction of the US/UK relationship as well as
            leading to other states taking steps to withhold the UK-sensitive information that could
            be important to its safety and security, and those words, even if the inability to protect
            information is caused by your judicial system, were unilaterally included in the original
            classified letter by the US administration. As the replies to the request for information
            have made clear, UK officials did not draft or assist in drafting the letter or suggest the
            inclusion of those words.

      402. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But the words on their own, there is a very strong case
            for arguing that they could be read as "could" and this is why what Secretary Clinton'
           l ays is so important, that actually the certificate is a letter that was meant to be read as
           ('would". Is it not? That is the real -- I mean, if we may want to put to You at the end --I
           pecause we do not want an application to reopen this judgment on the basis there has
            been a misunderstanding of the position of the United States government, because nol
           doubt someone is going to ask Mrs Clinton or the CIA "did you really mean that if a
           few paragraphs of no value at all to intelligence was made public you would actuallyil
           take steps to reduce intelligence sharing with a real risk to the lives of the ordinary man
           pnd women of the United Kingdom", the answer they would have to give is yes,'
           because that is it how we understand the Foreign Secretary's decision.

      403. MS STEYN: Yes.!

      404. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: And I think we must be very clear about this because
            s6erns to me that otherwise we would just be faced with someone going to ask thel
            question as happened -- this is all deja vu as far as we are concerned -- someone will gc■
           land ask a question and we will he faced by an application to reopen our fifthjudgmentil
            on the basis that the position was misunderstood. That is why I think we did -- I would
            Ignite like to see, you know, this very precise statement of the Foreign Secretary's1
            Position, because I think I have put it very clearly to you, and it will be apparent
           'from the transcript, a copy we will attain, to be sure that we are not faced with any
            Imis -- I do not want a misunderstanding about this case. We have had too many.
              have tried not to use the word threat, because that is not right, and no doubt not al
             ldiplomatic word, but have the consequence that, and that, as long as there is flo!
              i
              misunderstanding, the case becomes very easy to decider

      405. MS STEYN: Yes. In my submission it is very easy. Your Lordship has reached --

      406. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: The right answer last time and the true position is that the
           Obama administration would, if we made these paragraphs which have no intelligence
           value whatsoever public, take steps to review intelligence sharing relationships with the
           United Kingdom, with there being a very serious risk as a consequence to the national
           security of the United Kingdom which means in the vernacular a risk to the men,
           women and children of this country from terrorist attack. I mean, if that is what the
           position is, this case is extremely simple.

      407. MS STEYN: Yes.




                                                    [49]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      408. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Because the answer to our -- we know, because we said
           in our last judgment, no court could possibly make anything public if that was the
           consequence.

      409. MS STEYN: The factual position is precisely as --

      410. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: As I said.

      411. MS STEYN: Yes, as your Lordships have said, and as it was at the time of the fourth
           judgment and, in fact, this is -- your Lordship sort of raises the spectre of other parties
           going off and seeking further information. The Secretary of States's position has been
           clear throughout in our submissions back in December --

      412. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Well, it *as not so clear when he addressed, if we ma}1/
           respectfully say so, interviews and things. That is why I do not want a
           Misunderstanding as to what we understand his position to be. There is no wriggle
           t-oom here. NoneJ

      413. MS STEYN: The Secretary of State's understanding, in relation to -- at the time of his
            first and second PII certificate --

      ;414. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No, we have put to you what our understanding is. I do',
            not want -- I mean, we can go through this affidavit and there are words here
            everywhere, but in the ultimate analysis it has to be put very clearly what his positioh
            is, and I think I have put it, namely, that the position, as he understands -- the positionli
            of the United States government is that it would, not could, reassess. , the
            intelligence relationshiji with the United Kingdom with the result that there might
            be a very serious risk to the national security of the United Kingdom, and that is to'l
            say danger to the men, women and children of the United Kingdom. I do not
            think anything could be clearer. Because if that — that is what I understand the
            gravamen and that is actually really what Mrs Clinton was saying, according to
            the Foreign Secretaryi

       415. MS STEYN: And the Secretary of State makes it absolutely plain in his third PIT
            certificate at paragraphs 20 through to 22 -- paragraph 21, he sets out his earlier
            judgment that --

        i6. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No, but this is all subject -- you see, the problem is sorri
             lof these words are very carefully chosen, but the advantage of an oral hearing in this
               country is you can tie people down. Now, you are acting on the express instructions oir
              the Secretary of State and there are two distinct issues and this is where the muddle
             'occurred on the last occasion. What we do not want is yet another muddle. There is
                 he breach, the ordinary — there is the principle of confidentiality of information
              si upplied and control over it and a breach of it which may or may not have
               Iconsequences: point 1. This case is that, but there is another bit, because the

             U    nited States government has made its position clear, namely that it would, not
               could, reassess intelligence sharing relationships, what I have just said, and they
                are the two completely different points. This is the elision that occurred on the last



                                                     [ 50 ]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            'occasion and I do not want -- it is not in anyone's interest that we have another error. I
            Id
               a not mind what the Secretary of State's position is, as long as I know ini
            'absolutely clear terms because there is no doubt someone is going to go and ask is
            this the position of the Obama administration and we do not want
                isunderstanding)

      417. MS STEYN: Well, Mr Saini threw down the gauntlet on the last occasion to the other
           parties and said, if they had one iota of evidence to --

      418.LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Well, no, the US administration's position is as set out iI
           the CIA letter, which is subject to the submissions that have been made. Now, what,
          'you are telling us is that, as an expert in these matters, the Secretary of State has read
           that letter. He knows what all these diplomats mean by these nice words and thereforel
           L- and he has listened to Ms Clinton and her words are very clear and it has -- 1. am
          !
           sorry, I am not allowing you any wriggle room. I am quite prepared for you to go and
           say you want five minutes to think about it or go and take some instructions, but we,1
           'cannot have another misunderstanding in this case".

      419. MS STEYN: My Lord, I am not seeking any wriggle room. I am simply seeking to
           refer your Lordships to --

       2O. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No, that is not good enough. That is not good enough-,'
           siMs Steyn, because I have put in clear -- I want to tie the Secretary of State down. Now,'
             if you say to me he needs a bit of time to think whether he should be tied down,
           'entirely understand that, but we cannot have a confusion about this. We cannot have a
           'confusion between the general position, which Dame Pauline Neville-Jones made
             the control principle, you can breach it, well -- and this case, where there is an
           'additional factor, namely it has been made clear what the consequences would be, and
            Our decision on the second -- in whatever gloss people want you to put on it, ouri
             decision in our fourth judgment was based on the second part of it, namely that there
             was an explicit statement of consequences. We used the word threat. Maybe that was!
             ill advised, we should have used the word explicit statement of consequences. What
             'really wish to know is have we understood the explicit statement of consequences
             'clearly, because if there is, there is no doubt about our answer in this case. If we have
             riot understood it, and that demolishes any argument that Mr Vassal-Adams wishes to'
             canvas -- could possibly proceedi,

      421. MS STEYN: It is entirely right, there has been that explicit statement of consequences),
           Your Lordships have of course already referred to what the US Secretary of State has
           said. I have also referred to the fact that the CIA letter is something that the Secretary
           of State and those advising him has considered and he is understanding that that is an
           explicit statement of the consequences --

       422. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Again, I want to be sure, because someone is no doubt
            going to go and ask did you mean this and the last thing one wants is for someone to
            come back and say, well there is a misunderstanding. Let me give you five minutes.

            (3.40pm)



                                                    [51]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




                                               (A short break)
             (3.45pm)

      423. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes, Ms Steyn?

      424. MS STEYN: My Lord, the position, I hope, is entirely clear, that the Secretary off
           State's assessment is that the disclosure, public disclosure, of the seven paragraphs
           would cause serious harm to the national security of the UK. He has made it absolutely,'
           Clear that the only reason that he has opposed the disclosure of these paragraphs is
           I
           prder to protect the national security and international relations of the UKT

      425. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But that can only be, Ms Steyn, because the °barna'
           administration have made it clear that disclosure has -- we used the word threat, can
            use the same word but put in more diplomatic language, consequences. They mean the
           ipame, but the Foreign Secretary does not like the word threat, so we will use the word
           consequences.

      426. MS STEYN: Yes, his assessment is that those consequences --

      427. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: And so if someone asks us --

      428. MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES: His assessment is that those consequences would
           follow?

      429. MS STEYN: Yes.

      430. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: And so if someone asks Mrs Clinton or whoever it ma))
           be, at a press conference, or one of these advisers -- this all happened last time, so we,
           do not want a mistake -- they will say, of course, if the British court puts in paragraphs,
           to its judgment that have nothing to do with anyone's national security -- there is
           nothing in these paragraphs that affect's anyone's national security -- the US,
           government would seriously consider the reduction -- reassess the intelligence
           relationship with a very serious risk to the national security of the United Kingdom!
           That is the lives of British subjects, because you talk about national security, but you
           had better put it in the vernacular, so people understand it, that is a very, very grave
           threat and I just want to make certain that no-one goes and asks the United StateS
           government and it says, no, of course, we did not mean that, because we should be back
           to square onei

       431. MS STEYN: My Lord, that is the position, save that, as your Lordships will be well
            aware, the US administration does not accept that there is no national security
            implication in disclosure of the paragraphs. Now --
       r32      LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No, but there is nothing in the paragraphs -- we have
             ,twitten
                 r them -- that could conceivably identify anything that is of a national security,
                nterest. The only thing that we are doing is breaching the principle of control and that
               is why Dame Pauline Neville-Jones drew the distinction between us disclosing thing
               that were damaging to national security -- ie giving agent's names, location of facilitiesi
               things of that kind — and putting something in which was simply a breach of the


                                                     [52]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            Principle of control -- that is all that we are doing, is breaching the principle of control
            L and what I do not want to do is to be back here all over again, or to have the Foreign■
            Secretary question whether we had -- that we have not properly understood it, because'
            1-- and this torpedos, as I thought it probably would, Mr Vassal-Adams and Mr Jaffey'si
            1
            argument, which is all depending on the word "could". You are saying, effectivelyi
               hat you are saying, is that when the CIA said "could", actually it is properly to be,
            iw
            understood as "would".!

      433. MS STEYN: That is the Foreign Secretary's assessment, precisely.

       434. As far as the question of the US administration's assessment of the national security
            implications of disclosure are concerned, your Lordships have already set out in the
            fourth judgment at paragraph 76 that the rationality or otherwise of their view in
            relation to that is not material.

       435. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Of course not. We may think it is wholly irrational and I
            am sure you would find it very difficult to find anyone who, security analyst, who
            would think there was anything of a security nature in what we are doing, but, as they
            take such a -- what is happening is that the United States administration is taking the
            position that the breach of the principle of control, which discloses something of a
            security nature, is so serious that they are prepared to reassess the relationship with the
            United Kingdom with lives at risk. That is all I want to be clear about, because that is
            what we understood on the last occasion, and we got criticised for saying so, and I do
            not want there to be any misunderstanding it.

       436. But you have made the position clear, it is as we understood it, and makes the case
            much easier to decide.

       437. MS STEYN: Yes. My Lord, in my submission the position is clear, that the Foreign
            Secretary's assessment is based on his own considerable experience and expertise in
            this field, with clear and unanimous expert advice that he has received, direct
            conversations, as well as written communications on this very issue, and direct
            experience of working with this US administration and its predecessor. In my
            submission, it is not reasonably open to your Lordships to take a different view --

       438. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No. Put in these very clear terms, the case is no differeni
            from the way we understood it the last time round. The last time round it was said that
            there was no threat. Well, maybe threat is not a word that is recognised, but the word
            6onsequences is exactly -- the consequences we understood on the last occasion are
            Precisely the consequences we understand now, that there is a real risk, in the terms set
            out, to national -- what I am so anxious that there is misunderstanding aboutj
            Someone is no doubt going to go and ask him, did he mean this, or ask Mrs Clinton)
            pr ask anyone else, and I think it is very important that he has a transcript of this
            so there is no doubt about the gravity of what -- of the position. I do not -- Msi
            Steyn, it is not in our interest, it is not in Mr Mohamed's interest, it is not in the
            newspapers' interest, that there is a misunderstanding. I want to be perfectly fair about
            this. So I think we shall organise a transcript so people can actually — so Mri
            Miliband and others can read it and just be sure that we have understood it. And


                                                     [53]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




             if not, obviously you can -- we might have to have a further hearing. So we assume'
            1
             that we have not misunderstood it because you have reiterated on numerous occasions
             that we have got the message and it is the message we had in -- we had when we wrote'
             bur fourth judgment!,
      439. MS STEYN: Yes, and that message in my submission comes from --

        4O. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: OK. If that is the understanding, and based oil'
            'conversations, and based on -- it is exactly what Ms Clinton in fact is recorded as
            'saying, then the case -- I suspect we do not need to hear any more argument on it!

       441. MS STEYN: Yes. It may be that there is little more to say. I was just --

       442. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: OK. Well, carry on then.

       443. MS STEYN: That, in my submission, is the nub of the issue in relation to the
            likelihood of the risk occurring. It is plain that your Lordships have to accept the
            evidence of the Secretary of State. When it comes to the balance, well, in my
            submission the balance is at least as far in favour of non-disclosure now as it was at the
            time of the court's judgment.

       444. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: The balance is deal:. I mean, if lies are to be put at risk
            through the non-provision of intelligence, there cannot be any argument about it.

       445. MS STEYN: Yes.

       6.    MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES: Ms Steyn, what is the impact on this issue of the',
             'apparent fact that the Secretary of State would have been prepared to expose the Unite,4
             Kingdom to this risk had the documents not been disclosed to Mr Mohamed's lawyers?

       7.    MS STEYN: My Lord, that simply shows how seriously the Foreign Secretary took the,
             'possibility that Mr Mohammed, in circumstances where he was potentially facing
             capital charges, might not have been in the position to properly defend himself and the
               ecretary of State, taking on board your Lordship's view in the first judgment as to the
             importance that he should -- of him having those documents, clearly was prepared to'
             'conceive of circumstances in which such damage might have had to have been
             'accepted. That does not in any way suggest that the damage is not, or would not be, as
             Serious as the Foreign Secretary has explained that it would be --I
       448. MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES: Does it tell us anything about the seriousness of the
             'threat or about his assessment of the seriousness of the threat?!

       09. MS STEYN: My Lord, no. In my submission, what it says is how sefiously he too—k,
            the public interests that were on the other side of the balance at that stage. It should ofc
            'course be remembered that what was in issue at that time was not public disclosure but
            disclosure to security cleared US lawyers. He took the view that -- he did not make a
            decision on this issue but clearly he made it clear that he might have had to take the,
            yiew that the disclosure would have to be made.



                                                     [54]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      450. MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES: He might have been inclined, I think was what he
            d)

      451. MS STEYN: He might have been inclined to order disclosure. That plainly is not
           decision that the Foreign Secretary would have taken lightly because he had explained,
           the real damage that would have occurred, and, if I may just give your Lordship's the
           reference to paragraph 31 of the second PIT certificate, where he explained his -- he
           refers to his detailed assessment, both to the nature of the damage that would be likely
           to occur and my appreciation that such damage would indeed be likely to occur, and he
           refers to his detailed assessments in the sensitive schedule. The position, as he has
           explained in the third PII certificate, is precisely the same now as it was then in terms
           of the damage that he believes would occur if there was public disclosure.

      452. MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES: But if he had made disclosure to security cleared',
           lawyers in those circumstances, that would still have been a breach of the control
           principle and it would have been a flat contradiction to the wishes of the source of the
           information!

      453. MS STEYN: Yes, it would, which is why there were clearly strenuous efforts to ensure
           'that the control principle was not and has not been breached in this case and thai
           remains the position. Obviously there was the possibility of it being breached, eitheii
           potentially by the Foreign Secretary or by the court, but that has not at any stage
           bccurred and so the position remains that the US administration will be aware of the
           ivery strenuous efforts that the UK has gone to to ensure that that principle is no
           breached.

             MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES: I understand that, but it is your position that thail
             indication was given in that certificate, notwithstanding the continuous and constant
            lassessment by the Secretary of State of the likelihood of the risk materialising, j

      455. MS STEYN: Yes) It has been suggested by my learned friend that that somehow
           shows that the damage was either not as likely pr would not have been serious as the
           Foreign Secretary has explained that it is and in my submission that is simply wrong. It
           is a failure to understand how seriously the Foreign Secretary took the public interest in
           favour of disclosure to Mr Mohamed's lawyers at that stage in the proceedings.

      4-5-6. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Ms Steyn, it could be put this way: that he was prepared
             'to put the lives of men, women and children in the United Kingdom at risk to provide,
             142 documents to Mr Mohamed.
                                      '      That must inevitablyfollow, must it not?

      ;457. MS STEYN: Be was
       458. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: It must follow. There is no wriggle room there)

       4-59. MS STEYN: Well, there is -- to some extent there is a degree of difference betweeri
             'disclosure -;

       #r 60. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No, there is not. I mean, one can underStand why in thei
               interests of justice, and making certain that one man was not wronged, ,he will be,


                                                   [55]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




             prepared to put the lives of men, women and children in the United Kingdom at risk)
             but the risk must be the samei

       4-61. MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES: His assessment of the risk was the same throughout)
             would you say?

      1462, MS STEYN: His assessment of the risk wasP precisely the same and that was ir
           -icircumstances where a British resident was facing the possibility of a capital charge andl
             his assessment was that in those circumstances, yes, he might have to, if there was no
               ther way, disclose the information, but that does not suggest that the damage or the,
             likelihood of damage is less than he has explained it to be. It was as high

       463. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No. It was just testing the proposition, that the risk is,
            'you put it, the same, but he has come -- but he was prepared to take that risk to our
            intelligence sharing relationships with the risks it entailed to the citizens of this country(
            m those circumstances, what he says, the risk is identical now, but he feels that, in
             making these matters public, of no intelligence value whatsoever, of being of no'l
             intelligence -- is too great a risk and one can understand how you can form a value
            judgment about that. But the real thing is the risk is the same.,

       464. MS STEYN: Yesi,

       465. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Good.

       466. MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES: Thank you.

             (4.00pm)

       467. MS STEYN: My Lord, unless there is anything else that I can --

       1468. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No, Ms Steyn, what we will do, I think, is, subject td
             'anything that Mr Jaffey or Mr Vassal-Adams might say, we will ask somebody to
             transcribe the hearing, to ask for a transcript to be made so that there can be no
             misunderstanding of the way in which we approach this case, because there
             k  warently was on the last occasion, and it is not in anyone's interest that thereil
             should be a misunderstanding. The Foreign Secretary's evidence, or position, is
              absolutely crystal clear. There is not a mere breach of the principle of control, he
              is acting as he did because there would be consequences. I prefer to use that word;
              because it should not cause offence, rather than a threat, but I do not believe there
              is any material distinction.

       469. MS STEYN: Well, it should, my Lord, I think be clearly understood that the Secretary
            of State's assessment is based both on his understanding of the consequences as
            explained to him in the communications received and also on his understanding of the
            principle of control. He has made that very clear in his PIT certificates, but his
            assessment is not just placed alone --

       470. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Because we might take the view that, if we were really
            here by any rational analysis concerned with the breach of the ordinary principle of


                                                      [56]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




             control, it might be very difficult to conceive that anyone would rationally take the
             steps that had been set out, but, if the Secretary of State, as the expert in knowing hoWl
             you read the documents, understands how the consequences have been spelt out by the
             Ip
             Obama administration, then it is very difficult to see how, he being expert in reading
             such documents and knowing how you read the consequences, we could come to a
               ifferent view, subject to any argument that may be made. But I do not want there tol
             be any misunderstanding, as was said to be on the last occasion, that this has
             i
             something to do with the principle -- this turns on the principle of control. It does
             not, it turns on the consequences of the Obama administration have made clear to!
             the Secretary of State's view. Goodi

             (4.03pm){}

       471. MR JAFFEY: Thanks to my Lord, Lord Justice Thomas' efforts, we are now told that
            the assessment of the Foreign Secretary is that could in the CIA's letter means would --

       .72. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I do not think it is my efforts. I think it is what thC
         ---,Foreign Secretary meant in his certificate, but it was not clear, but it now is clear.i, That
            is why I took Mr Vassall-Adams to the would paragraph, which underlines this whole
            thing, that it is not just a question of would, ie there are consequences.

       473. MR JAFFEY: I have two submissions for your Lordships on that. The first submission
            is, whether or not the court should accept that conclusion in the Public Interest
            Immunity certificate, because, as your Lordship knows, the case that is put forward by
            the claimant and by the UK media is that the CIA letter, which is the final statement of
            view of the Obama administration, is a letter deliberately designed to mean many things
            to many people and it has always been the case that our concern about that letter has
            been expressed clearly and before the Public Interest Immunity certificate was provided
            to the court and to the other parties and I showed your Lordship in my submission --

       l74    LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But Mr Jaffe, there is a very simple answer to that, whicli
             'is,
             t you know, we are mere judges, not diplomats. To a diplomat, versed in the wayl
             these things are done, the letter bears one meaning. That is the Foreign Secretary's
             point. We are not the expert in reading letters from the CIA.

       475. MR JAFFEY: I draw your Lordships' attention to these points. The first point which I
             make to your Lordships is that this is not a letter which is designed to convey
             diplomatic niceties. The CIA letter was deliberately designed to be an open letter
             which could be passed to the court. It is a communication from one state to another, for
             the purposes of informing the court as to the US government's position. It is not
             designed to be a clever diplomatic communication that can only be understood by
             someone who has a mastery of the workings of international relations. The request, and
             your Lordships have seen the request at page 94, the record of the request by the
             Treasury Solicitor and the Foreign Office, is that confirmation be given in the form of a
             letter as to the US government's final and considered position in a form which is
             suitable for presentation to the court for the court to see.




                                                     [57]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      476. That is the first point which I make to your Lordship, and it is that confirmation in the
           form of General Jones' letter which confirms that the CIA letter does indeed represent
           the final and considered position of the US government that was before the court today
           and which has also -- General Jones' letter postdates the Public Interest ImmunitY
           `certificate in this case. General Jones' letter has not been considered by the Secretary of
             tate when producing the Public Interest Immunity certificate and the Secretary of State
           has not opined or even considered whether or not that letter, referring to the CIA letter,'
           I
             oes indeed represent the final position. So when Ms Steyn says that the Secretary of
           State relies on the conversations with Secretary of State Clinton, that is quite a difficult
           submission from her, because it is not a submission which has been placed in the Public,
           interest Immunity certificate and it is made in the context where there is a letter frorric
           General Jones copied to Secretary of State Clinton, saying that this represents the final
           ivsition of the US govemmenti-That is my first submission.

      477. The third point which I make is that, all of the criticisms which we make of the CIA
           letter in terms of its analysis are not points which should have come to any surprise to
           the Secretary of State or indeed to the US government, because they have been set out,
           in writing, at the earliest possible stage and I have shown your Lordships the letter from
           those instructing me --

      478. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Mr Stone's letter. Yes.

      479. MR JAFFEY: And I draw attention to the differences between the CIA letter and
           Bellinger letter. What I suggest is the deliberate ambiguities in the CIA letter and alsd
            Why there was no attempt to clarify those ambiguities in the light of the concerns well
           expressed in correspondence. There is no explanation in a Pfl certificate why the
            a/ pparently firmer views of Secretary Clinton were not copied or expressed in the Cliti
           'letter or put in that way and there is no explanation at all of why the United State
               overnment do not know that the control principle is not in fact sacrosanct based onl
           gwhat   our Foreign Secretary said in the first PH certificate, where the Foreign Secretary
           1..nade it absolutely clear that he was willing to consider handing over documents far
             more interesting than those seven paragraphs in issue in theseyroceedings today;

       480. So, in circumstances where all of those arguments have been clear for a long time, and
            also the key material, namely the CIA letter and General Jones, is before the court, an
            unreasoned conclusion, which is what the court is faced with, in a PIT certificate that
            this is the Secretary of State's view is in my submission entirely inadequate. The
            Secretary of State has not put forward any response as to why the points which I have
            just identified to your Lordships are wrong. It may well be that the Secretary of State
            in the exercise of his expert diplomatic judgment, based on the experience he has and
            the experience of those advising him, he can say, well, those points are very all
            interesting but this is the answer to them. But, in the absence of a coherent and sensible
            answer, it is my submission that the court should not accept this Public Interest
            Immunity certificate. Because there are so many obvious and plain concerns about the
            CIA letter, it is in my submission so clear that it has been drafted with two objects in
            mind, an object first of all to try and persuade this court not to disclose the information
            but equally not being prepared to go as far as making a threat, or whatever anyone



                                                    [58]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            wants to characterise it as, in the way that the Bush administration was prepared to do.
            All of those are important points and none of them were dealt with --

      481. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Ms Steyn has made it very clear, there is no difference;
           between the position of the Bush administration as regards "consequences" and the
                                                                                              . 1
           Obama administration. I think she has made that -- the Foreign Secretary's position Isit
             the sameJ,

      482. MR JAFFEY: She has said that is the Foreign Secretary's position. The concern which
           I expressed to your Lordships is that conclusion is essentially unreasoned in light of all
           the concerns that have repeatedly been raised about the evidence on which it is based.

      43. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: The issue is clear, is it not, Mr Jaffey? We know very;
           iclearly, subject to anything the Foreign Secretary wish which to say, having read the
             transcript, what the Foreign Secretary's understanding is. We do not want there to be
            iinisunderstanding.! I did not think there was, but we must be as fair as we can in
             matters of this kind, take it slowly, but what you are really saying is, well, if that is his
             position, it is irrational.

      484. MR JAFFEY: Indeed. It is a position which is untenable --

      485. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No, when I say irrational, I do need to explain that is
           irrational in the legal sense and not in the layman's sense, that it is wrong --

      486. MR JAFFEY: Your Lordship has my submission that that is not the appropriate test to
           apply. The test is not one of Wednesbury irrationality, but the test is one of whether the
           court, making its own decision on the question of Public Interest Immunity, and I
           emphasise that, has been satisfied that the Secretary of State, bearing in the mind the
           Secretary of State has expertise that the court does not, has reached a conclusion which
           is correct. It is the court's decision and the court is not acting as a court of judicial
           review considering a Wednesbury rationality claim, but the court is making its own
           decision on Public Interest Immunity and in those circumstances, where the Public
           Interest Immunity certificate which the court has been presented with, does not deal,
           and Ms Steyn's submission, in her submissions she has not even attempted to deal with,
           any of the points and concerns which have been raised by Mr Vassall-Adams and me
           today about the evidence justifying this so called threat. In those circumstances, the
           court should not accept this Public Interest Immunity as an appropriate statement, an
           appropriate conclusion as to what the response of the US authorities would be.

      487. My Lords, the only other point which I wanted to deal with very briefly is the spectre
           that all of this is going to repeated ad infinitum -- this is what I call the Ground Hog
           Day point.

      488. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: The what?

      489. MR JAFFEY: The Ground Hog Day point. There is a lovely film, a romantic comedy
           with Bill Murray, and he wakes up every morning and he is still in the same day, every
           single day.



                                                     [59]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      490. MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES: This case is starting to feel like that.

      491. MR JAFFEY: He is still in the same day. Life just repeats itself indefinitely. He only
           escapes from this nightmare when he finally manages to get the girl, which I do not
           think is probably an option here. But there does have to be an end to this litigation at
           some point and in my submission the proper end to this litigation is in fact now,
           because what has happened in the letter at page 94 is it is made clear that the Secretary
           of State, the Foreign Secretary, that is, has asked the US authorities for their final
           definitive statement of position and General Jones has responded yes, the CIA letter is
           our definitive statement of position. The US authorities have had every opportunity to
           put this case in the C

      492. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I do not think it has ever been -- I have tried to put to Ms
           Steyn, because of this problem with clarity, actually what is being said by the Secretary
           of State in the vernacular, and it -- you know, he can think again is that what he is
           saying. I believe it is, because Ms Steyn has been very clear about it, but there cannot
           any longer be any -- there will not be a repeat of this, the battle line is now clear and we
           know where we are. The Foreign Secretary is very clear in his view of what is being
           said. You say that is not what they mean.

      493. MR JAFFEY: What your Lordships have been told is your Lordships have been told in
           the submissions the view of the Foreign Secretary, not having had the benefit of any
           submissions or any explanation on all the issues which I have identified. It is my
           submission that the case should in fact end here, because your Lordship has been
           presented with a piece of drafting, the CIA letter, which had been produced by someone
           -- no doubt the most intelligent diplomats and intelligence expert that the world has to
           offer -- those people will have read your Lordships' fourth judgment where your
           Lordships set out what the position is, the threat if you like, made by the Bush
           administration, with absolute clarity and, if it was the position, the court having
           reopened its fourth judgment, that the position was exactly the same as it was
           previously, it would have been the simplest thing in the world for that to be said but
           that was not the course --

      494. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But Mrs Clinton --

      495. MR JAFFEY: -- which the Obama administration decided to take.

      496. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Subject to what Mrs Clinton is saying.

      497. MR JAFFEY: Subject to what Mrs Clinton says but, what Mrs Clinton said in
           conversation with the 'Foreign Secretary, has clearly been overtaken by events. It has
           not been dealt with in the Pll certificate--

       498. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: OK. Well, we have your submission.

       499. MR JAFFEY: Your Lordship has my point on that. The reason why this letter, the
            CIA letter, is unclear and ambiguous of course is because that is a deliberate policy
            choice which has been made by the United States government. They chose to make it



                                                    [60]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




           an unclear letter because, of course, that serves everyone's purposes. It is useful for it
           to be unclear. It is beneficial to all concerned.

      500. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But it is no longer beneficial, because the Foreign
           Secretary now has taken a stand. He has taken a stand that although this -- he has made
           his position abundantly clear that, although it may all seem very odd, but he has taken
           it. Here I stand.

      501. MR JAFFEY: The consequence of that, my Lord, and the consequences in my
           submission are, that the PII certificate cannot be accepted in those circumstances
           because it simply does not deal with any of the relevant issues which have been around
           not just today but for a very long time. My Lords, unless I can assist your Lordships
           any further, those are my submissions.

      502. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Mr Vassall-Adams, do you have anything -- I was going
           to be rude, but I would not be too rude -- anything new to add.

      503. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Very briefly, my Lord.

      504. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Of course.

      505. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: In your bundle I handed in today, at tab 2, there is a
           chronology and it may be helpful for us to remind ourselves, painful though it is, of the
           history of these proceedings in relation in this issue of what the true position of the
           Obama administration is, because in my submission it will shed some light on the
           submission now being made on behalf of the Secretary of State. Do you have that
           chronology, my Lord?

      506. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Indeed.

      507. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: 2008, 30th November, that is when David Rose first raised
           the issue of what the position of the Obama consideration would be and whether it
           would be the same as the Bush administration. We have the defendant's response of
           18th December and your Lordships are very familiar with the submission that was
           made at that time.

      508. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes.

      509. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Your Lordships handed down your fourth judgment on 4th
           February and on 5th February the claimants made the application to reopen the fourth
           judgment. From 5th February onwards, there can have been no doubt that there was
           going to be a challenge as to what the actual position of the Obama administration was
           in relation to the disclosure of these paragraphs and so that matter has been in issue
           since 5th February. On 11th February, this court ordered that the defendant's evidence
           in response to the claimant's application had to be provided by 11th March and you can
           see what happened in relation to that. It was never provided by 11th March and what
           we have on 24th March was a letter from Mr Bethlehem purporting to deal with the
           Obama administration position, Leigh Day then responding, making the point that there
           had been no evidence on what the true position was, and the defendant replied on 1st


                                                  [61]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            April saying we are unwilling to elaborate on the Bethlehem letter. On 16th April, the
            Obama administration released the torture memos. The defendant did not see fit to
            draw the court's attention to that important development, but it all came up on the
            hearing date of 22nd April, when the court actually heard the application to reopen, and
            it was only at that stage that the defendant took the position to actually go away and get
            evidence about what the Obama administration position was.

       510. That evidence is the CIA letter. There can be no question about that, because any doubt
             that may have existed as to whether that truly reflects the view of the Obama
             administration is settled by the letter on behalf -- CCed to the Secretary of State and
             said to be expressing her views, which is made by the assistant national security
             adviser, and in my submission the defendant is trying to do what it always has done in
             these proceedings, which is to have its cake and eat it, which is on the one hand this is
             -- the CIA letter is evidence on which the defendant relies. As Mr Jaffey has pointed
             out, in the context of this case, and the court having given judgment back in February,
             and this issue having been live now literally for months as to what the true position of
             the Obama administration is, it cannot be open to the defendant at this stage to say the
             CIA letter does not mean what it says. Everybody knew that the court would pour over
             the language in that letter and that the language chosen would be very important and it
             is a could not a would letter and in my submission it does mean what it says and if the
             Foreign Secretary's true analysis is something different, then it is founded on a false
             factual premise, or it is not made in good faith.

       '511. In relation to the issue of-- the issue that Ms Steyn sought to deal with, the point made
             by Mr Justice Lloyd Jones in relation to the willingness of the Secretary of State tO
             'order disclosure, it simply shows that even back in August 2008 the Secretary of State
             cannot possibly realistically have believed that the US would act on the threats, the'
             'serious threats, it was making at that time, because no Foreign Secretary in my
             'respectful submission could possibly adopt the position that, in order to ensure a fair!'
             trial of one person, it was really going to put the lives of men, woman and children on
              ,
             the streets at risk

       512. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: That is what he was saying: he was prepared to do that,
            prepared to consider it. 'You are not submitting, surely, that the Foreign Secretary,
            when he said that, did not mean it?

       513. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Well, there are so many difficulties with the way the
            Foreign Secretary has put his case in this case that in my respectful submission there is
            very little reliance on anything that the Foreign Secretary -- well, the court can place
            very little reliance on What the Foreign Secretary is in fact said to be saying.

       514. My Lords, I cannot really add to those submissions, but I am happy to address any
            point that you wish to raise.

       515. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS:! Well, what we shall do, we have to hear a very short
            closed session, so we shall rise for a few minutes. (pause)




                                                    [62]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      1516.   Ms Steyn, the transcriber -- I think it is important, because it is not -- we do not wani
              what happened on the last occasion, for there to be any misunderstanding, it is not int
                nyone's interests. So it would be desirable if Her Majesty's Principle for the'
                                                                                                        l
                 ecretary of State for the Foreign Department does look at the transcript so hel
              can see precisely what the argument is, that this is not a case being advanced by'
              him about the control principle but a case that we are asked to decide on the basis
                                                                                                        ,
                f his assessment of, in language which you can choose, either there are these
              !
              consequences or a threat, the words -- a play on words. But he needs to know and
              i
               see and have a review of it, so that your position that he has put is absolutely clear1
              and we would then ask -- I do not know where he is at the moment, no doubt he may be
               taking a vacation or be elsewhere, I simply have no idea -- but maybe you could takel
              some instructions when let us know when he will be able to have a look at it, mak
              Certain it is accurate and confirm it is so. If it is in any way inaccurate, we will have
              address what we do theni

      517. MS STEYN: Yes, my Lord. May I

         8. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: But we do not want any misunderstanding. That is whati
            1I am most anxious, because I think there was a muddle somewhere that aros
            between the breach of the principle of control, which this case has nothing to do,I
            'about, it is the consequences we are concerned about, is it a could situation, where
                                                                                                  1
            re will have to assess it, or is it a would situation, and I think we have made -- you
            have made the Foreign Secretary's position abundantly clear as to what hell
            believes the Obama administration will do, but we want to be sure that is his
            'understanding as welli

      519. MS STEYN: May I just very briefly respond to the suggestion that the Foreign
           Secretary -- that the view has not been put in good faith. That is utterly refuted. As
           your Lordships acknowledged at paragraph 82 of your fourth judgment, both the
           Foreign Secretary and his legal adviser, Mr Bethlehem QC, have made so clear the
           United Kingdom's position on the --

       520. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: I think Mr Vassall-Adams is putting that submission on
            the Foreign Secretary's conduct after and the interpolation -- he has really saying no
            person in good faith could read the CIA letter in the way in which he has done so. Have
            I understood it correct?

       521. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: You have, my Lord.

       522. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: That is the position.

       523. MS STEYN: Well, my submission is, as your Lordship will have understood, that that
            is a perfectly rational --

       524. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: We have absolutely got the point, but I just wanted to be
            clear, he was not criticising the respondent. Up to this day, it is his way, in which we
            have been over -- but the issues are crystal clear, I just want to make certain there is no




                                                      [63]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




            misunderstanding today, because it is very unfortunate and we must be as fair as we
            can.

      525. MS STEYN: Yes. I understand that. I simply wanted to respond because the
           suggestion --

      526. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Have I understood you correctly?

       527. MS STEYN: -- that it was not made in good faith --

       528. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: You have, my Lord.

       529. MS STEYN: -- had not previously been put.

       530. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: OK. Well, look, we shall rise for a few minutes.

       531. MR GOUDIE: My Lord, we have the document, but I think neither myself nor Ms
            Steyn have had any proper chance --

       532. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Would you like about quarter of an hour, 20 minutes to
            have a look at it?

       533. MR GOUDIE: I think that would be --

       534. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Because the last thing -- I mean, these are revisions to
            our first judgment. If we can sort everything out, wonderful, if we can sort everything
            out except one point, that will be less wonderful but still enormous progress. So how
            long do you want. We are at your disposal, subject to the position of the court clerks.

       535. MS STEYN: And I think quarter of hour will hopefully speed up what then happens
            thereafter.

       536. MR JAFFEY: My Lord, does your Lordship want us back after that? There will be no
            more open issues to be raised today.

       537. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: No. It is highly unlikely, I think, that we will be able to
            clarify everything and we are not prepared to release a corrected judgment in two parts.
            There may be one issue to be resolved.

       538. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: My Lord, two matters that will take less than one minute.
            The first is just to draw your Lordship's attention to the fact that at tab 7 of the latest
            media bundle are the ICLR submissions --

       539. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Yes, we have read those very carefully and we see great
            force in the somewhat, I think someone might put it, way in which this whole
            jurisdiction has grown up without someone having stood back and said, now we have a
            few years experience, how do we handle all these issues, and, if we may say so, the
            position has been very clearly put.

       540. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Thank you very much.


                                                    [64]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016




      541. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: And we shall address them. Whether we are the right
           people to solve them is a different question. It may be a matter for the rules committee.

      542. MR VASSALL-ADAMS: Thank you very much, my Lord.

      543. MS STEYN: My Lord, before we go into closed, there is just one final point, which is
           that we would seek a formal order from the court at the end of this judgment dismissing
           the claim and making an agreed order that the defendant pay the claimant's costs of 5th
           December 2008 on the standard basis and thereafter there should be no order for costs.

      544. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: Very well. If you had agreed that. Have you?

      545. MR JAFFEY: We have agreed the issues in relation to costs. I do not think we agreed
           to dismiss the claim. I think there is simply no legal grant.

      546. LORD JUSTICE THOMAS: OK. Well, that is a terribly important point, about which
           we can have another day's argument.

      547. MR JAFFEY: If not more.

            (4.30pm)

                                       (A closed session followed)




                                                   [65]

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763708 Date: 01/07/2016
