UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794917 Date: 01/07/2016

                                                                                          RELEASE IN FULL




                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                               June 28, 2012



  For: Hillary
  From: Sid
  Re: Erdogan, Oezel & Syria; Lebanon/Syria


  SOURCE: Sources with access to the highest levels of the governments and institutions
  discussed below. This includes political parties and regional intelligence and security services.



          1. During late June 2012 individuals with access to the security situation in Turkey and
  Syria stated in strict confidence that General Necdet Oezel, Chief of the Turkish General
  Staff/Turkish Armed Forces (TAF), advised Prime Minister RecepTayyip Erdogan that Turkey
  must be prepared for unpredictable circumstances that could bring its force into direct conflict
  with the Syrian Army. For his part Erdogan, supported by Minister of Defense Ismet Yilmaz and
  his advisors, warned that it is clear Turkey's NATO allies do not want to see a conflict between
  Syria and Turkey and that the Turkish government cannot allow the chaotic security situation in
  Syria to draw them into a war that could rapidly spread throughout the region. Oezel 'assured
  Erdogan that the Turkish Army and the rest of the TAF could subdue Syrian forces with a
  minimum of damage, particularly as the morale in the Syrian Army is extremely low as a result
  of what Oezel described as the civil war underway in Syria.

           2. According to this individual, Oezel added that the General Staff has updated its
  contingency war plans for Syria, including a review of the 400,000 reserve troops, who can be
  activated in relatively short order if needed. Oezel pointed out that, although as many as 100,000
  troops are involved in operations against the PKK in the eastern mountains of Turkey, and
  northern Iraq, the bulk of the remaining 600,000 troops are available for operations against Syria,
  including elite Special Forces and para-military police units. For their part, both Erdogan and
  Yilmaz cautioned Oezel to avoid building momentum toward war with Syria among the rank and
  file of the Army, particularly the captains and majors commanding combat units. They added
  that it was clear from the recent meetings with their NATO counterparts that their allies are
  opposed to an aggressive response to Syrian military activities against Turkey. In response



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794917 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794917 Date: 01/07/2016




  Oezel pointed out that during the United States invasion of Iraq there were a number of incidents
  in which TAF forces deferred to U.S. forces in Kurdistan. These incidents created extreme
  resentment on the part of mid-level TAF officers. In his opinion, Erdogan has had great success
  in establishing his nationalist credentials with the Turkish military and Oezel fears that this
  progress would be lost if Syrian forces continue to carry out operations that are seen as an insult
  to the TAF.

          3. (Source Comment: In the opinion of this very sensitive source, Erdogan believes that
  he has done enough to intimidate the Syrians and he does not want TAF contingency planning to
  get out of hand. He has also asked Oezel to depend as much as possible on NATO resources to
  obtain intelligence on the situation in Syria, avoiding a repeat of the F-4 incident. According to
  sensitive sources, Erdogan, Yilmaz, and Oezel believe that whatever steps they take must be
  carried out in secret. Erdogan also believes that the NATO allies do not want a conflict between
  Turkey and Syria that might complicate relations with Russia. They are convinced that the
  Russian naval forces and marines at Tartus, Syria are on alert for any development. Finally,
  Erdogan stated that while the TAF was worried about its honor the majority of the Turkish
  people do not want a war with Syria, particularly at a time when their economy is doing well.
  He is also privately concerned that in a time of war the Turkish Constitution allows Oezel, as the
  representative of President Abdullah Gul, to become Commander — in — Chief of the TAF,
  putting him outside of the Prime Minister's authority. According to this individual Erdogan does
  not believe Oezel would take such a step given the current political situation in Turkey; however,
  he knows Turkish history and must always have this possibility in the back of his mind. )



          4. At the same time, an individual with access to the Lebanese security services, stated
  that the Syrian Military Intelligence Directorate (MID) has stepped operations in the region of
  Tripoli and throughout Northern Lebanon. Lebanese military commanders believe that these
  Syrian officers are working, with the help of their allies innezbollah, to increase tension
  between the Lebanese Army and Salafist militias, in an effort to limit the Salafist support for the
  Free Syrian Army (FSA). In this regard, the Lebanese military expects to see an increase in
  political bombings and assassination attempts by Syrian agents against local officials. These
  individuals believe that the MID will disguise these attacks in an effort to attach blame to the
  Lebanese Salafists, and by extension, the FSA. According to this individual, the MID believes
  that with growing tension between Syria and Turkey, the FSA is looking to use Northern
  Lebanon as a base of supply for their operations inside of Syria. The MID is convinced that by
  stirring up internal conflicts in Lebanon, they can interfere with these FSA plans.

          5. (Source Comment: A sensitive source in Beirut stated in private that the government
  of Saudi Arabia has received information that Syrian troops will pursue rebel forces who seek
  refuge in Lebanon. Accordingly, the Ambassador of Saudi Arabia to Lebanon, Ali Awad Asiri,
  stated in confidence that his country has put in place a contingency plan for the evacuation of its



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794917 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794917 Date: 01/07/2016




 nationals in Lebanon, should the need for a sudden departure arise. The Ambassador noted that
 the Kingdom will not be responsible for the safety of its citizens who choose to remain in the
 country once they are advised to leave. By the same token, the U.A.E., Bahrain, Qatar and
 Kuwait advised their citizens to avoid all travel to Lebanon, and for the citizens of those in the
 country to depart given the tense security situation.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794917 Date: 01/07/2016
