UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791810 Date: 01/07/2016




                       MEORANDUM FROM SECRETARY CLINTON                              RELEASE IN FULL

                                 August 22, 2012

 TO:            Eric Goosby
                Ambassador-at-Large
                President's Emergency Plan for Aids Relief (PEPFAR)

                Rajiv Shah
                Administrator
                United States Agency for International Development (USAID)

 COPY:          Thomas Friedan
                Director
                Center for Disease Control

                Agency and Department implementing officials

 SUBJECT: Government-to-Government Mechanisms: Policy and Technical Guidance



 I want to begin by thanking you for the tremendous work you, along with our partners at CDC,
 are doing to implement and grow the PEPFAR program, which is saving millions of lives. Since
 2009, we have more than doubled the number of people who are receiving life-saving treatment
 and we also are reaching far more people with prevention, testing and counseling.

 I just returned from visiting 10 countries across Africa. I saw up close the impact of our global
 health programs and the successes we are having through PEPFAR and the Global Health
 Initiative. PEPFAR and its USAID and CDC implementing partners are transforming not only
 the lives, but the health systems of many of our partner countries. And, our efforts are leading
 resolutely toward an aids-free generation.

  While in South Africa, I signed a PEPFAR framework implementation agreement with the
  government that transitions USG leadership of the implementation of our PEPFAR programming
  to the South African government, over a period of 5 years. It represents a model of the future we
  seek — partnering with countries to grow their capacities so that they lead, manage and in the
  long-run, increasingly fund their own aids programs and health systems. I was very proud to
  witness the signing of this agreement, which reflected more than two years of progress.

  Consistent with the President's Policy Directive on Development (PPD), the Quadrennial
  Diplomacy and Development Review (QDDR) and best practices, PEPFAR, USAID and CDC



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791810 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791810 Date: 01/07/2016




 share the goal of host governments growing and sustaining their own capacity to receive, manage
 and program both national and donor funds (government-to-government funding) in support of
 planning and executing their own country health programs. To be an effective partner in helping
 host countries achieve this goal, USG agencies in the global health space must operate pursuant
 to the dual mandate of: 1) saving more lives, while 2) building sustainable capacity and host
 country ownership/responsibility. Otherwise, the U.S. risks not making progress on the long
 road to sustainable health systems.

 I appreciate the work that PEPFAR, USAID and CDC have done over the past several months to
 examine our current government-to-government funding mechanisms. We needed to both
 streamline and harmonize the burdens we place on host governments receiving USG funds for
 our health programs. Accordingly, this directive provides policy and technical guidance that
 challenges the PEPFAR implementing agencies to adapt existing practices and prevent
 duplication in the processes of PEPFAR, CDC and USAID as you execute, expand or transition
 government-to-government funding capacity. It recognizes the important mandate of building
 host country ministry capacities using government-to-government mechanisms and practices
 that, in the long run, become the foundation for host governments gaining their own capacity to
 plan, program and execute their country's health programs.

 The actions this policy guides will only succeed with strong and ecumenical leadership both in
 Washington and in the field — leading in a transparent and collaborative interagency manner that
 puts the needs of host government ministries first in government-to-government engagements.
 Our achievements under this approach will be revealed through our individual and collective
 ability to modify existing practices to demonstrate a common approach, rather than an agency
 approach.

 I know that Secretary Sebelius, who leads global health programs at HHS and CDC, shares the
 values that I am expressing in this memorandum; we have had our respective teams work closely
 in developing the attached policy guidance.

 I appreciate the spirit of collaboration you and your respective teams brought to this effort. I
 look forward to your dissemination of the attached policy guidance and to your strong and
 unambiguous leadership, as the Global Aids Coordinator and USAID Administrator, as your
 teams implement this guidance immediately.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791810 Date: 01/07/2016
