      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785249 Date: 01/07/2016


                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Wednesda March 2 2011 7:19 AM
To:                                'sbwhoeop
Subject:                           Re: H: Very latest, Egypt special forces now in Libya, more... Sid



Very useful. Continuing thx.


From: sbwhoeop
Sent: Tuesday, March 01, 2011 11:06 PM
To: H
Subject: H: Very latest, Egypt special forces now in Libya, more... Sid




                                         CONFIDENTIAL



                                                  March 1,2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Egypt in Libya; US rhetoric


I am told this information is especially sensitive. Two points that can be drawn:

    1. The commitment of Egyptian Special Forces to the overthrow of Qaddafi is rooted in more than
       longstanding Egyptian hostility to Qaddafi, but also the Egyptians' belief that their economic future may
       be greatly aided by the outcome in Libya and the relationship with post-Qaddafi Libya.
    2. The personal name-calling by certain U.S. officials of Qaddafi is stiffening his resistance and he is using
       it internally to support his case with his followers that he is fighting Western/Israeli imperialism, foreign
       interests, etc., according to one of his advisers. This rhetoric differs from the formal condemnations of
       Qaddafi's abusive rule and policies by other senior officials and Western governments.




During late February, 2011 Field Marshall Hussein Tantawi, Chairman of Egypt's ruling
Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) and Army Chief of Staff Sami Annan
ordered elite, clandestine Special Operations units of the Egyptian Army to begin •
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785249 Date: 01/07/2016
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785249 Date: 01/07/2016




carefully providing support to the forces fighting against Libya's Muammar
Qaddafi. Officers from these clandestine units have crossed the border into Libya and
made contact with representatives of the National Libyan Council (NLC) in Benghazi and
begun discussing how to provide support and weapons to the opposition forces. This aid
will be particularly valuable as these anti-government forces are formed into rudimentary
military units by Libyan Army officers who have gone over to the opposition. These
Egyptian troops are operating with great care, as Tantawi and the other members of the
SCAF do not want this effort to come to light in any way.
According to knowledgeable individuals Tantawi, Annan, and the staff of the SCAF want the
opposition forces to succeed in their fight against Qaddafi, and restore stability to Libya. The
Egyptian leaders are deeply concerned about the refugee crisis along their border, and the
danger of potential terrorists taking advantage of the situation to enter Egypt.
The Egyptian military commanders harbor longstanding animosities toward Qaddafi,
particularly regarding territorial disputes over the oil rich region along Libya's Southeastern
border. The Egyptian authorities are also allowing NLC supporters to bring cash across the
border to support the activities of the anti-Qaddafi opposition forces. This program is being
managed under very tight security controls; however, one particularly sensitive source added
that a small number of these Egyptian Special Operations officers are assisting opposition
forces in their successful defense of the town of Zawiyah against repeated attacks by up to 2000
troops loyal to Qaddafi.
(Source Comment: According to knowledgeable individuals the Egyptian Special Operations
troops are working in small teams under cover as Libyans from the border region with
Egypt. Also, Tantawi, Annan, and the other leaders of Egypt want to see the Libyan oil fields
return to full capacity as soon as possible. The cash remittances sent home by the Egyptians
working in these fields are a major source of revenue for the country. These payments will be
particularly important as the SCAF, and the new government that follows, attempt to improve
Egypt's economic situation.)
According to sources in Libya, the NLC and its leader, former Minister of Justice Mustafa
Mohamed Abdel Galil, are working to establish an orderly system to provide food and other

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785249 Date: 01/07/2016
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785249 Date: 01/07/2016




essential materials to the people of Benghazi and Eastern Libya. The NLC is proceeding
cautiously in this effort, resisting the temptation to call itself an interim government in an effort
to avoid angering the other anti-Qaddafi groups; however, they are faced with shortages that
must be addressed.
At the same time an adviser to Qaddafi states that the Libyan leader remains confident he can
survive this crisis and regain control of the country. As the revolution has continued, the circle
of people around Qaddafi has contracted to a group of family members and longtime
supporters, many of whom feel that if Qaddafi falls they will be held to account for activities
conducted on his behalf. According to this individual Qaddafi and his sons are prepared to
carry on this struggle as an all out civil war if a revolutionary government is established in
Benghazi. These individuals add that Qaddafi also believes the revolution against his
government is being funded and supported by foreign regimes, business interests, and Islamists
hostile to him and his family. This individual added that policy statements by senior officials of
the United States government continue to anger Qaddafi, who feels betrayed by Western
governments. However, Qaddafi and his sons believe that personal attacks by the United States
Ambassador to the UN, and various U.S. politicians, characterizing the Libyan leader as insane
or "delusional," serve to give credence to his claim that the revolution is being organized and
driven by foreign interests.




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785249 Date: 01/07/2016
