UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788334 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL

                                        CONFIDENTIAL




                                        January 14, 2012




 For: tdR.0
 From: Ski
 Re: Muslim Brotherhood on the move


 SOURCE: Sources with acc.:ess to the highest levels of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, The
 Supreme Council of the Armed .Forces. and Western Intelligence and security services.

          1. During rnid-lanuary, 2012 Supreme Guide I'vloharned Bache ann his advisors,
 including 'Mohamed Mursi. leader of the Muslim .Brotherhood's (lYTB) Freedorn             Justice
 Party (FP), =began a series of secret planning sessions aimed a developing a. strategy for
 consolidating its success in the recently concluded three 'phased elections for the tower house of
 •the new Egyptian parliament. Accorclin g to individuals +Arith access to the highest levels of the
  MB. Bathe and the other senior members of the Brotherhood behave that once the reconciliation
  voting is concluded, they and their allied parties in the Democratic Alliance will control thirty
  eight percent c.:f the scats in that lower house of parliament, with the al Nour party and its
  supporters in the Salafist Islamic Bloc holding twenty seven percent of the one 'hundred and fifty
 seats.

          2. In the opinion of these individuals, despite the personal differeileQS beiween Mursi and
  the leaders of al Nom., Bathe is convinced that the MB can form an Islamic alliance which will
  control between sixty five and seventy percent Of the seats in the lower house of the new
  Parliament. They also believe that these voting rii3ures will be similar after the upper house
  elections, which begin in late January, 2012. With this level of control the MB will be able to
  draft the new constitution and: if they can manipulate the Salafist and military supporters, may
  even be able to form an interim civilian government before the constirtiti011 is approl,ed in May
  or June 2012.

         3. In addition to discussions with al Nour and other. smaller Islamist parties. the MB is
  maintaining its sensitive, secret dialol..zue with. the ralin?., Supreme Council of the Armed Forces
  (SCAF). Their challenge here is to reassure interim national leader Field Marshal Mohammed
  Hussein Tanta.v.ii and the other leaders of the SCAF that their position. in Egyptian society will



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788334 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788334 Date: 01/07/2016




   remain intact after the introduction of civilian, Islamist rule. According to this source, Badie was
   angry over press leaks of recent MB-SCAF discussions regarding guarantees against the future
   prosecution of SCAF officials for actions during the 2011 uprising, once they are no longer in
   control of the government. These leaks complicated discussions with the SCAF officers, and
   raised emotions among the Egyptian population, at a time when the MB is poised to gain its long
   sought victory, and political control of Egypt. Badie stated in private discussions that the only
   thing that can delay this success is a preemptive move by the military; fearing that its
   commanders will face the same fate as former President Hosni Mubarak.

           4. (Source Comment: In the opinion of an extremely well placed individual, Badie
   appears to have made a degree of progress in reassuring the SCAF, but these concerns about the
   transition from military to civilian rule will continue to complicate matters over the coming year.
   According to this sensitive source, Mursi believes that the MB and, by extension, the FJP must
   learn to avoid provoking the military at the grassroots level, however; the party may not have
   enough experience in government to manage this complex process. Mursi stated in a private
   conversation that while many MB/FJP candidates ran for parliament as independents in 2005 and
   2010 parliamentary elections, the organization as a whole still has limited political experience.
   In his opinion, in order to appease the SCAF, the FJP must see to it that the military retains
   control over its own economic and security interests. However, if, at some point in the future, the
   FJP considers the SCAF to be a threat to its own priorities, the party must retain the ability to
   activate large-scale protests using the MB's nationwide infrastructure.

            5. In addition, these sensitive sources state that Mursi continues to remind Badie and the
   MB leadership that the SCAF is interested in separating parliament from the office of the
   president, because it will then be able to deal with each branch of government in a different way,
   while trying to manipulate the political environment. In the opinion of this individual, it is not
   yet known how the SCAF will approach the 2012 presidential elections, which are scheduled to
   take place by July 1. In this regard, the FJP continues to stress that the party will not field a
   presidential candidate of its own. In the opinion of this source, given the military's past
   successes in exploiting extreme Islamist elements in the political structure, while marginalizing
   the Muslim Brotherhood, the leaders of the SCAF may harbor the belief that they can control the
   future parliament. This individual also pointed out that the MB had received reporting that there
   were recent discussions between the SCAF and Salafist representatives. This individual believes
   that if these discussions continue, while al-Nour wins a significant portion of the seats in
   parliament, the SCAF will have an opportunity to weaken the FJP, if their efforts at cooperation
   begin to fail.

           6. (Source Comment: Individuals with access to the MB leadership add that Mursi, and
   the political leaders of the FJP believe that when reaching a compromise with the SCAF and the
   Salafist parties, Badie and his senior advisors must create the impression among foreign
   governments and businesses that, while Egypt will be a devout Islamist state, the new Egytpian
   Government and the MB in particular are sophisticated enough to manage a parallel system that




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788334 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788334 Date: 01/07/2016




 will allow these foreign interests to invest and participate in the new Egypt. For his part,
 speaking in confidence; Muni is not convinced that the Army and the Salafist wilt support this
 course.)




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788334 Date: 01/07/2016
