      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792027 Date: 01/07/2016


                                                                                            RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                             Sunday, February 27, 201110:10 AM
To:                               'JilotyLC@state.gov'
Subject:                          Fw: H: Very latest from inside Libya intel agency. Sid
Attachments:                      hrc memo latest libya 022111.docx



Pls print.


From: sbwhoeop
Sent: Monday, February 21, 2011 04:16 PM
To: H
Subject: H: Very latest from inside Libya intel agency. Sid




                                         CONFIDENTIAL



                                                 February 21, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Latest Libya intel


This is the latest as of this afternoon, based on sources inside the Libyan intelligence agency:

Overview:    During the early afternoon of 21 February a senior official of the Libyan External Security
Organization (ESO) stated privately that the security situation throughout the country is rapidly moving out of
control, and that Libyan leader Muammar Qaddafi is becoming increasingly desperate in his efforts to put down
the anti-government demonstrations. These individuals noted that late on 20 February Qaddafi ordered the
commander of the Air Force to bomb the barracks of any troops or police who go over to the anti-government
forces. (Source Comment: The commander of the Air Force is a Qaddafi loyalist but he has apparently not yet
implemented this controversial order. Two pilots have flown their aircraft to Malta rather than carrying out this
order.) At the same time, Qaddafi has order the Peoples Militia, the Presidential Guard and the para-military
"revolutionary committees" to use whatever means are necessary to gain control of the situation.

 ESO officials warn that while Qaddafi seems intent on fighting this battle, he is not suicidal and if he judges
there is no hope he will leave the country. They expect he may begin sending family members out of the
country later today. (Malta and Italy are the two most likely destinations. Qaddafi is quite concerned about the
security of his family, telling one senior official that he never recovered from the death of one of his children
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792027 Date: 01/07/2016
           UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792027 Date: 01/07/2016




luring the U.S. bombing of Tripoli in April 1986, in retaliation for an ESO attack on US military personnel at a
[ightclub in Berlin.)

    the same time, the two main factions in the regime have polarized, reflecting a serious dispute over policy
, etween Qaddafi's two oldest sons. The moderates, led by Saif al-Islam Qaddafi favor aggressive police anti-
 jot tactics but are opposed the use of deadly force. Saif is also calling for negotiations with tribal leaders in the
 ast, including members of the former royal family. The more violent faction is headed by Montasem Qaddafi,
 he National Security Advisor, and believes that the police and military must use deadly force to end the
ioting. This faction points out that during the recent revolution in Egypt the military and police did not use
 heir full force against the demonstrators and in the end they were defeated.

4ontasem, and his father, according to knowledgeable individuals, appear to view this crisis as an escalation of
he longstanding rivalry between the government in Tripoli and tribal groups in the east, centered around
3enghazi. At the beginning of the demonstrations, on 18 February, Saif al-Islam made contact with tribal
.aders in the Benghazi region in an effort to find a solution for the situation. According to knowledgeable
adividuals, his representatives came away from these meetings with the view that only the departure of Qaddafi
nd the establishment of a new regime would satisfy the demonstrators.

 addafi and his senior advisors are particularly concerned by the growing number officials and diplomats
Jrning against the government, including, most importantly the Minister of Justice, Mustafa Mohamed Abud
  Jeleil, and the Ambassador to the Arab League in Cairo, Abdel-Moneim al Houni. At the same time the
)eputy Chief of Mission of the Libyan Mission to the UN, Ibrahim Dabachi, made a statement accusing
 addafi of Genocide.

Source Comment: At present Montasem Qaddafi and his hard line supporters in the Presidential Guard and
 SO have the upper-hand in the government, and are pressing for increased violence, including the use of
nipers against demonstrators. There have been some defections from the Peoples Militia in the Benghazi
egion, which led to the loss of control in the city, but the majority of the Militia and all of the Presidential
,uard are extremely loyal to Qaddafi. As stated, several senior officials, including senior officers of the ESO
 elieve that the fighting will go on for the foreseeable future, but they believe that in the end Qaddafi will be
orced to leave. Senior ESO figures point to the persistence of the false rumor that Qaddafi has left the country
3 seek asylum with his friend Hugo Chavez in Venezuela, as a sign that support for the regime is beginning to
lip.)

Jnrest Intensifies in Tripoli: Violence continues to escalate in Tripoli, with troops firing on demonstrators in
hany parts of the city. Anti-government protesters have set aflame a number of public structures, including the
tate television headquarters and People's Hall, the seat of parliament. Protesters attacked foreign businesses,
hcluding a South Korean construction site, injuring at least 18 foreigners. Fighting between protesters, security
orces and "revolutionary committees" supporting leader Muammar Gaddafi, particularly in the vicinity of
ireen Square; reports indicate that security forces have been issued "shoot to kill" orders and firing on unarmed
rotesters. Anti-government protesters continue to riot in cities across Libya, demanding that Qaddafi step
 own. Opposition forces, supported by members of the Peoples Militia have gained control in the eastern city of
lenghazi; a massacre by government forces in the city on February 19 emboldened demonstrators, who have
,ained control of a number of tanks. Reports indicate that some police and military units have defected in the
ity, while most others are remaining off the streets. Protesters have also reportedly gained control of the
astern city of Bayda, while fighting has taken place in Ajdabiya, Al Marj, Derna, Tobruk, and Zawiya.




           UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792027 Date: 01/07/2016
