    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780774 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL




From:                          Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov >
Sent:                          Sunday, June 12, 2011 11:33 PM
To:
Subject:                       Fw: U.S. Said to Turn Back North Korea Missile Shipment (NY Times)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Sunday, June 12, 2011 09:16 PM
To: NEWS-Korea; NEWS-WHA; NEWS-EAP; NEWS-Mahogany; NEWS-ISN; NEWS-PM; NEWS-L; NEWS-VCI
Cc: SES-0; SES-O_OS
Subject: U.S. Said to Turn Back North Korea Missile Shipment (NY Times)


SEOUL (NY Times) - The United States Navy intercepted a North Korean ship it suspected of carrying missile
technology to Myarmar two weeks ago and, after a standoff at sea and several days of diplomatic pressure from
Washington and Asia nations, forced the vessel to return home, according to several senior American officials.

Washington made no announcement about the operation, which paralleled a similar, far more public
confrontation with North Korea two years ago. But in response to questions about what appears to be a growing
trade in missiles and missile parts between North Korea and Myanmar — two of the world's most isolated
governments -- American officials have described the episode as an example of how they can use a
combination of naval power and diplomatic pressure to enforce United Nations sanctions imposed after the
North's last nuclear test, in 2009.

It was a rare victory: a similar shipment of suspected missile parts made it to Myanmar last year before
American officials could act. Despite the Obama administration's efforts to squeeze North Korea with both
economic and trade sanctions, there are continuing reports of sophisticated missile technology exchanges, some
of it by air, between North Korea and Iran, among other nations.

North Korea, aware that shipments leaving the country are under increased scrutiny, has found a profitable
trading partner in the authoritarian government in Myanmar.

The extent of that trade is unclear to American intelligence agencies. Two years ago, Secretary of State Hillary
Rodham Clinton publicly expressed suspicions that Myanmar was attempting to purchase nuclear weapons
technology, but it recently said it was too poor to use such technology. And the evidence has been scant at best.
(In 2009, India inspected a North Korean ship that was believed to be carrying equipment for a nuclear reactor
to Myanmar, but quickly discovered that its contents were legal.)

The most recent episode began after American officials tracked a North Korean cargo ship, the MN Light, that
was believed to have been involved in previous illegal shipments. Suspecting that it was carrying missile
components, they dispatched a Navy vessel, the destroyer McCampbell, to track it.

"This case had an interesting wrinkle: the ship was North Korean, but it was flagged in Belize," one American
official said, meaning it was registered in that Central American nation, perhaps to throw off investigators.

But Belize is a member of the Proliferation Security Initiative, an effort begun by President George W. Bush's
administration to sign up countries around the world to interdict suspected unconventional weapons. It is an

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780774 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780774 Date: 01/07/2016




effort that, like the military and C.I.A. drone programs, Mr. Obama has adopted, and one of the rare areas where
he has praised his predecessor.

According to American officials, the authorities in Belize gave permission to the United States to inspect the
ship.

On May 26, somewhere south of Shanghai, the McCampbell caught up with the cargo ship and hailed it, asking
to board the vessel under the authority given by Belize. Four times, the North Koreans refused.

As in the 2009 case, which involved the North Korean vessel the Kong Nam 1, the White House was unwilling
to forcibly board the ship in international waters, fearing a possible firelight and, in the words of one official, a
spark "that could ignite the Korean peninsula." Moreover, the Americans did not have definitive proof of what
was in the containers — and a mistake would have been embarrassing.

"There is always a chance that the North is setting us up for a raid that they know will find nothing," one
official said. "So we want to make sure we don't fall into a trap."

By happenstance, a group of senior officials from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations — including a
representative from Myanmar — was in Washington while the slow-speed chase was occurring 8,000 miles
away. On May 27, when the group visited the Old Executive Office Building opposite the White House, Gary
Samore, the president's top nuclear adviser, addressed the officials, urging Vietnam, Thailand, Indonesia and
Malaysia to fully join the nonproliferation effort.

He then surprised the Asian officials by telling them he had a "sensitive subject" to raise, and described the
American suspicions, providing the group with a picture of the ship on its way to Myanmar. He reminded them
that under United Nations Security Council Resolution 1874, which was passed in response to the North Korean
nuclear test in 2009, its vessels are to be inspected if "reasonable grounds" exist to suspect that weapons are
being exported.

"The Burmese official in the room protested that we were making accusations," said one American official
familiar with the exchange. Myanmar, formerly known as Burma, has denied stockpiling missiles or buying
parts from North Korea. It repeated those denials during recent visits to the country by a midlevel State
Department official and by Senator John McCain.

American officials dismiss those denials, pointing to years of evidence of missile-related purchases during both
the Bush and Obama administrations. But they concede they are mystified about Myanmar's motives. The
missiles that they believed were aboard the MN Light have a range of about 350 miles, meaning they could hit
parts of India, China, Thailand or Laos — all unlikely targets.

The message apparently got across. A few days later, long before approaching Myanmar, the cargo ship stopped
dead in the water. Then it turned back to its home port, tracked by American surveillance planes and satellites,
and suffering engine trouble along the way.

NewsTickers alert senior Departmeht officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780774 Date: 01/07/2016
