UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763763 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                    RELEASE IN PART B5




 UNCLASSIFIED

 FOR THE SECRETARY
 FROM:    Anne-Marie Slaughter
 SUBJECT: Moving Forward on Honduras
        I got lots of signals last week that we are losing ground in Latin America
 every day the Honduras crisis continues; high level people from both the business
 and the NGO community say that even our friends are beginning to think we are
 not really committed to the norm of constitutional democracy we have worked so
 hard to build over the last 20 year. The current stalemate favors the status quo; the
 de facto regime has every incentive to run out the clock as long as they think we
 will have to accept any post-election government You played an important
 leadership role at the outset of the crisis; I urge you to think about taking bold
 action now to breathe new life into the process and signal that regardless what
 happens on the Hill, you and the president are serious. WHA and I are working on
 a memo proposing some options, but experience has taught me that this could take
 several days. So I wanted to give you a heads up this weekend.

        We need to strengthen both the carrots and the sticks in this process. Re the
 de factos, we should find that coup was a "military coup" under U.S. law and
 revoke the visas of more de facto regime members. We should also go after the
 visas of a few prominent de facto supporters in Honduras's business community,
 signaling that we'll widen this net if negotiations fail. We should also make noises
 about prohibiting U.S. companies from doing business with companies controlled
 the de factos, though we have to be careful about the impact on Honduran
 institutions.

        We also need to work on carrots to encourage both sides to accept the
 Accords. I had lunch Wednesday with Mexican Ambassador. Arturo Sarukhan,
 who also thought we were losing ground and proposed a "Gruppo de Amigos"
 approach involving the U.S., Mexico, Costa Rica, Chile, Spain, and possibly Brazil
 that would make clear that if Zelaya returns we are prepared to flood the zone with
 international observers to guarantee an honest election process.



                                                                              n
                                     If you're interested in considering thed---
 other ideas in more detail, you would probably speed up the process by asking for
 options.


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763763 Date: 01/07/2016
