UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791807 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL


                                     POLICY GUIDANCE
           GOVERNMENT-TO-GOVERNMENT MECHANISMS AND SUPPORT
                             August 22, 2012

 Consistent with the President's Policy Directive on Development (PPD), the Quadrennial
 Diplomacy and Development Review (QDDR) and best practices, PEPFAR, CDC, and USAID
 share the goal of host governments growing and sustaining their capacity to receive, manage and
 program both national and donor funds (government-to-government funding) in support of
 planning and executing their own country health programs. To achieve this goal, these and other
 agencies in the global health space must therefore operate pursuant to the dual mandate of: 1)
 saving more lives, while 2) building sustainable capacity and host country ownership and
 responsibility. Otherwise, the U.S. risks not making progress on the long path to sustainable
 health systems.

  Accordingly, this directive provides policy and technical guidance to adapt existing practices and
  prevent duplication in the processes of PEPFAR, CDC and USAID as they execute, expand or
  transition government-to-government funding capacity. To succeed, each agency implementing
  this guidance must demonstrate strong and ecumenical leadership both in Washington and in the
  field — leading in a transparent and collaborative interagency manner that puts the needs of host
  government ministries first in government-to-government engagements.

  Effective immediately, in the execution of government-to-government health funding
  mechanisms:

     1. PEPFAR will establish an annual process (as a discrete part of an existing planning
         process such as Country Operating Plan (COP) planning, Global Health Initiative (GHI)
         planning, annual budget planning/execution) whereby PEPFAR solicits information and
         grants approval of PEPFAR program activities covered by government-to-government
         mechanisms. This process requires:

             •   CDC/HHS to undertake and present annually a multi-year plan that encompasses:
                 (1) a baseline of all existing PEPFAR government-to-government funding
                 mechanisms that CDC currently implements and the level of U.S. resources
                 flowing through these mechanisms for each country, and (2) an assessment of the
                 subset of countries where CDC will or anticipates transitioning aspects or all of its
                 management support provided for in its government-to-government mechanisms
                 to host country established, supervised and wholly operated internal planning and
                 procurement implementation offices. Each assessment shall include: current
                 country capacity, type of operational support necessary to increase country
                 program management capacity without risk of diminution in PEPFAR services or
                 accountability for USG funds, and intended timeline for seeking/achieving

                                                                                                    1
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791807 Date: 01/07/2016
                •
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791807 Date: 01/07/2016




                measurable shifts from current direct funding mechanisms to regular internal
                planning and implementation units in each respective ministry of health. It is
                anticipated that CDC will continue to provide with provision of technical support
                under government-to-government agreements to ensure quality health program
                outcomes.

            •   USAID to undertake and present annually a multi-year plan that provides: (1) a
                baseline; and, (2) the subset of countries and steps for how USAID will program
                government-to-government activities under procurement reform goals, providing
                specific documentation and data of host country government capacity for
                countries where risk assessments indicate the possibility of new or increased
                government-to-government activities; USAID actions planned or underway to
                build host country governmental capacity, timelines; and risk mitigation
                interventions or requirements to ensure no diminution of PEPFAR services or
                accountability for USG funds.

     2. No later than September 15, 2012, PEPFAR shall require a common, standardized
         approach that abides by all USG audit and compliance standards and IG requirements for
         certain key elements in all government-to-government mechanisms implementing
         PEPFAR programs. This internal USG discipline-forcing measure will reduce the
         complexity of U.S government-to-government mechanisms so that host country
         governments are not burdened by multiple and differing requirements for PEPFAR
         funding and programming procedures. This approach is intended to apply to all new
         mechanisms as well as the periodic renewal or amendment of existing CDC mechanisms
         (e.g., cooperative agreements, grant awards, direct cost agreements, fixed reimbursable
         agreements, etc). At least the following elements will have a common standard in all
         PEPFAR government-to-government mechanism agreements:

                  Bank account/banking mechanism;
                  Single standard for USG required banking/accounting procedures;
                • Single standard for U.S. legislated audit and compliance procedures; and,
                  Single standard for program impact, metrics & financial reporting.

     3. As USAID works to assess and build regular internal Ministry capacity to enable a larger
         share of U.S. programs to be managed directly by collaborating governments and to use
         regular, internal host government structures, should USAID determine their program
         interventions for PEPFAR-approved funding require the use of direct-funding planning
         and implementation units, USAID will use available existing CDC government-to-
         government mechanisms; if CDC has no such mechanism in place in the relevant
         country, USAID may establish a PEPFAR-approved alternative process or mechanism.



                                                                                                  2

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791807 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791807 Date: 01/07/2016




            • Where USAID uses an existing CDC mechanism, the existing CDC-ministry of
              health agreement will be refashioned to provide for USAID' s lead role in all
              aspects of oversight, technical assistance for the funded activity and, if necessary,
              growth of the capacity of the CDC in-country mechanism to accommodate the
              incremental flow of funds and programming activity.

            • Where USAID uses an existing CDC mechanism, CDC is a collaborator with, but
              not interlocutor on behalf of, USAID; this means that USAID will engage directly
              on its own behalf with ministries of health, with CDC and USAID accountable to
              each other for transparency regarding their respective programming and activities
              to leverage the greatest U.S. results.

     4. Finally, in countries where either CDC or USAID seeks to engage for the first time in
         government-to-government funding with non-PEPFAR health funds, the seeking agency
         will adopt the same common set of protocols and processes that abides by all USG audit,
         reporting, compliance and Inspector General standards and requirements for the central
         elements in any such government-to-government mechanisms as used for PEPFAR
         funding and health programs. This common approach requirement will ensure host
         country governments are not burdened by multiple and differing requirements for U.S.
         health funding and programming.




                                                                                                      3
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791807 Date: 01/07/2016
