UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794868 Date: 01/07/2016


                                                                                            RELEASE IN FULL




                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                               June 24, 2012



 For: Hillary
 From: Sid
 Re: The deal between MB & SCAF


 SOURCE: Sources with access to the highest levels of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, The
 Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, and Western Intelligence and security services.

         1. On the evening of June 23, 2012, senior officials attached to the Guidance committee
 of the Muslim Brotherhood (MB) were called to an emergency, secret meeting with officers of
 the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF). During this session the MB was informed
 that on the following day Egypt's Electoral Commission would announce the victory of
 Mohammed Morsi, the MB/Freedom and Justice Party (MB/FJP) candidate for President of
 Egypt. The SCAF officers stated that their commander, Field Marshall Mohammed Hussein
 Tantawi, was concerned that the MB followers, as well as many of the secular/liberal groups
 were becoming increasingly volatile during the extended vote counting period. The MB
 representatives, after a call to Supreme Guide Mohammed Badie, assured the SCAF that there
 would be no violence before the election results were announced. The SCAF officers reiterated
 their previous position that Tantawi and the SCAF do not want to rule the country, but they will
 not tolerate any move that limits either their budget, or their position of respect in society. The
 MB officials, who were extremely happy with the news they had just received, assured their
 SCAF interlocutors that Badie, Morsi, and the rest of the MB leadership were committed to this
 position.



        2. According to a very sensitive source, the MB officials added that Morsi would chose
 government officials from a wide spectrum of parties and movements, ranging from the Salafist
 al Nour party to secular/liberal groups like the April 6 Movement. The SCAF officers had no
 problem with this, but added that the current military decrees would remain in place, at least until
 the constitution is drafted and a new parliament is elected. In the opinion of this individual, the
 MB representatives were under instructions from Badie to avoid getting into an argument on this



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794868 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794868 Date: 01/07/2016




 point, at this particular time. Having won the presidency, Badie and his advisors believe that
 public opinion, and political momentum will allow the MB to dominate the entire government.
 In this regard he also believes it is important that the MB not overreach, as Morsi, and the FJP
 speaker of Parliament, Saad Al-Katany had done in the weeks leading up to the second round of
 voting.



         3. (Source Comment: In the opinion of this individual, Badie believes that the aggressive
 tactics of the MB/FJP supporters, in the period immediately before the second round of voting,
 led to Tantavvi moving to dissolve parliament, and redefine the duties of the president. The
 Supreme Guide wants Morsi to realize that if they maintain their studied pace, they will get
 everything they want. The MB polling noted that despite the fact that Morsi's opponent Ahmed
 Shafik is a former commanding general of the Air Force, approximately seventy (70) per cent of
 the regular army troops supported the MB candidate. At the same time, as many as forty (40) per
 cent of the members of the April 6 movement also voted for Morsi. The MB leadership also
 intends to include Coptic Christians and some women in the new government, in an effort to the
 new Egypt as an inclusive, moderate Islamic State. Their challenge is to find individuals who
 they feel they can trust, and who are willing to serve under Morsi. According to this individual,
 the Coptic community in particular is frustrated over what it sees as voter fraud and intimidation
 of its members by the FJP in Christian areas.)



         4. At the end of this meeting, according to this source, the MB and SCAF representatives
 agreed to stay in contact and to do what is necessary to prevent any violence, while recognizing
 the important role the military will continue to play in Egyptian society. Both sides recognize
 that there will be incidents resulting from the political passions at play in the country, and agree
 that they must prevent these incidents from getting out of hand. The SCAF officers also agreed
 that they would not overreact to statements from MB supporters regarding a reduced role for the
 military in government. The SCAF officers added that Tantawi was not unhappy with the result
 of the election, as he and Shafik have a poor personal relationship, and a history of competition
 for power within the military under the regime of the former President Hosni Mubarak.



         5. (Source Comment: According to this individual, both sides agreed that their first
 order of business together in the new Egyptian political situation will be developing a coherent
 policy toward Israel. The SCAF officers pointed out that Israel is extremely concerned about the
 changes in Egypt. The MB officials added that they would like to maintain and enhance the
 policy the SCAF and MB developed during the 2011 uprising: maintaining the Peace Treaty with
 Israel, while limiting joint activity and cooperation on sensitive security matters. Both sides also
 agreed that, after the election, it will be important to create a positive working environment for



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794868 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794868 Date: 01/07/2016




 foreign firms, particularly those from the United States and Western Europe. The MB officials
 stated that Badie and Morsi are firmly committed to a dual Islamic/Western banking system and
 good relations with Western firms. He regularly states that the West has dealt with Saudi Arabia
 for many years and the system he anticipates for Egypt will be far less restrictive than the one put
 in place by the Saudi rulers. Badie also believes the fact that Morsi was educated in the United
 States and has many good contacts in that country.)



         6. The representatives of the ME and the SCAF will meet again during the week of June
 25, and will continue regular contact as they prepare for the drafting of the new Constitution and
 parliamentary elections. Both sides agreed that they must also keep a careful eye on the situation
 in Syria, which could spread to Lebanon and other countries, potentially creating a situation
 affecting Egypt's security.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794868 Date: 01/07/2016
