      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784513 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                             B5,B6


From:                            Sullivan, Jacob J <SuIlivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                            Wednesday, November 23, 2011 9:39 PM
To:
Subject:                         Re: H: INTEL. Secret offer to el Baradei/Muslim Brotherhood-Army alliance



Will do


From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Wednesday, November 23, 2011 09:22 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3
Subject: Fw: H: INTEL. Secret offer to el Baradei/Muslim Brotherhood-Army alliance




From: sbwhoeor              [ma ilto: sbwhoeop
Sent: Wednesday, November 23, 2011 06:56 PM
To: H
Subject: H: INTEL. Secret offer to el Baradei/Muslim Brotherhood-Army alliance




                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                               November 23, 2011



For: HRC
From: Sid
Re: Secret offer to el Baradei/Muslim Brotherhood-Army alliance

SOURCE: Sources with access to the highest levels of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, as well as
Western Intelligence and security services.

       1. During a series of meetings over November 21 and November 22, 2011, senior officers of
the Egypt's ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) met discreetly with Mohammed el
Baradei , the former director of the United Nations International Atomic Energy Agency (IEA) and
candidate for the Presidency of Egypt. These discussions centered on the possibility of el Baradei
stepping in as interim Prime Minister in an effort to address the frustration of pro-democracy
demonstrators currently clashing with Egyptian Army and Security forces in Cairo's Tahrir Square.
The SCAF officers believe that el Baradei's record of political independence from the SCAF will allow
him to address the concerns of the demonstrators regarding extended military rule. In these
discussions el Baradei demanded assurances that he would not be a puppet of the SCAF, with the

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784513 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784513 Date: 01/07/2016




freedom to name his own cabinet. The SCAF officers indicated that they would have to consider this,
but noted that under any circumstances, the SCAF would remain the ultimate authority in Egypt,
pending the conclusion in 2012 of a series of national elections beginning on November 28, 2011.

        2. (Source Comment: The leaders of the SCAF believe that el Baradei can not only calm the
situation Tahrir Square, but due to his long experience at the UN he will reassure foreign businesses
regarding political and security stability in Egypt. These officers also believe they can control el
Baradei if he accepts the position. One sensitive source noted that el Baradei must certainly know
that his position would be managed by the SCAF, but hope his ambition may lead him to accept the
offer. Despite the resignation of the incumbent Prime Minister, Essam Sharaf, and his cabinet, el
Baradei has not yet responded to the proposal, and one SCAF officer speculated that the caution
diplomat was waiting to see what happens in Tahrir Square over the next week.)

        3. During the week of November 21, 2011extremely sensitive sources with access to the
leadership of the Muslim Brotherhood (MB) in Egypt stated in strict confidence that MB Supreme
Guide Mohamed Badie and his advisors maintain a secret and increasingly clandestine relationship
with senior advisors to Field Marshall Mohammed Hussein Tantawi and the SCAF, in an effort to
establish a relationship that will allow them to cooperate and govern Egypt successfully following the
parliamentary and presidential elections scheduled for the fall of 2011. Despite increasing tensions
and political violence as the November 28, 2011 parliamentary elections approach, the highest levels
of the MB and SCAF agree on the idea that they represent the only two truly established political
organizations in the country, and they must work together to gain full advantage from the newly
developing political structure in Egypt. The SCAF continues to provide a degree of funding and
information to the MB, giving it an advantage over competing secular and religious based political
movements. For its part the MB provides intelligence to the SCAF regarding developments in the
smaller and more radical political parties. At the same time, the MB, in coordination with the Egyptian
General Intelligence Directorate (GID) and Military Police forces, is working to reduce the level of
violence in demonstrations protesting extended military rule.
        4. This knowledgeable individual, a source with access to the highest levels of the Egyptian
GID, states in confidence that the MB and SCAF are becoming increasingly frustrated with each
other, the MB over what they see as heavy handed missteps by the SCAF that serve only to increase
popular support for more radical political and religious groups. For its part, the SCAF leadership is
concerned that the MB has been unable to dampen the level of violence attached to recent
demonstrations in Tahrir Square. Prior to November 18, 2011, according to these individuals, MB
operatives were able to reduce the level of violence in the pro-democracy demonstrations, even on
those occasions where the Brothers joined ongoing demonstrations that had begun to turn violent. In
the opinion of these sources, the groups currently demonstrating in Tahrir Square are so diverse and
so frustrated that the MB has been unable to gain any kind of control. In all of these cases the MB
maintains public support for early transfer of power to a civilian government. In the opinion of these
 sources the MB's immediate concern is to reduce to the level of violence, fearing that if matters get
 out of hand Tantawi may feel compelled to cancel or delay the parliamentary elections.
        5. (Source Comment: Speaking in confidence, an individual with access to the leadership of
 the SCAF stated that Tantawi and his advisors realize that any delay in the November 28 election
 date will result in increased levels of violence throughout the country. At the same time, reporting
 from police and Military Intelligence sources indicates that the demonstrations will continue, even in
 the face of deadly force. For his part Tantawi has informed the MB leadership that the Army and
 security forces will use increasingly aggressive measures to counter the demonstrators, and he asks
 that they step up their efforts to reduce the level of violence among the pro-democracy
 demonstrators.)
        6. According to knowledgeable individuals, Badie and the other leaders of the MB are also
 extremely concerned over the growing violence in Cairo. They note that during recent attacks against
 the Coptic Christian community in Egypt, the MB and the SCAF worked discreetly to ensure that the
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784513 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784513 Date: 01/07/2016




military and security forces did not intervene forcefully to protect the Copts as they were besieged by
Islamist groups. At that time the MB warned that any serious intervention would set off violent
demonstrations among the many small and often radical political groups that formed during the
uprising against former President Hosni Mubarak. In this discussion Subhi Saleh, a lawyer and
former Member of Parliament, who served as the MB delegate to the March 2011 constitutional
commission, pointed out that discussions between the MB and the SCAF regarding the Copts had
been relatively simple, because both sides were not concerned about the fate of the Coptic Christian
community. In the case of the Tahrir Square demonstrations, the MB and SCAF cannot ignore the
scope of the movement. According a knowledgeable source, Subhi advised Badie to remember that
Tantawi is first and foremost a military man who will be tempted to react with a steady escalation of
force if the demonstrators do not begin to disperse. This source believes that Badie agrees with this
analysis but added that the MB's ability to influence the young demonstrators is increasingly limited.
        7. (Source Comment: One particularly sensitive individual added that Subhi, speaking on
behalf of Badie, warned SCAF officers that the MB believes an increasing number of Egyptian Army
conscripts are sympathetic to the Tahrir Square demonstrators. At the same time, Subhi stated in
confidence that MB sympathizers associated with the SCAF have advised that the GID is continuing
well established, discreet liaison discussions with the Israeli Mossad, providing Tantawi with a vehicle
to address potential areas of conflict with Israel. The Brothers fear that through this relationship Israel
can influence and manipulate the SCAF, particularly regarding support for Hamas and other
Palestinian groups, as well as border security.)
        8. In the opinion of these knowledgeable sources, the MB and the SCAF will continue to work
together secretly in an effort to establish a stable government in Egypt. At that point they can be
expected to begin competing aggressively with each other for final control of the country. Both bodies
are particularly interested in creating a secure environment throughout the country, looking to
reassure foreign investors and tourists. These individuals believe, however, that Egypt will see
repeated episodes of often intense violence as the members of the pro-democracy movement
become increasingly frustrated by the domination of the political process by the established leaders of
the military and the MB.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784513 Date: 01/07/2016
