UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778772 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL


                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                               February 21, 2011



 For: Hillary
 From: Sid
 Re: Latest Libya intel


 This is the latest as of this afternoon, based on sources inside the Libyan intelligence agency:

 Overview: During the early afternoon of 21 February a senior official of the Libyan External
 Security Organization (ESO) stated privately that the security situation throughout the country is
 rapidly moving out of control, and that Libyan leader Muammar Qaddafi is becoming
 increasingly desperate in his efforts to put down the anti-government demonstrations. These
 individuals noted that late on 20 February Qaddafi ordered the commander of the Air Force to
 bomb the barracks of any troops or police who go over to the anti-government forces. (Source
 Comment: The commander of the Air Force is a Qaddafi loyalist but he has apparently not yet
 implemented this controversial order. Two pilots have flown their aircraft to Malta rather than
 carrying out this order.) At the same time, Qaddafi has order the Peoples Militia, the Presidential
 Guard and the para-military "revolutionary committees" to use whatever means are necessary to
 gain control of the situation.

  ESO officials warn that while Qaddafi seems intent on fighting this battle, he is not suicidal and
 if he judges there is no hope he will leave the country. They expect he may begin sending family
 members out of the country later today. (Malta and Italy are the two most likely destinations.
 Qaddafi is quite concerned about the security of his family, telling one senior official that he
 never recovered from the death of one of his children during the U.S. bombing of Tripoli in April
 1986, in retaliation for an ESO attack on US military personnel at a nightclub in Berlin.)

 At the same time, the two main factions in the regime have polarized, reflecting a serious dispute
 over policy between Qaddafi's two oldest sons. The moderates, led by Saif al-Islam Qaddafi
 favor aggressive police anti-riot tactics but are opposed the use of deadly force. Saif is also
 calling for negotiations with tribal leaders in the east, including members of the former royal
 family. The more violent faction is headed by Montasem Qaddafi, the National Security
 Advisor, and believes that the police and military must use deadly force to end the rioting. This
 faction points out that during the recent revolution in Egypt the military and police did not use
 their full force against the demonstrators and in the end they were defeated.

 Montasem, and his father, according to knowledgeable individuals, appear to view this crisis as
 an escalation of the longstanding rivalry between the government in Tripoli and tribal groups in
 the east, centered around Benghazi. At the beginning of the demonstrations, on 18 February,
 Saif al-Islam made contact with tribal leaders in the Benghazi region in an effort to find a
 solution for the situation. According to knowledgeable individuals, his representatives came
 away from these meetings with the view that only the departure of Qaddafi and the establishment
 of a new reaime would satisfy the demonstrators.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778772 Date: 01/07/2016
