      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768864 Date: 01/07/2016


                                                                                                            RELEASE IN
                                                                                                            PART B6



From:                               sbwhoeop                                                                                      B6
Sent:                               Friday, April 30, 2010 10:45 AM
To:
Cc:
Subject:                           just a note of skepticism. Pat Lang, Syria, scuds. Sid


Pat Lang on the Syrian scuds below...

If Lang's skepticism is in any way credible then... Making public statements by acknowledging unsubstantiated intel is not
exactly solid; if disproved or never proved, one is revealed to be hollow. How about analysis first, and citing authority of
CIA, putting it on the spot, before very possibly lending credence to a disinformation operation? Does Israel need
reassurance on its own claims here? Unless this is part of a larger diplomatic movement that involves serious pressure to
come soon on Israel. Otherwise, back to square one, making statements without evidence and disclosing that the Obama
administration is spooked by the Israeli inspired propaganda campaign against it involving everything from ads signed by
Eli Weisel to statements signed by Harry Reid, et al, encouraging more of same. Unless of course you actually have the
intel nailed down. Cheers, Sid


http://turcopoliertypepad.com/sic_semper_tyrannis/2010/04/more-propaganda-from-the-washington-post.html

More propaganda from the Washington Post

    these reports turn out to be true, we are going to have to review the full range of tools that are available to us in order
to make Syria reverse what would be an incendiary, provocative action," Assistant Secretary of State Jeffrey Feltman told
the House Foreign Affairs Committee last week, moments after making a strong pitch for the first U.S. ambassador in
Damascus since 2005. Administration officials have suggested that the Scuds may not have reached Hezbollah in
Lebanon; in that case the strong statements may be preventative. What is known for sure is that Syria has facilitated the
transfer of thousands of rockets and missiles to Hezbollah since 2006 in blatant violation of the U.N. resolution that ended
that summer's war in Lebanon. So why persist with the "engagement" policy? "President Assad is . . . making decisions
that could send the region into war," was Mr. Feltman's answer. "He's listening to Ahmadinejad. He's listening to Hassan
Nasrallah. He needs to listen to us, too.—

"If these reports turn out to be true..."
Well, are they or aren't they? Israel asserts that Syria has transferred some of these old, liquid fueled ballistic missiles to
Hizbullah to drag around in the hills, fiddling with the dangerous fuel and oxidizers. What would be the point? Hizbullah is
already in possession of a large and effective collection of short and long range rocketry.
Israel is an interested party in this matter. Are we to take their word for it? What does US intelligence say of this?
This Hiatt editorial quoted Jeffrey Feltman a lot. Feltman's bias is clear. Why is he still at the State
Department as Assistant Secretary for the Near East? Don't we need a new ambassador in Iceland? pl




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768864 Date: 01/07/2016
