UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL




       IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                                        Claim No. C0/4241/2008
       QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
       ADMINISTRATIVE COURT

                                                BETWEEN

                                               THE QUEEN
                                           on the application of

                                          BINYAM MOHAMED
                                                                                             Claimant
                                                     and

                               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
                           FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH AFFAIRS
                                                                                            Defendant



                     THIRD CERTIFICATE OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE
                       FOR FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH AFFAIRS



       1.   I am Her Majesty's principal Secretary of State for Foreign & Commonwealth Affairs
      and the Defendant in these proceedings. I make this, my third, public interest immunity
      Certificate in these proceedings following two earlier Certificates from me on 26 August and
      5 September 2008. This Certificate addresses (A) the reasons, based on the national security
      and international relations interests of the United Kingdom, for my continued assessment that
      the 7 paragraphs redacted from the Court's 1st open Judgment of 21 August 2008 ("the 7
      paragraphs") should not be publicly disclosed; and (B) my reasons, based on the same
      considerations, for opposing disclosure of classified correspondence from the US
      Administration dated 30 April 2009, filed with the Court on 1 May 2009 ("the US
      correspondence").

      2.    In this Certificate, relevant to the question of disclosure of the 7 paragraphs, I address
      whether there is a real risk of serious harm to the national security and international relations
      of the United Kingdom if public disclosure is ordered by the Court. I also address the
      abhorrence of torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment and punishment, which
      was the subject of extensive review in my second Certificate, and the needs of open justice as
      safeguarding the rule of law, free speech and democratic accountability. Finally, I set out
      where, in my judgement, the balance should lie between the relevant public interests.

      3.    Relevant to the question of the disclosure of the US correspondence, I address whether
      there is a real risk of serious harm to the national security and international relations of the

                                                      1


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016




       United Kingdom were the Court to order further disclosures from this classified text. I also
       address the needs of the Claimant and the third parties involved in these proceedings to have
       access to the same documentary material as that provided to the Court, as well as the wider
       public interest in open justice. Finally, I set out where, in my judgement, the balance lies
       between the relevant public interests.

       4.      In undertaking these assessments, I understand and fully accept that the threshold of
       whether there is a real risk of serious harm to the national security and international relations
       interests of the United Kingdom is high. I also understand and fully accept that, on the
       question of the balance between the relevant public interests, the presumption is in favour of
       open justice. By way of summary of my conclusions, on the public disclosure of the 7
       paragraphs, my assessment of the risk of serious harm to the national security and
       international relations interests of the United Kingdom that would be caused by public
       disclosure, and on where the balance lies between these public interests and the public
       interest of open justice, remains as set out in my earlier Certificates. Indeed, for the reasons
       set out in this Certificate, my view is that the balance of the countervailing public interests in
       issue in these proceedings has shifted further in favour of the non-disclosure of the 7
       paragraphs by action or order of the United Kingdom, including of our courts. On the
       disclosure of the US correspondence, my assessment is that disclosure of the letter into open
       in its full classified form would cause serious harm to the national security and international
       relations interests of the United Kingdom and that these public interests outweigh the public
       interest in the open disclosure of this document.

       5.    In making this Certificate, I note that the United Kingdom worked hard to ensure that
       the information that has been in issue in these proceedings, of which the 7 paragraphs are in
       part a summary, was disclosed to Mr Mohamed's US counsel through US processes. I note
       also that the United Kingdom has disclosed, very largely in open form, its own
       documentation in issue in this case. The United Kingdom has thus, throughout this case,
       made considerable efforts in favour of open justice. It also secured the release of Mr
       Mohamed from Guantanamo Bay and his return to the United Kingdom, free from any
       charge, in the defence of which Mr Mohamed first sought the disclosure of the information in
       issue in these proceedings. In considerable measure, the administration of justice has thus
       been served by the efforts of the United Kingdom. Further issues associated with Mr
       Mohamed's allegations of mistreatment remain to be addressed through other procedures of
       open justice, rule of law and democratic accountability. These include a civil damages claim
       that Mr Mohamed has brought against the UK Government and, separately, the criminal
       investigation that is proceeding following the reference of allegations of criminal wrong-
       doing arising out of this case to the Attorney General, and subsequently, by the Attorney, to
       the police for further investigation.



                                                       2

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016




       6.    Appended to this Certificate is a sensitive Schedule to which I will make further
       reference below. This Schedule addresses the issue of the disclosure both of the 7 paragraphs
       and of the US correspondence.

       7.    In making this Certificate I have been advised as to and have directed myself in
       accordance with the tests which apply to PII claims, as set out in paragraph 34 of the Court's
       4th Judgment. I do not repeat these tests in this Certificate.

       8. By virtue of my office, I am responsible for assessing the publicjnterests in protecting
       the national security and international relations of the United Kingdom. I am also required to
       assess the balance of these public interests against the countervailing public interests in open
       justice and in properly reflecting our abhorrence of torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading
       treatment and punishment. The final judgement as to where the balance lies is a matter for
       the Court.

       9.    For the purposes of this Certificate, I have reviewed the documents I considered for
       purposes of my earlier Certificates. I have also reviewed the additional documents submitted
       to the Court, including letters from the Treasury Solicitor of 9 and 17 April 2009. I have,
       further, reviewed afresh the 7 paragraphs, as well as the underlying US intelligence
       documentation of which the 7 paragraphs are in material part a summary produced by the
       Court. I have also read carefully the Court's 4th Judgment and considered the US
       correspondence to which I will refer further below. I have also had careful regard to the
       advice I have received from my officials and to the detailed and considered assessment of
       those in the intelligence and security agencies in relation to the national security and
       international relations issues that arise.

       (A)      The 7 Paragraphs

       Summary of conclusions

       10. By way of summary, I state at the outset that, while there have been various
       developments since my last Certificate, and, more particularly, since the assumption of Office
       of President Barack Obama in the United States on 20 January 2009, that may be regarded as
       having a bearing on this case, my assessment of the risk to UK national security and
       international relations and where the balance lies between countervailing public interests,
       remains as set out in my earlier Certificates. Indeed, for reasons set out below, my view is
       that the balance of the countervailing public interests in issue in these proceedings has shifted
       further in favour of non-disclosure of the 7 paragraphs by action or order of the United
       Kingdom, including of our courts. This is not to downplay the importance that attaches to the
       abhorrence of torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment and the countervailing


                                                       3

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016




       public interests addressed in the Court's 4th Judgment and described, in paragraph 107 of that
       Judgment, in terms of open justice as safeguarding the rule of law, free speech and
       democratic accountability (addressed below, in shorthand, as "open justice"). These are
       important standards of our democracy and matters to which I give substantial weight. For all
       of their substantial weight, however, they are not the only public interests that must be
       considered.

       11. In making this Certificate, I am aware of the wider interest in this case and the broader
       issues to which it gives rise. The case has generated significant parliamentary, press and
       wider public debate. I have been criticised for the conclusions that I have reached on the
       question of disclosure. It is said that the invocation of national security is designed to hide
       from scrutiny the conduct of our Government and our personnel, as well as ,conduct of the
       United States. It is also said that to assert national security against disclosure in this case is
       simply to do the bidding of the United States. These criticisms are completely without
       foundation. To accept them as a basis of disclosure would be to ignore the realities of the
       issues that need to be weighed in the balance. My assessment, in my earlier Certificates and
       in this one, is driven neither by a wish to shield from the light issues of wrongdoing or
       embarrassment nor by an inclination towards easy answers. It is what is required to
       safeguard the national security and international relations interests of the United Kingdom.
       As I address further below, there are indeed proper and weighty imperatives of open justice
       that require consideration. However, in the balance, it is my judgement that these
       imperatives of open justice are capable of being addressed in this case in other ways which do
       not pose the same risk of serious harm to the national security and international relations of
       the United Kingdom as would the public disclosure of the information in issue before the
       Court.

       12.    I have also had regard to the fact that the Claimant has stated that the position on public
       disclosure taken by the previous US Administration was aimed at avoiding damaging or
       embarrassing disclosures about its conduct. The new Administration in Washington is not
       associated with the events in issue in these proceedings. It has also been prepared to disclose
       sensitive information when it has considered such disclosures to be warranted. Against this
       background, the position taken by the new Administration to the public disclosure of the 7
       paragraphs and other information in issue in our proceedings is all the more noteworthy.

       The Claimant's application to re-open the 4th Judgment

       13. I am advised that the Claimant applied to re-open the 4th Judgment on two grounds
       going to the factual predicates on which the Judgment was based. First, I am advised that the
       Claimant contended that statements made by me and by others following the 4th Judgment on
       the subject of whether the United States had "threatened" the United Kingdom called into

                                                       4

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016




       question one of the factual bases for the Judgment. Second, I am advised that the Claimant
       contended that, following President Obama's election, the position of the US Government on
       questions of disclosure of information of the type in the 7 paragraphs (including the
       consequences for the UK if there was public disclosure by the UK Courts) may have or had
       changed. I am advised that, in response to the Claimant's application, the Court has decided
       to re-open its Judgment. While this Certificate addresses issues raised by the application to
       re-open and related developments, as the Court has not yet stated its reasons for re-opening, I
       am not in a position to address the specific concerns of the Court directly.

       The "threat" issue

       14. In its 4th Judgment the Court chose to characterise the US Government's position as to
       the consequences which would flow from public disclosure of the 7 paragraphs as a "threat."
       It was a matter for the Court to describe the position as it saw fit, in language of its own,
       based on the evidence before it, including evidence in the sensitive Schedule appended to my
       first Certificate. Taking into account that same evidence, I did not at the time of my earlier
       Certificates, and still do not, describe the US communications as a threat. The consequences
       that would flow from the public disclosure of the 7 paragraphs reflect the reality of
       intelligence liaison.

       15. My understanding is that the Court in its 4th Judgment fully appreciated the basis upon
       which intelligence information is shared and the consequences for such future sharing if
       confidentiality is violated. In this regard, I refer in particular to paragraph 74 of the Court's
       4th Judgment where it concluded:

              "It is self evident that liaison with foreign intelligence services, including the
              provision of information or access to detainees held by foreign governments, lies at
              the heart of the protection of the national security of the United Kingdom at the
              present time, particularly in the prevention of terrorist attacks in the United Kingdom.
              If the value of information is to be properly assessed by the United Kingdom
              intelligence services, it is also essential the intelligence services know the
              circumstances and means by which it was obtained. There is powerful evidence that
              intelligence is shared on the basis of reciprocal understanding that the confidence in
              and control over it will always be retained by the State that provides it. It is a
              fundamental part of that trust and confidentiality which lies at the heart of the
              relationship with foreign intelligence agencies. This is particularly the case in relation
              to the United States where shared intelligence has been developed over 60 years.
              Without a clear understanding that such confidence will not be breached, intelligence
              from the United States and other foreign governments so important to national
              security might not be provided. The public of the United Kingdom would be put at

                                                      5

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016




              risk. The consequences of a reconsideration of and a potential reduction in the
              information supplied by the United States under the shared intelligence relationship at
              this time would be grave indeed."

       16. This assessment was based on an appreciation of the fundamental requirement of
       confidentiality that is at the heart of the UK's liaison relationship with the US intelligence
       agencies and with intelligence agencies of other countries, also described in my earlier
       Certificates and in particular in the sensitive Schedule attached to my first Certificate.

       The position of the Obama Administration

      17. My understanding has throughout been that the change in the US Administration on 20
      January 2009 did not alter in any way the fundamental objection of the United States to the
      public disclosure of its intelligence material, or of information derived from that material, by
      the United Kingdom (including by our courts), nor of the consequences for intelligence
      liaison with the UK, were there to be such disclosure. That remains my understanding, as I
      describe in more detail below. The position of the United States on public disclosure is of
      course critically important as, if the US did not object to the disclosure of its information, the
      UK would have no objection, as we have repeatedly made clear. The US position being what
      it is, however, the considerations central to my assessment of these issues are the principles
      of trust and confidence that are at the heart of intelligence liaison, the reliability of the United
      Kingdom as an intelligence liaison partner, and the consequences for the national security and
      international relations of the United Kingdom if that trust and confidence were to fracture and
      that reliability were to be called into question.

      Fresh consideration of PII issues

      18. In the light of the Court's decision to re-open its 4th Judgment and the submissions
      which I understand have been made to the Court, including the suggestion that the Obama
      Administration takes a different view to the Bush Administration on public disclosure of the
      7 paragraphs and as to the consequences which may flow from such disclosure, I have
      undertaken a fresh consideration of the public interest immunity issues.

      19. The Court indicated in paragraph 18 of its 4th Judgment that it considered that the issues
      in the present case required a balance between the competing public interests in national
      security and in open justice, the rule of law and democratic accountability. I will first address
      whether disclosure of the information in question will bring about a real risk of serious harm
      to the national security and/or international relations interests of the United Kingdom; and,
      second, the balance between the public interests in national security and international
      relations against the countervailing public interests.

                                                       6


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016




       The United Kingdom's national security and international relations interests


       20. In my second Certificate, I expressed my judgement on the national security and
       international relations interests of the United Kingdom in the following terms (at paragraph
       48):

              "[I]t is my judgement that there is a likelihood of real damage to the national security
              and international relations interests of the United Kingdom in the event of any Court
              ordered disclosure of the classified information in issue into the public domain by the
              movement of the material from the closed judgment of 21 August 2008 into open form.
              The reasons for this assessment correspond to those set out and referred to in
              paragraphs 29-35 above."

       21. Paragraphs 29-35 of my second Certificate in turn referred to the assessment of the
       issues given in my first Certificate. My judgement, across these two Certificates, was that
       public disclosure of the information now in issue before the Court "would seriously harm the
       existing intelligence-sharing arrangements between the United Kingdom and the United
       States and cause considerable damage to the national security of the United Kingdom. I also
       assessed that disclosure may damage international relations of the United Kingdom more
       generally and liaison relationships with third parties" (first Certificate, at paragraph 10;
       second Certificate, at paragraph 34).

       22. I have carefully reviewed my assessments and conclusions as expressed in these earlier
       Certificates taking into account the further advice that I have received. I consider that the
       judgements expressed therein were then, and remain, correct. It is my continued view that
       real harm to the national security and the international relations interests of the United
       Kingdom would be caused were there to be public disclosure of the 7 paragraphs in issue in
       these proceedings. The critical issue is the principle of trust and the fundamental requirement
       of confidentiality that lies at the heart of intelligence liaison relationships. This aspect is
       addressed in greater detail in the sensitive Schedule attached to this Certificate. I have
       weighed the advice provided to me by my officials and by those of other Government
       departments and agencies concerned with this matter. I emphasise, however, that this
       conclusion reflects my judgement of the issues, informed by a familiarity with and considered
       appreciation for the work and expertise of our intelligence and security agencies.

       23. Although in this case, the correspondence with the US Administration has been given
       prominence, in coming to my conclusion I began by paying regard to the long established
       practice within intelligence communities that information passed on intelligence channels
       cannot be publicly disclosed without the consent of the State providing it. This custom is of

                                                      7

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016




       fundamental importance to the intelligence relationships maintained by the United Kingdom
       in protecting its national security. It is a custom which has always to the best of my
       knowledge, in practice, been respected by UK courts.

       24. I am advised that it has been suggested in evidence before the Court that because the
       US Government is aware that the disclosure decision is to be made by an independent court,
       no harm would in fact result if the Court decided to exercise its power to disclose. I do not
       accept this view. Although, in a case such as this one, the UK courts have the power, in
       principle, to disclose information provided by a foreign liaison service, or derived from such
       information, without the consent of the provider (and even against its expressed will), it
       would be extraordinary to do so. If the Court was to disclose the 7 paragraphs in the current
       circumstances, that would cause a loss of confidence in the United Kingdom's ability to
       comply with this custom (not only by the United States but also by other foreign
       governments), which would cause considerable damage to our national security. It would not
       be a question of the United States merely "taking umbrage", as it has been described to the
       Court, but of the United States and other foreign governments re-evaluating the extent to
       which they believe they can safely provide the UK with information in light of what would be
       a highly significant breach by the UK of the control principle. A failure of the UK legal
       system to respect and protect information disclosed in an intelligence relationship will have
       serious consequences for intelligence liaison.

       25. I have also had regard to the position of the US Administration as set out in open and
       closed materials before the Court. After the release on 16 April 2009 of four previously
       highly classified Department of Justice memoranda concerning interrogation practices, and
       the Court hearing on 22 April 2009, the FC0 Legal Adviser, Daniel Bethlehem QC, sought
       clarification of the Administration's position in respect of the 7 paragraphs and underlying
       US intelligence information in issue in this case. In doing so, I am advised that Mr
       Bethlehem did not seek clarification of the Administration's position in any particular form
       but only an authoritative statement of the position of the Administration in a manner that
       could be conveyed to the Court and the parties as fully as possible in open form. I understand
       that this request for clarification was intended to be responsive to the Claimant's and the
       Court's concerns to know definitively and authoritatively the precise position of the new US
       Administration to the disclosure issues before the Court. The US correspondence dated 30
       April 2009, the content of which was not known by UK officials until its receipt on 1 May
       2009, was the US response to these enquiries. Although in the open version of that
       correspondence details of the sender and addressee of the letter have been redacted, I am
       clear beyond doubt that the letter authoritatively reflects the views of the °barna
       Administration as a whole.




                                                     8


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016




       26. The US correspondence accords with the position of the Administration communicated
       to me in more general terms by US Secretary of State Clinton on 2 March 2009 in my
       discussions with her, as indicated in paragraph 14 of Mr Bethlehem's correspondence to the
       Court of 24 March 2009. She was clear then that the position of the new US Administration
       on the disclosure of US intelligence material had not changed, indicating that it was an
       inviolable principle that one State should not disclose publicly the intelligence information
       shared with it by a liaison partner.

       27. Since receipt of the US correspondence on 1 May 2009, this matter also arose for
       discussion when I met Secretary of State Clinton in Washington on 12 May 2009. She was
       fully aware of the issues and reiterated that the US position on public disclosure in this case
       had not changed with the change in Administration, the protection of intelligence going
       beyond party or politics. She indicated that the US remained opposed to the public disclosure
       of US intelligence information in this case. The US Secretary of State indicated further that
       public disclosure in this case would affect intelligence sharing and would cause damage to
       the national security of both the US and UK. Comment by those representing the National
       Security Council at the same meeting made it clear, if further clarification were needed, that
       this was also the position of the White House.

       28.   While it is appropriate in the case of our closest ally and intelligence partner, to give the
       US correspondence and other statements weight and careful consideration, I emphasise that
       the views expressed by the United States are not dispositive of the United Kingdom's
       national security or international relations interests. Nor are they dispositive of the United
       Kingdom's wider public interest, including as regards the balance of the public interests in
       national security and international relations as against the countervailing public interests.
       Accordingly, while I have weighed carefully the position of the United States, my judgement
       has turned on my appreciation of the national security and international relations interests,
       and of the countervailing public interests, of the United Kingdom, not on the interests of the
       United States.

      29.   I have carefully considered, together with those advising me, whether the recent US
      correspondence indicates a different approach to that indicated in the earlier US
      correspondence which was before the Court when it delivered its 4th Judgment. It is my
      view, and that of my advisers, that there is no difference in substance between the earlier and
      recent correspondence. The open version of the recent correspondence reiterates that "Wile
      cooperation and sharing of intelligence between the United Kingdom and the United States,
      as well as with other foreign governments, exists under strict conditions of secrecy. Public
      disclosure by the United Kingdom of information garnered from such relationships would
      suggest that the United Kingdom is unwilling or unable to protect information or assistance
      provided by its allies." This issue was central to my earlier assessment. I note, for example,

                                                       9

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016




       the observations at paragraphs 31 and 32 of my second Certificate, including "the absolutely
       essential issue of the confidence that other governments, including notably the US
       Government, can have when they share intelligence information with us" (at paragraph 32).
       In this regard, it is incumbent upon me to weigh with the utmost care the statement in the
       concluding paragraph of the US correspondence: "If it is determined that HMG is unable to
       protect the information we provide to it, even if this is a result of a decision of its courts, we
       will necessarily have to review with the greatest care the sensitivity of information we can
       provide in future". This issue is addressed further below and in the sensitive Schedule
       attached to this Certificate.

       Balancing the public interests in national security and international relations against
       the public interest in open justice


       30. For purposes of assessing where, in my judgement, the balance lies between the public
       interests of national security and international relations and the public interest in open justice,
       I have taken into account the factors that the Court identified in paragraph 18 of its 4th
       Judgment. I have also had closely in mind the abhorrence of torture and cruel, inhuman and
       degrading treatment and punishment and the importance of reflecting that appreciation
       publicly, issues addressed in detail in paragraphs 15-21 of my second Certificate. In addition,
       I have taken into account various factual developments since my earlier Certificates,
       including:

               (a) Mr Mohamed was released from Guantanamo Bay and returned to the United
               Kingdom on 23 February 2009;

               (b) Mr Mohamed is able to speak, and has spoken publicly, about the treatment that
               he alleges he suffered while in detention by foreign governments;

              (c) Mr Mohamed has brought proceedings against the UK Government in a civil
              damages claim;

              (d) potentially relevant documents have been disclosed to Mr Mohamed's security
              cleared Counsel in redacted form in habeas proceedings in the United States;

              (e) in the United Kingdom, there has been considerable speculation and media
              attention about the content of the 7 paragraphs and the underlying intelligence
              material;

              (0 allegations of criminal wrongdoing arising out of this case were referred to the
              Attorney General in her role as an independent Minister of Justice. Having consulted

                                                       10

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016




              the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Attorney General referred the matter to the
              police for investigation. That investigation is proceeding;

              (g) papers relating to Mr Mohamed (and in particular the closed documents at issue
              in this case, the closed judgment and the open and closed transcript of Witness B's
              evidence) have been provided to the ISC, which has already undertaken inquiries into
              the matter as described in the ISC's press notice of 17 March 2009;

              (h) the Prime Minister issued a Written Ministerial Statement on Detainees on 18
              March in which he set out a range of further work to provide reassurance that
              everything has been done to ensure that our practices are in line with United Kingdom
              and international law;

              (i)   there have been various developments in the United States, including:

                    • the Executive Orders issued by President Obama on 22 January 2009
                      relating to the closure of Guantanamo Bay and reviews of detention and
                      interrogation policies;
                    • the release on 16 April 2009 of four Department of Justice memoranda on
                      interrogation practices;
                    • on-going habeas proceedings in Mr Mohamed's name before the US federal
                      courts;
                    • a judgment of the 9th Circuit Court of Appeal in a case brought by Binyam
                       Mohamed and others against Jeppesen Dataplan Inc rejecting a state secrets
                       claim by the Administration. I am advised that the US Government is
                       considering whether to file an appeal in this case;
                    • the US Senate Armed Services Committee has recently published in
                      unclassified form a detailed Inquiry into the Treatment of Detainees in U.S.
                      Custody dated, in its classified version, 20 November 2008;
                    • on 5 March 2009, the US Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
                      announced "on a strong bipartisan basis to begin a review of the CIA's
                      detention and interrogation program", including how the CIA created,
                      operated and maintained its detention and interrogation programme.

       31. In considering these and other factors to which I make reference below, I have had
       regard to the Court's observation, in paragraph 102 of its 4th Judgment, as follows:

            "We have already expressed at paragraph 54 our clear view that the requirements of
            open justice, the rule of law, free speech and democratic accountability demonstrate the
            very considerable interests in making the redacted paragraphs public. However,

                                                    11

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016




             although the open conduct of justice is under our constitution one means of achieving
             these purposes, our constitution provides other means by which the rule of law, free
             speech and democratic accountability can be safeguarded given what has already been
             placed into the public domain and what has resulted in consequence of these
             proceedings to date."

       32. I note also the Court's review and conclusions in the paragraphs subsequent to this
       extract which address the engagement of the Intelligence and Security Committee and the
       reference to the Attorney General, which led subsequently to a reference of the matters in
       question by the Attorney to the police for further investigation.

       33. While certain of the factors identified in paragraph 30 above may lean towards public
       disclosure of the 7 paragraphs as an element of the "open conduct of justice" to which the
       Court referred in paragraph 102 of its 4th Judgment, these developments also point to wider
       mechanisms and processes of democratic accountability, free speech and the rule of law.
       While, if the Court accepts my judgement, the 7 paragraphs will not be disclosed, the broader
       open justice objective which is sought through their disclosure will largely be addressed, both
       as to the specifics of Mr Mohamed's case and allegations and in terms of the rule of law and
       democratic accountability more broadly.

       34. I am also advised, and note, that, in a manner that would be fully consistent with the
       principle of control over intelligence material, it is open both to Mr Mohamed and to others
       who have an interest in these matters, to pursue the disclosure of the US intelligence
       information underlying the 7 paragraphs through US processes. Specifically, I am advised
       that (a) the protective order pursuant to which the underlying intelligence documentation was
       disclosed to Mr Mohamed's US counsel allows those counsel to submit a request to the US
       Government for the declassification of the documents disclosed to them, (b) any person with
       an interest in the matter may request the disclosure of the underlying intelligence material
       under the US Freedom of Information Act and may, if necessary, pursue such request through
       judicial review proceedings to challenge any refusal by the US Government to disclose the
       information, and (c) may seek to persuade the US Senate Select Committee on Intelligence to
       make specific recommendations on the disclosure of intelligence documentation in the course
       of its inquiry announced on 5 March 2009.

       35. I have set out above my judgement on the national security and international relations
       of the United Kingdom. On the question of the balance between these public interests and
       the countervailing public interests in disclosure, I have also had regard to the other means,
       addressed by the Court in paragraphs 102 — 105 of its 4th Judgment, by which the rule of law,
       free speech and democratic accountability can be safeguarded. I have also considered other
       developments and factors noted above that favour, on the one hand, public disclosure and, on


                                                     12


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016




       the other hand, that point to other processes and mechanisms by which the rule of law, free
       speech and democratic accountability may be safeguarded. Considering all of these elements,
       my judgement continues to be very firmly that the balance of the public interests remains
       against the public disclosure of the 7 paragraphs.

       36. As the Court stated in the concluding sentence of its 4th Judgment, it is now a matter for
       the United States to consider whether, and, if so, when and in what form, it should make the
       information in question public.

       (B)      US correspondence

       37.     An open and quite full version of the classified US correspondence dated 30 April
       2009 has been provided to the other parties in these proceedings. This text was produced and
       provided by the US Administration for public disclosure. Following disclosure, it has already
       been quoted extensively in the media.

       38.      In part of the sensitive Schedule attached to this Certificate, I have set out my
       reasons for concluding that there would be serious harm to the existing intelligence sharing
       arrangements, and therefore real damage to the national security and international relations
       interests of the United Kingdom, in the event of further disclosure of this classified US
       correspondence.

       39.       I fully accept that in normal circumstances the Claimant and the third parties
       involved in these proceedings would have access to the same documentary material as that
       provided to the Court. There is an important public interest in seeking to achieve this if
       possible and also in ensuring, as part of the principle of open justice that the public see or
       have access to documents relied upon in legal proceedings. However, balancing these
       important interests against the national security and international relations interests of the
       UK, to which I refer in the sensitive Schedule, has led me to conclude that disclosure of the
       full text of the classified letter would not be in the public interest. In arriving at this
       assessment, I have had particular regard to the fact that Special Advocates have been
       appointed to represent the Claimant in closed sessions and that they have been provided with
       full and unredacted versions of the documents. Disclosure to the Special Advocates is
       consistent with the approach adopted in these proceedings in relation to earlier classified US
       correspondence and I understand that they have forcefully advanced the Claimant's interests
       in the closed proceedings by reference to the contents of closed documents.




                                                    13

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016




       Conclusion

       40. In putting this further PII Certificate to the Court, I accept that the Court has final
       responsibility for determining questions of disclosure and in particular for deciding where the
       balance of public interests lies.




       The Right Honourable David Miliband MP
       Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs

       Dated the 15th day of May 2009




                                                     14

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763713 Date: 01/07/2016
