     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795494 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                        RELEASE IN PART B6


From:                            H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                            Wednesday, September 12, 2012 11:30 PM
To:                              'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                         Fw: H: Magariaf on attack on US in Libya. Sid
Attachments:                     hrc memo magariaf, attack on US in Libya 091212.docx



PIs print.


From: Sidney Blumenthal [mailto
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2012 12:50 AM
To: H
Subject: H: Magariaf on attack on US in Libya. Sid




                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                               September 12, 2012



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Magariaf and the attack on US in Libya

SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as
well as the highest levels of European Governments, and Western Intelligence and
security services.


      1. During the afternoon of September 11, 2012 new interim President of Libya
Mohammed Yussef el Magariaf spoke in private with senior advisors, including the
members of the Libyan Muslim Brotherhood, to discuss the attacks by demonstrators
on U.S. missions in Tripoli and Benghazi. According to a sensitive source, el Magariaf
was shaken by the attacks, and gave permission to commanders on the ground for
security forces to open fire over the heads of the crowds in an effort to break up mobs
attacking the missions. During this session, a senior security officer told el Magariaf
that the attacks on that day were inspired by what many devout Libyan viewed as a
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795494 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795494 Date: 01/07/2016




sacrilegious internet video on the prophet Mohammed originating in America. The
Libyan attacks were also inspired by and linked to an attack on the U.S. mission in
Egypt on the same day. At the same time, el Magariaf noted in strong terms that the
atmosphere that made fostered these incidents in Libya is the product of widespread
publicity regarding the security situation in the country between 2004 and 2010 and
the cooperation that developed between a number of Western Intelligence services and
the regime of former dictator Muammar al Qaddafi.

       2. This source added that el Magariafs advisors believe that this situation adds
to the President's growing concern over the unpredictable effects that will follow
current covert efforts by his political opponents to link him directly to foreign
intelligence services. According to a separate sensitive source, el Magariaf noted that
his opponents had often tried to connect him to the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA) through the National Front for the Salvation of Libya (NFSL), a group
established in opposition to former dictator Muammar al Qaddafi, which el Magariaf
led in the 1980s. In the opinion of this individual el Magariaf believes that he can
survive potential negative publicity in this regard, but if this situation continues to
develop in this manner it will complicate his efforts to establish an orderly
administration in the country. Again, he stated that the attacks on the U.S. missions
were as much a result of the atmosphere created by this campaign, as the controversial
internet video.

      3. At the same time, this individual noted that several of el Magariafs advisors
share his concerns in this matter, pointing out that the return of Qaddafi's intelligence
chief Abdullah al-Senoussi for trial in Libya has heightened public interest in the
liaison relationships conducted by the CIA and British Secret Intelligence Service (SIS)
with Qaddfi's intelligence and security services. These same individuals note that they
believe Islamist militia forces under the command of General Abdelhakim Belhaj
captured files and documents describing this relationship from Qaddafi's offices in
Tripoli. This fascination with Western intelligence operations in Qaddafi's Libya is also
driven by Human Rights Watch (HRW) and its efforts to tie Western governments to
human rights violations committed under Qaddafi. In this regard HRW has
interviewed at least fourteen (14) individuals claiming that they were turned over to
Qaddafi's forces by the Western powers. Belhaj is included in this group.

       4. (Source Comment: In the opinion of a very sensitive source, el Magariafs
enemies are working to take advantage of his suspected links to the CIA at a time when
Western intelligence services are under scrutiny in Libya. They also fear that this
situation will only grow more complex as Qaddafi's son Saif al Islam Qaddafi and al
Senousi are brought before Libyan courts to answer for their crimes under the old
regime, particularly during the 2011 revolution. These individuals believe both men
will be linked to Western Intelligence during their trials. )

     5. According to this individual, el Magariaf is working with the Muslim
Brotherhood and other Islamist groups to defuse this situation. He is particularly
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795494 Date: 01/07/2016
  UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795494 Date: 01/07/2016




concerned by the level of violence between Sufi Muslims and Salafists, and believes he
must maintain his reputation for impartiality if he is to defuse this growing problem.
As he works to organize the government, and disarm the militias, he cannot afford to
lose the respect and trust of the Libyan people, especially at a time when cultural
clashes between followers of the mystical Sufi tradition and ultra-conservative Salafis
have taken central stage in the new Libya. This source adds that these religious
conflicts were largely unknown during Qaddafi's rule.
       6. (Source Comment: This source added that the individuals interviewed for the
HRW report were former members of the Libyan Islamist Fighting Group (LIFG), an
Islamist group formed in opposition to Gaddafi's controversial interpretations of Islam.
These LIFG fighters fled the country in the late 198os and went to Afghanistan to join
the fight against the Soviet Union while also gaining training and experience for their
own struggle. A separate source adds that messages to Libya from the CIA and SIS
were found among the Tripoli Documents published by HRW, indicating that the
United States and Britain were eager to help Libya capture several senior LIFG figures,
including its co-founders, Belhaj and Sami al-Saadi.)

       7. As Libyan authorities struggle to control the armed rings that refuse to
surrender weapons following last year's civil war, Salafis, who say Islam should return
to the simple ways followed by Mohammed, have established their own armed gangs in
post-Gaddafi Libya. They view Sufi practices as idolatrous. Since the start of the Arab
Spring uprising across the region, a number of Sufi sites have been attacked in Egypt,
Mali and Libya. Magariaf is determined to establish a democratic state based on
Islamic principles. This individual adds that Magariaf remains dedicated to the idea of
building a tolerant Islamic state in Libya. El Magariafs opinions continue to be shaped
by his experience with Qaddafi, whom he felt built a cult of personality in violation of
all of the basic ideas of Islam.




  UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795494 Date: 01/07/2016
