     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794214 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                           H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                           Tuesday, February 28, 2012 8:31 AM
To:                             'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject                         Fw: H: Syria. Main Source:                               ivith v close relations with      B6
                                highest level of Syrian govt & diplomats, etc.
Attachments:                    hrc_syria_022412.docx



Pls print.


From: sbwhoeop             [mailto:sbwhoeop                                                                                B6
Sent: Friday, February 24, 2012 11:55 AM
To: H
Subject: H: Syria. Main Source:                             with v   close relations with highest level of Syrian govt &   B6
diplomats, etc.




                                      CONFIDENTIAL



                                               February 24, 2012



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Syria




SOURCE: Sources with access to the highest levels of the Syrian Government, as well as Western
Intelligence and security services.

The Following information was provided in strictest secrecy by a source with direct, personal access to
the very highest levels of the Syrian Government. This information is particularly sensitive as it
includes the personal firsthand comments of the source:

Syria: Internal

Several things that I think are important to understanding Bashar al-Assad and the uprising in Syria:

1) While the rest of the world thinks As sad has been delusional (or at the very least trying to deflect
attention from the real causes of the uprising) ever since his March 30, 2011speech when he blamed
foreign conspiracies for the unrest in Syria, he and his inner circle really believe--more than most
people can imagine--that there, indeed, have been foreign conspiracies from the very beginning. It is
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794214 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794214 Date: 01/07/2016




simply the very different way the Syrian leadership perceives the nature of threat based on their own
history, one in which Syria has been subject to conspiracies by external enemies, just enough so to
lend credence to such exhortations to many Syrians. The Syrian leadership has a different conceptual
paradigm that frames the nature of internal and external threat to their country. From the point of
view of the West, it appears to be extremely paranoid; from the perspective of Damascus, it is prudent
and based on historical circumstances. And the violence he unleashed has helped create the
circumstances in Syria whereby external forces are in fact involving themselves much more assertively
at the diplomatic level if not yet in terms of direct funding and arms deliveries, so it has to some
extent become a self-fulfilling prophecy.

2) The Syrian government's crackdown is a push button, convulsive response to domestic threat. It is
business as usual. It is not as though Assad does not control the security forces. It is that this has
been the way Syria works under the Assads. And to date, Bashar has not been willing to diminish the
tremendous amount of leeway he has given the security forces to deal with threats, both domestic and
foreign, with the latter often seen as causing the former. In my view this has been a dangerous
abdication of power to thuggish security forces who only know one way to deal with threats. He
believes it is an unfortunate necessity in a dangerous neighborhood. I told him personally after I was
interrogated in a threatening manner by security forces at Damascus airport for three hours back in
2007 that he needed to get more control over the security forces, and if he didn't, it could come back
to haunt him. Well, that's exactly what happened. Bashar simply went along with business as usual
instead of understanding the new circumstances created by the Arab spring. In addition, the regimes
of Hafiz and Bashar al-Assad simply do not make concessions from a perceived position of weakness.
They will only make concessions from a perceived position of strength, so cracking down hard on
demonstrators while offering political reforms are two sides of the same coin. This is very typical
behavior.

3) Over the course of five years (2004-2009) of regularly meeting with Bashar al-Assad (and other
leading Syrian officials), I personally witnessed him becoming more comfortable with power—or more
to the point, him becoming captive to the arrogance of power. I think he was, indeed, a committed
reformer in the beginning, but he soon realized what he could and could not do as president. Over the
years, he started to believe the sycophants around him and the propaganda surrounding him that the
well-being of the country was synonymous with his well-being. He truly believes that everything that
has happened, even the violence, is ultimately for the well-being of the country over the long-term. He
sincerely believes the reforms he has announced, such as the upcoming constitutional referendum,
will make a significant difference and reduce the intensity of the rebellion. He probably believes that
he has not received enough credit in a biased international press for the reforms he has announced
and attempted to implement, which is consistent with how he has felt in the past in terms of not
receiving enough credit for concessions he feels he made. Therefore, he and his supporters believe
they are on their own and must do things their own way because ultimately they believe they have a
better understanding of what is going on and what it will take to move forward. He is not going
anywhere for the time being, and no one has a gun to his head forcing him to stay. The members of
Syria's leadership class truly think they will work their way through this. They view things over the
long, not the short term. The leadership believes that if they can hang on for several more years, they
will outlast the protestors, outlast world attention, and eventually in ten years or so work the
country's way back into the good graces of the international community. In their minds, they have
survived onslaught and isolation before, following the Hariri assassination in 2005, and they emerged
in an even better position. Although the current situation is fundamentally different in terms of its
internal character, they think they can survive again and emerge eventually in a better position.

4) The highest levels of the regime believes the opposition in and outside of the country is to a
considerable degree all smoke and mirrors in terms of its cohesiveness—and it is not altogether
incorrect. It is clear that the uprising is a significant and organically home-grown rebellion in Syria
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794214 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794214 Date: 01/07/2016




that has become more widespread since April 2011. But on the ground in Syria there is no unified
leadership, although there is communication between opposition groups in different parts of the
country. The uprising is very localized in this sense—in terms of coordination and planning—
although the general goals of the opposition elements are quite similar, thus giving the illusion of
cohesiveness. The vast majority of armed opponents of the regime are civilian, not army defectors.
Although the latter have increased, especially from lower level conscripts, they are not a determining
factor yet—not even close. The Free Syria Army, which gets a lot of press, is not a monolithic,
centrally organized group. It is very loosely organized and uncoordinated. The FSA is, for the most
part, local militias, many of them civilian based, that are simply calling themselves the FSA to appear
to be part of a whole. The armed resistance to the regime is not well funded or well armed. Also
despite reports (usually by the Syrian government) that they are being armed by foreign countries and
intelligence services, they are not receiving any significant foreign assistance except perhaps second
hand from groups in Turkey or the Arab Gulf States. Much of this financing comes from Syrian
expatriates, who then funnel money and aid to their compatriots inside Syria. The exiled Syrian
opposition is equally divided despite the Syrian National Council being generally accepted by the
Syrian protestors in Syria, and by the international community as the interlocutor of the uprising and
as a potential interim governing organization that could takeover if/when Assad regime falls. There
are serious differences among different groups that make up the SNC, and it has yet to articulate a
vision for the future and other necessary declarations that would be more inclusive of different groups
in Syria. The regime has obviously played up these sectarian differences in Syria, presenting itself as
the only thing between stability and chaos. To date, important sectors of Syrian society, while not
 necessarily supportive of the regime, have gone along with this view and have not supported the
 opposition. The money is drying up as the economy deteriorates, but important businessmen, such as
 Rami Maldouf and Firas Tlas, have ample wells of money that they are funneling to the regime. The
 regime no doubt has quietly built up reserves that can be drawn upon. This is something the Syrian
 regime under Bashar manages quite well, given their experience with years of pressure and isolation
 after the Hariri assassination. The regime is also receiving funds from Iran. It is a dire economic
situation, but Syria was already suffering from a myriad of economic difficulties, thus the socio-
 economic roots of the uprising, so the fall has not yet been cataclysmic. The situation will deteriorate
 quickly if all out civil war ensues.

External
1) In his time in power since 2000, Bashar al-Assad has been quite measured in his response to
provocation. He definitely understands asymmetrical power, i.e. he understands that his country is
relatively weak when compared to many of his neighbors and to interested external actors. For
instance, his regime's responses were fairly meek following the US raid from Iraq into Syria to kill a
suspected insurgent, the Israeli bombing of a suspected nuclear reactor, and the (probable) Israeli
assassination of Imad Mugniyeh in downtown Damascus, among other things. He is careful in this
regard. In trying to deflect attention away from the protests by generating support against Israel,
rather than lob missiles into Israel in the style of Saddam Hussein in the 1991 Gulf war, he authorized
the bussing of Palestinian refugees to the Israeli border of the Golan Heights to stage protests in May
and June (resulting in the deaths of 10-20 Palestinians). This action did not produce what Assad
wanted, but it was fairly low level compared to what he could do. This is not to say that he might not
take action on his borders, perhaps arming the Kurdish PKK rebel group against Turkey or something
more dramatic aimed at Israel. His most important advisors believe that any move like this would be
a clear sign of desperation, possibly opining the last stage of a successful uprising. Assad knows the
Turkish Government would have no qualms about moving into northern Syria to protect their
interests—as it threatened to do under Bashar's father, in reaction to Syria's support for the PKK. He
will not want to give the Turks any opportunity to establish any safe zones that could be utilized by the
opposition.

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794214 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794214 Date: 01/07/2016




2) Certainly the Syrian regime wants to give the impression that it can create chaos beyond its
borders, as many regime figures have openly boasted, but the regime will be very careful in this
regard, particularly as the regime feels it can still outlast the protestors on the ground. In addition,
the regime understands that the situation in Syria has become a function of the wider
Saudi/Qatar/US/Israeli versus Iran nexus, so the leadership will be careful not to launch any actions
across Syria's borders that could harm Iran and/or reduce the level of assistance Iran is providing.
Having said this, I do not think it is a given that Syria would engage Israel militarily if Iran is attacked.
Senior Syrian officials believe that it is much more likely that Hizbullah would engage Israel's
militarily if Iran is attacked. Frankly, given the weakened condition of the Assad regime, if Hizbullah
attacked Israel, the Israelis would have to think long and hard about hitting at Syria in addition to
Hizbullah. After the 2006 Israel-Hizbullah war, it has been something of a given that if there is
another such conflict, Syria would not be able to avoid Israeli bombardment as it did in 2006. But
with the current difficulties in Syria, the Israelis may prudently demur widening any conflict to Syria
and the Syrian leadership may say thank you very much and launch bombastic remarks against Israel
rather than bombs. That said, one particularly important advisor to Assad warned that if the
domestic situation for the Syrian regime deteriorates to the point where joining a fight against Israel
may be a last ditch attempt to divert attention and rally the populace around the regime. At this time,
secret sources in the Syrian military report that, there are no Iranian forces fighting with Syrian forces
against the opposition, but Teheran is clearly providing funds, equipment (especially in electronic
surveillance and monitoring) and maybe even some training. This reporting is borne out by rebel
security forces, based on the interrogation of captured Syrian troops.

 3) Again, the Syrian regime has withstood intense international pressure before. It feels it can do so
 again over the long term, even if it becomes the North Korea of the Middle East, although, as pointed
 out earlier, this situation is fundamentally different in terms of the combination of internal opposition
 with external pressure; after the Hariri assassination it was primarily just the latter. As such, unless
 there are some notable defections that bring the whole house of cards down quickly in Syria, the
 regime has the repressive apparatus to hang in there for a number of months if not years. More to the
 point, it seems to have the willingness and belief that it can. Also, the regime might crumble, if
 important elements of support that have stayed loyal to this point change sides. Also, if Russia and
 China are persuaded to join the rest of the international community and the rising chorus of pressure
 and condemnation, The Assad regime will be great danger. Extremely sensitive sources at the United
 Nations state that if Russia gets onboard, so will the other BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India,
 China, and South Africa.) However, these sensitive sources believe that the Russians will wait as long
 as possible, perhaps seeing if the new constitutional referendum and other reforms produce any sign
•of a weakening of the opposition. If they do not, then Moscow may press more forcefully for Assad to
 go and position itself as a primary player in overseeing any sort of transition. Assad and members of
 his family could then go into exile in Russia, Iran, or perhaps even India or Venezuela. _




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794214 Date: 01/07/2016
