UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778942 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL



                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                               February 10, 2011



  For: Hillary
  From: Sid
  Re: Behind Mubarak's speech


  Latest intelligence from sources with extraordinary access on the ground in Egypt:

  Mubarak's conflict with the Supreme Council of the Egyptian army delayed the delivery of his
  speech. Mubarak is demanding guarantees regarding his possessions and honor once he has left
  office. Since his son Gamal cannot now replace him Mubarak is insisting that Gen. Omar
  Suleiman must follow him in power. But Gen. Hassan al-Roueini, the military commander for
  the Cairo area and Field Marshall Hussein Tatawi are opposed to Suleiman, who comes from the
  air force and intelligence, not from the army, and see Suleiman as an extension of the discredited
  Mubarak. Above all, these commanders want to preserve the institution and reputation of the
  army. They wish to avoid bloodshed and are inclined to lift the state of emergency, another
  sticking point. The commanders want Mubarak to devolve power in the transition to the Supreme
  Council, not Suleiman. The conflict between Mubarak and powerful army figures has been
  momentarily stalemated by Armed Forces Chief of Staff Lt. Gen. Sami Annan, who appears to
  accept Suleiman for the time being. Annan is continuing to work with Mubarak regarding how to
  proceed and has stated privately that he is warning the President's advisors that extreme violence
  may result from the confusion that will arise from vague announcements (Mubarak's speech).
  Annan has added that the government must act to clarify the situation, and Mubarak should not
  count on the army firing on demonstrators for any extended period of time. Annan reportedly
  believes that Mubarak cannot bring himself to say that he has given in to pressure. Annan is
  concerned that if the situation spirals out of control the army may have to act to move Mubarak
  out, a step he does not want to have to take.

  Both President Obama's speech today discussing Egypt and CIA Director Panetta's testimony
  predicting Mubarak's departure were poorly received all around and judged seriously unhelpful.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778942 Date: 01/07/2016
