      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793707 Date: 01/07/2016


                                                                                                      RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                      B6



From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Friday, December 28, 2012 5:31 PM
To:
Subject:                           FW: Bill Richardson



FYI

    Original Message
From: Sherman, Wendy R                                                                                                       B6
Sent: Friday, December 28, 2012 3:44 PM
To: 'Denis_R._McDonough                    Burns, William J; Sullivan, Jacob J; Davies, Glyn T; Campbell, Kurt M;
'sydney_A_Seiler                'claniel_r._russel                 Nides, Thomas R
Cc: Cintron, Dan; Lakhdhir, Kamala S
Subject: Bill Richardson

(SBU) I spoke by phone with Bill Richardson for nearly 25 minutes.
Bottom line is that he insisted he has made up his mind and will travel to NK.,leaving he thought Jan 7, going through
China and staying in NK 2 days. He said he would reflect on the conversation but he was going to go. I used the points as
well as our history on NK; the likelihood that he will be badly used; that this will be perceived as giving them credibility
with folks believing they come as reps of administration no matter what they say; that this will complicate UNSC action,
etc. to no avail. He said he didn't work for the administration though I reminded him as an American citizen and former
official he had to be cognizant of US national security and this was not in the national security interest of the US. He also
repeated that there would never be a good time. He said that Eric Schmidt was going with him and taking his
daughter(teenager) as well as Jared(neither of us could remember last name), who use to work for the administration
and is now at Google. Bill doesn't think Eric has thought through the trip but will be making a donation to an
international food entity and announce such while they are in NK. Eric, of course, hopes someday to have the NK market
but not point of this visit. Bill has been told highest level they will see will be Kim Gae Gwan. He said he needs to do this
because basis of funding for his foundation that 'supports my work with bad guys.' At any rate, I think we should
consider a call to Eric Schmidt and to Jared. I also think if we can't turn this off (not even sure a WH call would do it), we
should consider preemptive press statement. Bill had already gotten a call from ROK (don't know who) and that had not
persuaded him either. At end of call he also mentioned he would be tough with them,and he would do what he could for
the American detained. No surprise but sorry not more persuasive (in spite of his saying compelling call,etc )




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793707 Date: 01/07/2016
