      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792033 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                 B1,1.4(B),1.4(D),B5,B6



From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemailcom>
Sent:                             Sunday, February 27, 2011 7:09 PM
To:                               'sullivanij@state.gov'
Subject:                          Re: Libya: Thoughts on post-Qadhafi Assistance & Governance



Is he in NEA currently? Or was he in Embassy? I was surprised that he used personal email account if he is at State.


From: Sullivan, Jacob J [mailto:SullivanJJ@state.gov]
Sent: Sunday, February 27, 2011 07:04 PM
To: H
Subject: RE: Libya: Thoughts on post-Qadhafi Assistance & Governance         Classified by DAS, A/GIS, DoS on 12/31/2015
                                                                             — Class: CONFIDENTIAL — Reason: 1.4(B),
Us.                                                                          1.4(D) — Declassify on: 02/26/2026


From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Monday, February 28, 2011 1:03 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Re: Libya: Thoughts on post-Qadhafi Assistance & Governance

Who does he work for now?


From: Sullivan, Jacob J [mailto:Sullivann@state.gov]
Sent: Sunday, February 27, 2011 05:41 PM
To: H
Cc: Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Subject: FW: Libya: Thoughts on post-Qadhafi Assistance & Governance

Worth a read. This guy is very thoughtful.


From: Wells, Alice G
Sent: Sunday, February 27, 2011 5:35 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Fw: Libya: Thoughts on post-Qadhafi Assistance & Governance

Jake- godfrey is one of our most knowledgable officers on libya. Thought you would appreciate his analysis.



From: John Godfrey                                                                                                         B6
To: Burns, William J; Cretz, Gene A; Wells, Alice G; Catalano, Elisa; Roebuck, William V; Kalmbach, Heather E; Keene,
Matt E; Ried, Curtis R (USUN); Germain, Ellen J (USUN); Stevens, John C
Cc: Godfrey, John T
Sent: Sun Feb 27 15:17:04 2011
Subject: Libya: Thoughts on post-Qadhafi Assistance & Governance




 Amb Cretz asked earlier today for thoughts on post-Qadhafi international assistance and governance                         B5
                                         In parallel, Alice Wells and USUN had asked for thoughts on the
 same subject a couple of days back. Am sending this to those with whom I've been in touch on Libya issues -

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792033 Date: 01/07/2016
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792033 Date: 01/07/2016
                                                                                                          1.4(B)
                                                                                                          1.4(D)
                                                                                                          B1

    points below on assistance and governance are also in the attachment (wasn't sure those working off b'berry
    would be able to access that).
1




    Thoughts on post-Qadhafi governance & international assistance:

    Humanitarian assistance: We should begin flowing humanitarian assistance (medicine first, food second,
    everything else is less important right now) to eastern Libya and plan to do so in western Libya as soon as
    Qadhafi falls. The symbolism is critically important and it's important that we not allow Turkey, Italy and
    others to steal a march on this. Best done multilaterally, but the US should move unilaterally if multilateral
    efforts are taking too long to orchestrate. Stationing the USN hospital ship "U.S.S. Mercy" off the eastern
    Libya coast to provide medical care to those injured in the Benghazi uprising would be a powerful, high
    visibility step.

    Military assistance: Libyan contacts have consistently said they do not want overt foreign military assistance
    in toppling Qadhafi. "This is something we must do for ourselves," is the message. Depending on how events
    in/around Tripoli play out going forward, there is space for covert military assistance to the opposition
    (including arms shipments); the fighting should be done by the Libyans themselves, who are clear in
    emphasizing their willingness to do so.

    UN: The United Nations, largely by dint of the key role it played in birthing the modern Libyan state, enjoys a
    high degree of legitimacy among ordinary Libyans. A UN "hat" for multinational/international assistance
    efforts could be effective. Libyans are so far wary of the idea of a PKO; however, that could change
    depending on how long Qadhafi holds on and how bloody and chaotic things get in/around Tripoli before he
    goes. If/if a PKO is warranted, important to minimize its presence and role in the east, where the opposition
    has things better in hand and the culture is more inimical to the presence of foreign forces.

    Civilian Relief & Assistance: Contacts have consistently cited the need for assistance in civil administration
    and governance. They have stressed that this would have to come under a civilian rubric; U.S. military civ-pol
    assistance, for example, would not/not be welcomed. It will be important for the international community to
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792033 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792033 Date: 01/07/2016




realize that, not unlike in Iraq, it is dealing with what is in many ways a broken society. We will need to be
extremely mindful of not trying to push the interim and new permanent government to absorb more than
they have the capacity to handle.

Oil & gas infrastructure: Together with civilian administration, contacts have highlighted the need for quick
international assistance to bring Libya's oil and gas production and exports back on line. Doing so will
reestablish the country's cash flow and provide the interim and new permanent government the resources it
will need to finance development.

Italian Role: Should be kept relatively low-profile by virtue of Italy's colonization of Libya and enduring
sensitivities stemming from that. Will be tough to balance Italy's desire to protect its sizeable commercial
interests against the need to play a quiet, less visible role.

Tribal leadership: Important to acknowledge and facilitate the participation of senior tribal leaders in a post-
Qadhafi government. Eastern tribal and opposition leaders have signaled a desire for a return to more formal
government structures (vice the deliberate dismantlement of government apparatus under Qadhafi) and
envision a Parliament. A thought is to have a senior chamber, akin to a Senate or House of Lords, that would
be appropriate for senior tribal leaders. (NOTE: I'm working on a paper on relationships between the major
tribes and hope to have that done by mid-week. END NOTE.)

Religious leaders: Despite Qadhafi's best efforts, Islam has continued to play an important role in Libyan
society. Finding a mechanism by which to include religious leaders not seen as stooges of Qadhafi would lend
legitimacy to the transition period and new government. It would also help mitigate the potential for Islamic
extremists and al-Qaeda to exploit the transition to push for more extreme iterations of Islam. An idea would
be to convene a conference of eastern and western Libyan imams (very different groups of people -- the
western cohort would have to be carefully vetted) with thegoal of providing advice (not orders) to the
Executive Council. Reopening large, conventional mosques in eastern Libya would also be a positive step, and
would help minimize the importance of smaller, informal mosques that tend to propagate more conservative
messages.

Formalizing government structures: It will be important to quickly establish a clear, interim/caretaker system
of government to administer the country while a constitution is formulated and adopted and a process for
choosing a permanent government is determined. The eastern opposition has essentially already done this
with the establishment of the Executive Council. (NOTE: Important to note that a significant number of
eastern tribal and opposition leaders have agreed that the former royal family, the Sanussis, should be part of
the interim Executive Council. It is believed their participation would lend legitimacy and the semblance of a
known, relatively stable element to the interim government. END NOTE.) A parallel, national-level structure
could be a way to bridge the interim between Qadhafi's regime and a new, permanent government.

Constitution: A number of contacts have highlighted the formulation of a new constitution as an important
part of the post-Qadhafi governance picture. Eastern tribal and opposition leaders have already agreed in
principle on the need to: 1) formally resurrect the monarchy-era constitution as a basis for interim
governance; and 2) immediately form a constitutional committee to formulate a new constitution.

In addition to the monarchy-era document, the constitution project shepherded by Saif al-Islam al-Qadhafi
may offer some useful documents/points of departure. The existence of that draft document isn't widely
known, but it was developed in close coordination with U.S., UK and other int'l experts.

Bringing Former Regime Elements Into the New Gov't: Contacts in Libya have stressed that there is little
articulated desire (so far) for purges or wholesale reprisals against Qadhafi technocrats. Particular attention
should be paid to sub-national leaders, particularly at the 'shabiyat' level. Many of these enjoy genuine
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792033 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792033 Date: 01/07/2016




legitimacy in their communities and could help ensure continuity during the transition and new permanent
government.

Reconciliation Commission: In its bones, Libya remains a Bedouin/Berber culture, with an abiding belief in
"an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth." Initial feelings of comity and disinclination to pursue vendettas
will quickly abate unless a formal mechanism for addressing such grievances is established. Recommend
approaching the interim government early to advocate establishment of a Reconciliation Commission akin to
South Africa's, and to urge that it be announced ASAP to help forestall purges (even if it isn't expected to
begin its work until later).

Fathi el-Jahmi: Difficult to overstate the extent to which his case came to symbolize ordinary Libyans'
frustration with the regime. An important step for the interim or new permanent government could be
conducting a review of his case with the goals of: 1) exonerating him of any wrongdoing; and 2)
compensating his family. Important to note that the U.S. may not be comfortable with everything that comes
to light in the course of that, but it's important that it be done.

Investigation of Qadhafi-Era "Investments": A neuralgic issue for most Libyans is the fact that a country with
a small population and sizeable oil and gas reserves has not seen more development and a higher standard of
living. Recommend approaching the interim government early to advocate announcement of a review of all
investments abroad by government and quasi-governmental Libyan entities. Seek AU and Arab League
support for same.

Grace Period for Property Claims: The Qadhafi regime's seizure of private property and destruction of
property records were some of the most controversial actions it undertook. Many Libyans, including families
prominent in the monarchy era, will immediately seek to pursue claims to have their property restored. As in
Iraq, this will be a complicated, contentious and time-consuming process, one best left to the new permanent
government. Recommend urging the interim government to declare a moratorium on adjudication of
property claims until establishment of a new permanent government.

Wealth distribution: There is a strong socialist streak among Libyans, and the perceived failure of Qadhafi's
regime to make good on repeated promises to better distribute hydrocarbon revenues to the people was and
is a source of deep anger. It will be important for the new government to acknowledge that wealth
distribution is a key national issue. Practically speaking, it may be best for the interim government to defer
action on that issue until a new permanent government is in place.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792033 Date: 01/07/2016
