UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782177 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL
                                       CONFIDENTIAL




                                               September 1, 2011




 For: Hillary
 From: Sid
 Re: NTC, its army, allies, & China


 As of the morning of September 1, 2011, a source with excellent access to the highest levels of
 the Libyan National Transitional Council (NTC) and the National Liberation Army (NLA) stated
 in confidence that one of the greatest challenges facing the new government of Libya is the
 increasing self reliance of the regional and tribal militias that make up the bulk of the NLA. The
 NLA commanders, including Generals Khalifa Haftar and Mohammed Suleiman, believe that the
 upcoming siege of Muammar al Qaddafi's traditional stronghold at the city of Sirte affords them
 the opportunity to increase the level of coordination among these individual units. The NLA
 commanders are aware of the fact that while the centralized NLA forces continue to struggle
 with battlefield coordination, medical care, and matters of logistics, the smaller militia units have
 become better organized as individual commands. As the NLA attempts to wind up resistance in
 Tripoli and moves toward Sirte they are concerned that these units are beginning to compete with
 each other to be in position to take the greatest share of credit for final victory.

 The NLA commanders are attempting to deal with a disparity in the level of logistical support
 from unit to unit. Those militia units that are based in Benghazi and other relatively prosperous
 areas have been able to improve their support to the units drawn from their regions. At the same
 time, units arising from the poorer, rural parts of the country have suffered from shortages of
 food and ammunition. Extremely sensitive sources note that medical care is limited and
 unreliable throughout the NLA.

 (Source Comment: The NLA commanders are also concerned that their allies in NATO continue
 to worry about the presence of members of the Muslim Brotherhood in various NLA units. They
 are monitoring the activities of these individuals to guard against attempts by radical Islamist
 groups within the Brotherhood to press for an Islamic state in Libya. NLA security officers
 believe that these Libyan Brothers receive support from the Moslem Brotherhood in Egypt, and
 that this support will only increase as the Brotherhood plays an increasingly important role in the




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782177 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782177 Date: 01/07/2016




  neW Egyptian political structure that is developing after the fall of former President Hosni
  Mubarak.)

  These knowledgeable sources add that the leaders of the regional militias in the NLA are already
  maneuvering for positions of authority in the new NTC government, based on their service in the
  rebellion. At the same time, Prime Minister Malunud Jabril, President Mustafa Abdel Jalil, vice
  President Abdul Hafiz Ghoza, and the other more traditional leaders of the NTC are working to
  obtain support from NATO and its constituent members. At the same time,,they remain highly
  suspicious of the relationships that the governments of Italy and Germany maintained with the
  Qaddafi regime, particularly Qaddafi's son Saif al-Islam Qaddafi.

  (Source Comment: Jabril and the other NTC leaders are highly suspicious of the efforts of China
  and Russia to establish increased economic contact with the new Libyan government, believing
  that these relationships will not work to their advantage. This is particularly true in the case of
  China. The NTC's contacts in Africa have warned them that while the Chinese appear to be
  interesting partners, they are very aggressive in exploiting natural resources, and that the
  relationships end up being very one sided in favor of China. )




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782177 Date: 01/07/2016
