UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789099 Date: 01/07/2016


                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL

                                            CONFIDENTIAL



                                                February 14, 2011



  For: Hillary
  From: Sid
  Re: US mentor to Egyptian revolutionaries


  The New York Times today discloses that youthful non-violent Egyptian revolutionaries have
  been inspired by the work of an American political thinker on non-violent resistance, Gene
  Sharp, who spent decades at Harvard. (See NYT article and bio of Sharp below.)

  You might consider inviting him to see you and then sending him on a State Department USIS
  tour.


  NYT:


  Breaking free from older veterans of the Arab political opposition, they relied on tactics of
  nonviolent resistance channeled from an American scholar through a Serbian youth brigade -
  but also on marketing tactics borrowed from Silicon Valley.

  For their part, Mr. Maher and his colleagues began reading about nonviolent struggles. They
  were especially drawn to a Serbian youth movement called Otpor, which had helped topple the
  dictator Slobodan Milosevic by drawing on the ideas of an American political thinker, Gene
  Sharp. The hallmark of Mr. Sharp's work is well-tailored to Mr. Mubark's Egypt: He argues that
  nonviolence is a singularly effective way to undermine police states that might cite violent
  resistance to justift repression in the name of stability.


  The New York Times

  February 13, 2011


  Dual Uprisings Show Potent New Threats to
  Arab States
  By DAVID D. KIRKPATRICK and DAVID E. SANGER


  CAIRO — As protesters in Tahrir Square faced off against pro-government forces, they drew a
  lesson from their counterparts in Tunisia: "Advice to the youth of Egypt: Put vinegar or onion
  under your scarf for tear gas."

  The exchange on Facebook was part of a remarkable two-year collaboration that has given birth
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789099 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789099 Date: 01/07/2016

  In Washington that day, President Obama turned up, unexpectedly, at a 3:30 p.m. Situation
  Room meeting of his "principals," the key members of the national security team, where he
  displaced Thomas E. Donilon, the national security adviser, from his seat at the head of the table.

  The White House had been debating the likelihood of a domino effect since youth-driven revolts
  had toppled President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali in Tunisia, even though the American intelligence
  community and Israel's intelligence services had estimated that the risk to President Mubarak
  was low — less than 20 percent, some officials said.

  According to senior officials who participated in Mr. Obama's policy debates, the president took
  a different view. He made the point early on, a senior official said, that "this was a trend" that
  could spread to other authoritarian governments in the region, including in Iran. By the end of
  the 18-day uprising, by a White House count, there were 38 meetings with the president about
  Egypt. Mr. Obama said that this was a chance to create an alternative to "the Al Qaeda narrative"
  of Western interference.

  American officials had seen no evidence of overtly anti-American or anti-Western sentiment.
  "When we saw people bringing their children to Tahrir Square, wanting to see history being
  made, we knew this was something different," one official said.

  On Jan. 28, the debate quickly turned to how to pressure Mr. Mubarak in private and in public -
  and whether Mr. Obama should appear on television urging change. Mr. Obama decided to call
  Mr. Mubarak, and several aides listened in on the line. Mr. Obama did not suggest that the 82-
  year-old leader step aside or transfer power. At this point, "the argument was that he really
  needed to do the reforms, and do them fast," a senior official said. Mr. Mubarak resisted, saying
  the protests were about outside interference.

  According to the official, Mr. Obama told him, "You have a large portion of your people who are
  not satisfied, and they won't be until you make concrete political, social and economic reforms."

  The next day, the decision was made to send former Ambassador Frank G. Wisner to Cairo as an
  envoy. Mr. Obama began placing calls to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, Prime
  Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey and other regional leaders.

  The most difficult calls, officials said, were with King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia and Mr.
  Netanyahu, who feared regional instability and urged the United States to stick with Mr.
  Mubarak. According to American officials, senior members of the government in Saudi Arabia
  argued that the United States should back Mr. Mubarak even if he used force against the
  demonstrators. By Feb. 1, when Mr. Mubarak broadcast a speech pledging that he would not run
  again and that elections would be held in September, Mr. Obama concluded that the Egyptian
  president still had not gotten the message.

  Within an hour, Mr. Obama called Mr. Mubarak again in the toughest, and last, of their
  conversations. "He said if this transition process drags out for months, the protests will, too," one
  of Mr. Obama's aides said.

  Mr. Mubarak told Mr. Obama that the protests would be over in a few days.

  Mr. Obama ended the call, the official said, with these words: "I respect my elders. And you
  have been in politics for a very long time, Mr. President. But there are moments in history when
  just because things were the same way in the past doesn't mean they will be that way in the
  future."

  The next day, heedless of Mr. Obama's admonitions, Mr. Mubarak launched another attack
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789099 Date: 01/07/2016
