UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795703 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL




                                        CONFIDENTIAL



                                                August 8, 2012



  For: Hillary
  From: Sid
  Re: Euro fear and loathing: Aftermath of the August 2, 2012 European Central Bank (ECB)
  meeting/future plans


  SOURCE: Sources with access to the highest levels of the Governments and institutions
  discussed below. This includes political parties and regional intelligence and security services.



          1. In early August, 2012 German Minister of Finance Wolfgang Schaeuble and
  Chancellor Angela Merkel are closely watching what they fear will be increasing social and
  political unrest in Greece, Spain, and Italy as the Euro-zone economic crisis continues and the
  various governments attempt to deal with their sovereign debts, slow growth, and increasing
  unemployment. Schaeuble also advised his staff to expect anti-German statements from
  politicians in these troubled countries, supported by press coverage. His greatest concern is the
  possibility of these statements leading to hostile actions against German citizens and interests in
  Southern Europe. Following discussions with Schaeuble, Merkel has ordered German
  Embassies and the Stations of the Federal Intelligence Service (Bundesnachtrichtendienst-
  BND) to collect intelligence associated with these threats and the entire, complicated economic
  situation, particularly in Greece, Spain, and Italy.

          2. (Source Comment: A particularly sensitive source added that during late July 2012,
  BND President Gerhard Schindler, and Vice President General Norbert Steir informed Merkel
  and Schaeuble that the BND Operations Center (Abteilung GL) received reporting that media
  outlets owned by former Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi intended to begin attacking
  German government policy toward the Euro-zone in August 2012, calling the Merkel
  administration, among other names, the "Fourth Reich." The Chancellor was particularly
  angered by this reporting. According to Schaeuble, personal attacks of this type make it difficult
  for his staff to withstand the calls for increasingly nationalistic policies from certain officers of
  the Chancellery. Officials of Merkel's ruling Christian Democratic Union/Christian Social



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795703 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795703 Date: 01/07/2016




   Union/Federal Democratic Party (CDU/CSU/FDP) have also learned that the opposition Social
   Democrat Party (SDP) plans during the 2012 national election campaign to accuse Merkel of
   mismanaging fiscal and monetary policy, setting the stage for increased inflation and
   unemployment inside of Germany. )

           3. At the same time, after reviewing the results of the August 2, 2012 European Central
   Bank (ECB) meeting, and his late July discussion with United States Secretary of the Treasury
   Timothy Geithner, the German Minister of Finance told his senior staff members that they must
   be prepared to deal with the crisis in the Euro-zone with little hope of effective action in the
   foreseeable future from the ECB, the Eurogroup, or the European Union (EU) itself. According
   to an extremely sensitive source, Schaeuble is convinced that the seventeen (17) nations of the
   Euro-zone are incapable of making the hard choices needed to address the current economic
   crisis and can be expected to rely on symbolic moves and positive public statements to manage
   the situation. The Minister noted that this conclusion became clear to him from the results of the
   late June EU meeting in Brussels, as well as the August 2 ECB conference. In both cases the
   parties involved agreed on broad statements and limited action, when, in Schaeuble's opinion,
   they must address the serious structural and institutional weaknesses in the Eurogroup, and the
   EU in general. Schaeuble is now preparing for the September 3 finance ministers meetings,
   where he believes that actions regarding Spanish and Italian Bonds will be hotly debated. This
   session will be followed closely by the next ECB meeting on September 6, where Draghi will
   again be under pressure to take some action.

           4. This individual added that, as these meetings approach, Schaeuble now believes that
   needed reforms will not take place until the members of the Euro-zone are faced with real
   disaster, including the collapse of the Euro, serious increases in unemployment, and multiple
   bank failures. Schaeuble and Merkel are equally frustrated by what they view as the failure of
   France, Spain, and Italy to consider seriously the possibility that German internal politics make it
   impossible for the Berlin government to accept broader growth/relief packages for troubled
   economies, without real EU structural reforms. Schaeuble believes that both Geithner and ECB
   President Mario Draghi now realize that with national elections scheduled for 2013 German
   voters will insist that the Merkel administration press the other members of the Euro-zone to
   accept responsibility for their situations before supporting substantial relief packages. For his
   part, Schaeuble now has no doubt that the levels of growth in the U.S. and Chinese economies
   will not increase at rates capable of encouraging European growth until at least 2014.

          5. Accordingly, in the opinion of this particular source, Schaeuble and his advisors
   continue to approach the crisis on a day by day basis, reacting to political and economic
   problems as they develop. While they are not confident that progress can be made on the Euro-
   zone crisis, they will also look for indications that the French government of President Francois
   Hollande and its allies in the Eurogroup are prepared to make the compromises on structural
   reform that will allow the German government to support a comprehensive relief program for the
   problematic economies in Southern Europe. At the same time Schaeuble will work closely with



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795703 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795703 Date: 01/07/2016




  Draghi and Eurozone President Jean-Claude Juncker, the Prime Minister of Luxembourg, both of
  whom discreetly support his position in this matter. Like Schaeuble, Draghi and Juncker are
  concerned that conservative political appointees in the German Chancellery Economic Section
  (Wirtschaflische Abteilung — WA) will press Merkel to become increasingly vocal in expressing
  her frustration with the other members of the Euro-zone as the 2013 German elections approach.
  Schaeuble believes this increasingly nationalist position will become appealing to Merkel if she
  fears losing control of the Bundestag in 2013.

           6. (Source Comment: In the opinion of a very sensitive source, Schaeuble's staff is
   preparing to deal with the negative reaction they believe will develop when the world financial
   markets realize that optimistic public statements made by officials of the ECB and the Euro-zone
   states do not reflect the reality of the current situation. According to this individual, Schaeuble is
   particularly frustrated with Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti in this regard. He has also
   advised Draghi to avoid repeating his actions in July, first making seemingly optimistic
   statements about the Euro, followed by his cautious actions at the August 2 ECB meeting.
   Schaeuble believes that, while Germany must have a clear straightforward position supporting
   the Euro, they must prepare for the possibility that the Currency Union may change in makeup
   and structure as Greece, Spain, and other troubled states are faced with the prospect of having to
   leave or modify their relationships with the Eurogroup. )

           7. Schaeuble added that on September 3, if he can persuade the other Euro-zone finance
   minister to support idea of structural reform in tangible terms, he can persuade Merkel to go
   along with the idea of using the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) to purchase sovereign
   bonds. In the opinion of this individual, Schaeuble believes that by the time the German
   Constitutional Court (GCC) rules on the legality of German participation in the ESM in mid-
   September the crises in Spain and Italy will have reached serious stages, where action must be
   taken. That said his greatest challenge will come if no compromise can be reached on language
   regarding structural changes to the Euro-zone. In that case Schaeuble states that the Merkel
   government will be hard pressed support the ECB program.

           8. According a sensitive source, Schaeuble's advisors feel that the actual function of the
   ECB, maintaining price stability, has faded into the background during the crisis. Under German
   influence, the ECB has taken its duty of combating inflation seriously; however, pressure is
   growing on the mid- and long-term policy decisions which could complicate this position. The
   German officials, both in the Ministry of Finance and the Chancellery fear that the greater the
   quantity of questionable sovereign bonds on the books, the higher the potential losses. Schaeuble
   and his advisors believe that even worse is the potential damage to the bank's reputation; in a
   worst case situation the ECB could become subordinate to finance ministers in crisis-stricken
   countries. Schaeuble added that in Italy such a situation was the norm for decades and the result
   was chronic inflation. He is warning Draghi to guard against accepting a repeat of history. In the
   short term, it might bring relief in the debt crisis, but in the long term it will create an even
   greater crisis involving inflation and high levels of unemployment.



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795703 Date: 01/07/2016
