      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786445 Date: 01/07/2016


                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                         B6




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Friday, March 11, 2011 1:12 PM
To:                                Huma Abed in
Subject:                           Fw: H: Q's trick, Galil's approach. Sid
Attachments:                       hrc memo qaddafi's coming tricks 031011.docx



Pis print.


From: sbwhoeop               [mailto
Sent: Thursday, March 10, 2011 11:13 PM
To: H
Subject: H: Q's trick, Galil's approach. Sid




                                         CONFIDENTIAL



                                                March 10, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Qaddafi's coming tricks and fears; Galil's strategy

Latest report:

As of March 10, 2011 individuals with access to officials of the government of Muammar Qaddafi stated in
confidence that, several of his advisors, including Minister of Foreign Affairs Mousa Kousa, have discussed the
idea of proposing a ceasefire to the National Libyan Council (NLC), followed by negotiations to form a new
government led by a council of technocrats. Under this plan Qaddafi would stay in power as the head of state
and national leader, and the day to day management of the country would be given over to the
technocrats. According to these individuals Qaddafi does not believe the NLC or its leader Mustafa al Galil
will accept this offer, but feels that it enhances his position as head of state in the eye of the world, making it
less likely that NATO or some combination of foreign powers will come to the aid of the rebels.

Mousa Kousa is concerned that while the Western powers remain reluctant to commit to military action in
Libya, they appear to be moving toward a series of political and economic gestures which may weaken the
government. He was particularly concerned by the French government announcing it was recognizing the NLC
as the legitimate government of Libya.

(Source Comment: According to knowledgeable individuals both Qaddafi and Mousa Kousa believe the
announcement of the Russian government that it was suspending arms sales to the Qaddafi regime is symbolic
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786445 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786445 Date: 01/07/2016




in nature, and that the Libyan military will continue to obtain new equipment and replacement parts for its
existing Russian material, even if comes via an indirect route. Qaddafi repeatedly states that he has survived
numerous assassination attempts, an attack by the United States Air Force and tribal uprisings. He is now
increasingly confident that he will survive this crisis.)

On March 10 the rebels continued to move back slowly from the town of Ras Lanuf under fire from the Libyan
Air Force, and the 155 mm motorized guns of the Libyan Army. Galil has expressed concern to the Military
Committee of the NLC regarding unsuccessful efforts to organize the opposition troops into an effective
fighting force. Galil also said to other members of the NLC that he fears the United States and the other NATO
countries are reluctant provide arms to the rebels, because they fear that these weapons will fall into the hands
of al Qai'da and other radical Islamist groups.

Galil is convinced that one of his most important tasks is to convince these Western governments that the rebels
are not supported by al Qai'da, as Qaddafi regularly claims. (Source Comment: To date Galil has had only
limited success in this regard. He also stated that sources in Washington have informed him that certain
officials of the United States Government want to adopt a policy urging the Government of Saudi Arabia to
fund rebel efforts to purchase better weapons. However, as of this time the proposal has not received high level
support.) .

In fighting on March 10, forces loyal to Qaddafi advanced into the outskirts of Ras Lanuf. The Libyan Army
forces moved two T-72 tanks toward the oil town and are firing on rebel positions throughout the day.
Eyewitnesses reported that the rebels are pulling out of the city under the ongoing artillery bombardment.
Similarly, military airstrikes targeted the oil town of Brega, located 56 mi/90 km east of Ras Lanuf.

The Qaddafi regime has begun a crackdown on international media in the country. According to knowledgeable
individuals, journalists from the BBC were detained and tortured by regime officials earlier in the week. BBC
staff members were arrested just outside of the embattled city of Zawiyah, located 30 mi/50 km west of Tripoli.
The BBC journalists received permission from the government to operate in the country. At the same time, a
reporter from Britain's press outlet The Guardian is missing in the country. The Guardian correspondent and a
Brazilian newspaper journalist disappeared on the outskirts of the city of Zawiyah. Guardian officials are
reportedly in touch with Libyan authorities in an attempt to ascertain whether the men have been
detained. (Source Comment: During the evening of March 10 Libyan Army forces advanced into Zawiyah, as
the rebels withdrew.)

On March 9 advisors to Saif al Islam Qaddafi stated in confidence that his father had dispatched senior officials
to Lisbon, Brussels, Cairo, and Vienna, carrying the message that Qaddafi is willing to negotiate the surrender
of rebel forces, insuring their safety if they lay down their arms. Qaddafi believes that Mustafa Galil and other
former members of his government who joined the rebels must be prosecuted for treason, but he is prepared to
pardon the bulk of the rebels. In the opinion of these sources Qaddafi is asking these governments of the
European Union and Egypt to weigh in with the rebels and influence them to receive Qaddafi's representatives
to discuss an end to the fighting.

In Egypt, Qaddafi's representative, Maj. Gen. Abdul-Rahman al-Zawi, received a cool reception from
representatives of the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF), who reminded al-Zawi of the incident in
1991 when ten members of the rebel Libyan National Army (LNA), under Colonel Khalifa Haftar, accepted
Qaddafi's offer of amnesty if they returned to Libya from their base in the Congo. Upon their return these LNA
fighters were arrested put on trial for treason and executed. (Source Comment: Al-Zawi asked to discuss these
matters further after he had talked to Tripoli.)

According to these knowledgeable sources, forces loyal to Libyan leader Muammar Qaddafi closed in on rebel
forces in locations in both the eastern and western parts of the country on 9 March 2011. In Zawiyah, located
approximately 30 mi/50 km west of Tripoli, government forces surrounded rebels in the central city square.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786445 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786445 Date: 01/07/2016




Eyewitnesses have reported seeing snipers and tanks surrounding the fighters and stated that clashes are
ongoing. Government forces also drew closer to the rebel-held port city of Ras Lanuf in the eastern portion of
the country on March 9. Rebel and government forces clashed just outside of the city, approximately 12 mi/20
km from the city center. Government forces also launched rockets at strategic areas of Ras Lanuf during the
overnight hours of 8-9 March. Several injuries have been reported over the last 24 hours.

Conditions in Tripoli have been calm in recent days. Tensions remain significantly elevated, but government
orders and edicts have instilled an almost forced normality to day-to-day operations in the city. Traffic and
transport is normal, and shops and businesses are open; however, business operations have become increasingly
difficult due to stifled economic activity, rising prices and an increasing scarcity of goods. Internet services and
telecommunications, including text and most mobile phone services, have been suspended in the country for
nearly a week, creating further business operation problems for workers and companies in the capital.
Government surveillance has increased, and security and pro-Qaddafi militia patrols are prominent throughout
the city.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786445 Date: 01/07/2016
