UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793466 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL




                                        CONFIDENTIAL



                                                December 8, 2012



  For: Hillary
  From:- Sid
  Re: Intel: Badie, Morsi and the Opposition



  SOURCE: Sources with access to the highest levels of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, The
  leadership of the Armed Forces, and Western Intelligence, diplomatic, and security services.



           1. During the evening of December 7, 2012 Egyptian President Mohamad Morsi.,
  speaking in confidence, told senior advisors that he remains focused on establishing a lasting'
  Egyptian regime under the Muslim Brotherhood (MB) and its associated Freedom and justice
  Party (FJP). At the same time, according to an extremely sensitive source. Morsi added that
  although the ongoing demonstrations against his declaration of emergency powers will continue,
  and, if anything, become more violent, he firmly believes that at least 60 per cent of Egyptian
  voters continue to support his efforts to eliminate the last vestiges of the regime of former
  president Hosni Mubarak. That said, Morsi admitted that the current level of violence could not
  continue, and might lead to more serious conflicts across the country between MB/FJP activists,
  and the secular/liberal anti-government demonstrators. In the opinion of these individuals MB
  Supreme Guide Mohammad Badie advised Morsi to moderate his immediate position on
  presidential authority. Sadie wants Morsi to meet with anti-government leaders to see what he
  would have to do to calm their activities. According to Morsi, Badie and other MB leaders
  advised that the solution for the current situation lies in identifying the minimum he will have to
  give in compromise in order to regain control the situation.



         2. According to this source, Badie reminded the president that during the 2011
  parliamentary and presidential elections he had warned Morsi to control his FJP activists who
  were intimidating Christian and secular/liberal voters. Badie pointed out that Morsi's failure to




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793466 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793466 Date: 01/07/2016




   accept his advice in that situation had let to unneeded tension and international criticism, just as
   the new government was standing up. In the opinion of this individual Morsi and his advisors
   spent much of the week of December 3 developing a new strategy to deal with the current
   situation. For the present Morsi and Egyptian Army commander General Abdel Fatah al-Sissi
   agree that the MB leadership must continue to do what they can to control the movement's
   activists. While Morsi believes that it is important for MB supporters to demonstrate in support
   of the government, he agrees that they must control the number of people involved since these
   numbers to be directly proportional to the level of violence, according to the operatives of the
   Military Intelligence Service (MI -Mukhabarat el-Khabeya) sent by al-Sissi to follow the
   demonstrations. According to an extremely sensitive source, these MI operatives are also
   photographing and creating files on the leaders of the secular/liberal demonstrations, for
   potential future use.



           3. (Source Comment: According to a sensitive source, Badie and the leadership of the
   MB believe they are on the verge of reaching the goal of their eighty-five (85) year campaign to
   gain control of the Egyptian government. While Badie and FJP parliamentary leader Sand al
   Katany often find Morsi a difficult partner, they are convinced that he can achieve their goals;
   their main concern at this time is that the judges and other administrative holdovers from the
   Mubarak regime could slow their efforts, far more than the secular/liberal opposition. At the
   same time they are also concerned that the Salafist al Nur party, their nominal parliamentary ally,
   might attempt to expand its authority in the government. All of these concerns relate to the
   belief of these MB leaders, including Morsi, that the new government must be able to reassure
   foreign government and business leaders that the MB/FJP regime will be a good partner in the
   international world. Badie told associates that Morsi had overplayed his hand by moving so
   abruptly to expand his position, but now there is a possibility that this overreach will work in his
   favor as he negotiates with opposition figures to reach an agreement to stop the violent
   demonstrations.)



          4. According to an extremely sensitive source, Morsi 's first step in this effort to gain
  control of the situation was to support the move by election officials to postpone the scheduled
  early voting for the draft constitution. Advisors to Morsi also notified contacts in the
  secular/liberal opposition that it was possible that the entire election could be postponed until a
  new, more inclusive draft constitution had been developed. In the opinion of this knowledgeable
  individual the key issue is a reassurance that these opposition figures will not interfere with
  Morsi's efforts to weed out the Mubarak appointees from all levels of the government. Al
  Katany for one believes this is possible since the secular/liberal leaders are also hostile to the
  Mubarak legacy. Al Katany added that he believes Morsi plans to offer the possibility of
  prosecuting or re-prosecuting some of the Mubarak officials, a move that also will be popular




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793466 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793466 Date: 01/07/2016




 with the opposition. Only the former military leadership would be excused from this process, as
 all sides want to avoid putting al-Sissi in the position of having to defend his mentors.

         5. (Source Comment: According a knowledgeable individual, Badie has instructed
 MB/FJP activist organizers to practice restraint, as large groups of MB supporters gathered at
 Mosques around the country on the afternoon of Friday December 7. The Supreme Guide asked
 these groups to avoid confrontation with their opponents, at least for the time being. At the same
 time, senior MB officials stated in confidence that Ismail Hamdi, the chairman of the national
 election commission, secretly met with senior advisors to Morsi during the week of December 3
 and then announced a delay in the early voting on the new constitution. This move was kept
 secret and came as a surprise to most observers and the press. The MB/FJP publicity officers
 moved quickly to portray this move as the basis for a compromise in the crisis.)



          6. In the opinion of this individual Morsi was disappointed but not surprised when the
 opposition rejected talks aimed at compromise. Some of the opposition leaders called for a sit-in
 demonstration at the presidential palace, but Morsi and his staff believe that they can overcome
 this initial reaction if they can identify opposition leaders who might be more flexible. In the
 meantime, Minister of Legal Affairs Mohammed Mahsoub stated that he is considering several
 options, including cancelling the referendum, and moving the entire process back to the
 parliament for a compromise and a new draft. He also hinted that Morsi could dissolve
 parliament; forming a new body through a special election. Morsi developed this position- in an
 effort to set the basis for negotiation. His confidence is based on MB/FJP polling indicating that
 sixty to sixty five per cent of the voting public will continue to support their control of the
 government.

          7. (Source Comment: In the opinion of this individual Morsi, his Vice President
  IVIahmoud Mekki and Badie are convinced that democracy advocate Mohamed el Baradei will
  join in compromise negotiations eventually. They note that el Baradei heads the National
  Salvation Front (NSF), a secular/liberal umbrella group opposed to Morsi's decrees, while
  encouraging the protests in Cairo. While el Baradei continues to reject offers to negotiate. Badie
  is convinced that the former diplomat's ambition will drive him to accept the offer eventually. In
  the same vein one of Morsi's greatest concerns is identifying the real leaders of the opposition.)



          8. According to a particularly sensitive source, Morsi, Badie and the rest of the MB/FJP
  leadership realize that they must adjust their tactics for the immediate future, but they will stand
  by their goal of establishing long-term control of the government administrative structure, while
  disposing of Mubarak supporters. They will look for acceptable compromise positions, but in
  the end are convinced that they will emerge from this process as the leaders of Egypt. At present
  they continue to count on the support of al-Sissi and 60-65% of the voting populace. Their short-



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793466 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793466 Date: 01/07/2016




   term goals are to gain control of the current security situation, while reassuring the foreign
   business and diplomatic community that although the current situation is part of a messy post-
   revolutionary period, the MB/FJP, and the Islamist government of Egypt will be a reasonable
   partner for the international community.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793466 Date: 01/07/2016
