       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796068 Date: 01/07/2016


                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                   B6




From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Monday, November 26, 2012 7:04 AM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Barak Announces Retirement



Fyi


From: Shapiro, Daniel B (Tel Aviv)
Sent: Monday, November 26. 2012 06:55 AM
To: 'Donilon, Thomas E.'                                     ; 'McDonough Denis R.'
                                      ; simon, steven N; Abell, Andy <                             ; Sullivan, Jacob J;
Burns, William J; Sherman, Wendy R; Jones, Beth E; Hale, David M; Dibble, Elizabeth L; Hegadorn, Chris S
Cc: Vinograd, Samantha             _ _      _                    I; Canegallo, Kristie A.
                                   .; Goldberger, Thomas H
        —
Subject: Barak Announces Retirement

Defense Minister Ehud Barak announced in a press conference at 11:00 AM local time that he will not run for re-election
to the next Knesset, and he will retire from political life. He says he will complete his term as Defense Minister in
February or March when the new government takes office following the Jan. 22 elections. His announcement took the
political world by surprise. After near 50 years of public service, he said, he desired to spend time with his family.

He was asked in his press conference if he would consider accepting a "personal appointment" as Defense Minister in
the new government. The law permits the prime minister to nominate non-Knesset members to be ministers in the
government. Barak was vague in his reply, but clearly did not close the door to this possibility. Political observers are
split on the likelihood that a reelected PM Netanyahu would turn to Barak in this capacity. The PM may see advantages
in his personal comfort with Barak and the more moderate image Barak can project to the international community, but
there would be strong opposition to such an appointment within the Likud party.

The first name often mentioned as the next Defense Minister is Minister of Strategic Affairs Moshe "Bogey" Yaalon
(Likud). But it is a long way to go to anticipate how portfolios will shake out in the new government.

Here is a partial transcript of his announcement:



      .I had the privilege to assume a major role in the team that led
       Operation Pillar of Defense, both militarily and politically, all the
       way to its successful end so far. Fifty-three years ago, in November
       1959, I enlisted in the IDF and since then and for 47 years, I have
        served the people of Israel as best as I could. Today I stand before you
        to announce my decision to retire from politics and not to stand for
        re-election in the coming elections to the Knesset.


       I made this decision whole-heartedly, despite some deliberations. I
       would be lying if I'd say that the warmth I've been feeling from the
       public during these past few days, and even the somewhat positive
       coverage I've received from some of you in the media were not pleasant.
       Not having been spoiled this way, I know to appreciate this support and
       am happy with it.



       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796068 Date: 01/07/2016
  UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796068 Date: 01/07/2016



Practically speaking, I will vacate my position as defense minister
after the next government is formed, in about three months' time. That
will be the end of a cumulative period of seven and a half years I spent
in that office, in two tenures, under three governments, one of which I
headed. These were years when I, alongside others, led the Israeli
Defense Forces, rehabilitated it after the Second Lebanon War,
strengthened its long arm and its operational capabilities, so it can
withstand the Iranian threat, if and when a decision is made on the
subject. I've promoted the Iron Dome and the multi-layered missile
interception system, and no less important, we safeguarded the essence
and depth of the operational, intelligence, and diplomatic aspects of
our relationship with the Americans.


I am proud of the fact that during the past year and a half, aside from
the important operational achievements, a new sense of openness,
truthfulness, integrity, calm self-confidence, and modesty has returned
to the IDF -- attributes that have been scathed from time to time in the
past. We have restored the basics of the ethical code, and the
unequivocal understanding of the democratic basis of our lives, whereby
the military level is subordinate to the political level.


My decision to retire is based on my wish to spend more time with my
family. I feel that I have had enough of politics, which I was never
exceptionally passionate about. I also feel we need to allow other
people to take up high-ranking positions in Israel. Personnel turnover
in high-level positions is a good thing, and there are many ways to
contribute to the society and to the country, not only through politics.
As a former IDF chief-of-staff and prime minister, as a present defense
minister, and as long as my advice is needed and valued, I will make it
available to the prime minister and to senior officials in any political
or security issue.


I extend my gratitude to IDF commanders and soldiers, both reservists
and in the regular army, to the Defense Ministry and IDF Intelligence
personnel, for helping me function successfully as minister of defense,
and I am proud of the privilege of heading such a fine group. I thank
the prime minister and my colleagues in the government, and my devoted
friends in the Atzma'ut party who gave me much strength to cope daily
with numerous arduous tasks, for years and years. Thanks to all.


In the coming three months we     will continue to tackle together all
challenges we are facing, and     I promise you that there will be many
challenges. I would also like     to thank all of you for coming here on
such short notice to cover my     announcement. Now, I would like to answer
your questions.




  UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796068 Date: 01/07/2016
