        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788774 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                                                                          RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                         H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                                         Sunday, September 18, 2011 9:28 AM
To:                                           'abedinh@state.gov'
Subject:                                      Re: Pakistan troops battle Taliban for US drone debris (AP)



I like the idea of these. How high are they? What would the bench be made of? And I'd prefer two shelves or attractive
boxes/baskets/ conmtainers on one. What do you think?


From: Abedin, Huma [mailto:AbedinH@state.gov]
Sent: Sunday, September 18, 2011 09:16 AM
To: H
Subject: Fw: Pakistan troops battle Taliban for US drone debris (AP)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Sunday, September 18, 2011 09:07 AM
To: NEWS-Mahogany; NEWS-Afghanistan
Cc: SES-O
Subject: Pakistan troops battle Taliban for US drone debris (AP)



DERA ISMAIL KHAN,          Pakistan - (AP) Pakistani soldiers battled Taliban fighters in an attempt to seize
precious debris from a suspected U.S. drone that crashed in a rugged tribal area near the Afghan border,
Pakistani intelligence officials and militants said Sunday.
   The Taliban said they shot down the unmanned aircraft, which crashed Saturday night near Jangara village in
the South Waziristan tribal area.
   Pakistani intelligence officials said they were not certain whether Taliban fire or technical problems brought
down the drone. Drone crashes have happened before in Pakistan, but they are rare.
   Pakistan first learned of the crash by intercepting Taliban radio communications, said the intelligence
officials, speaking on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to talk to the media.
   The debris was first seized by the Taliban. Several hours later, the Pakistani army sent soldiers in to wrest it
out of militant hands, sparking a fight with the Taliban in which three militants were killed, said the officials.
Three militants and two soldiers were also wounded in the clash, they said.
   The intelligence officials said the troops were successful in seizing the debris, but Pakistani Taliban
commander Azmatullah Diwana claimed his fighters repelled the soldiers. The army then sent helicopter
gunships into the area where the militants were holding the debris, Diwana told The Associated Press by
telephone from an undisclosed location.
   Nawab Khan, a government official in South Waziristan, confirmed the drone crash and the subsequent clash
between militants and army troops. But he did not know whether the soldiers were successful in seizing the
debris.
   Neither the Pakistani army nor the U.S. Embassy responded to request for comment.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788774 Date: 01/07/2016
