UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785628 Date: 01/07/2016




                                        CONFIDENTIAL                                 RELEASE IN FULL




                                                March 6, 2011



  For: Hillary
  From: Sid
  Re: Qaddafi fears interim government


  Latest report:


  During the afternoon of March 6, advisors to Muammar al-Qaddafi and his son Saif al Islam
  stated in confidence that, while Qaddafi himself remains confident that his forces can gain the
  upper hand against rebel forces throughout the country, Saif is increasingly concerned that the
  rebels will form an interim government that will give the United States and the nations of
  Western Europe a focal point for providing both military and humanitarian aid to the rebels. Saif
  is encouraging his father to continue to speak out accusing the rebels of being puppets of these
  Western states. By the same token, Saif has instructed government spokesmen to return to the
  idea that, if this revolution succeeds, Islamist groups such as al Qa'ida and the Libyan Fighting
  Group (LFG), which Qaddafi has suppressed, will use Libya as a base for attacking the Western
  states and their allies. Saif believes that pressing these two themes will, if nothing else, confuse
  the foreign governments, and complicate their efforts to aid the rebels.


  (Source Comment: One source with access to Saif stated that word had spread through the
  Qaddafi government that NATO special forces troops —either Dutch or German -- had been
  captured by government forces outside of Tripoli on 4 or 5 March. Their sources also reported
  they believe 8-10 British troops had been taken into custody by rebel forces in Benghazi on 4
  March. Similar reports have appeared in the press, but there is no independent confirmation.)



  As of 6 March, Qaddafi's military advisors, including his sons Montasem and Khamis are
  warning Qadddfi that the 1500-2000 person rebel force advancing from Benghazi toward Tripoli
  presents the most immediate threat to the regime. They are particularly concerned by the
  situation in Misrata, warning that if the rebels can consolidate their hold on this town, they will
  be able to threaten Sirte, the base of Qaddafi's tribe, the Qadhafah. According to some advisors,
  Qaddafi views Sirte as a fallback position if he cannot remain in Tripoli; loss of this town would
  be a serious Psychological and Strategic blow to the regime. Government forces have used
  attack helicopters and ground support aircraft to attack the rebel forces at Misrata and, while they
  have been unable to secure the town, they have inflicted heavy casualties on the rebels and
  slowed their advance on Sirte.


  (Source Comment: Individuals with access to Qaddafi's military advisors believe government
  forces will make increasing use of their attack helicopters and the 250 combat air craft still under
  their control. They also state that Qaddafi believes that the rebels may soon receive more
 sonhi sti cated nti-iircrift weannne frnm rho NA/Aetarn                 —411
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785628 Date: 01/07/2016
