     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795668 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                         B6


From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Tuesday, September 18, 2012 10:10 PM
To:                                'sullivanjj@state.gov.
Subject:                           Fw: H: Intel, Assad's plans for retreat. Sid
Attachments:                       hrc_memo_assad's_plans_091812.docx



In line w what we've heard but more detailed.


From: Sidney Blumenthal I
Sent: Tuesday, September 18, 2012 02:28 PM
To: H
Subject: H: Intel, Assad's plans for retreat. Sid




                                         CONFIDENTIAL



                                                    September 18, 2012



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Assad's plans

SOURCE: Sources with access to the highest levels of the Governments and institutions discussed
below. This includes political parties and regional intelligence and security services.


       1. During mid-September 2012 a sensitive source stated that while Syrian President Bashar al
Assad remains convinced that his military forces can defeat the forces of the rebel Free Syrian Army
(FSA), his closest family advisors are discreetly working on plans for a retreat to the Alawite
homeland around the cities of Latakia and Tartus. Although Syrian military commanders believe that
the lack of unity among the factions of the FSA and the rebel Syrian National Council (SNC), added to
the continuing support of the governments of Russia and China for Assad, give them a real advantage
over the rebels they realize that the situation could change rapidly if the rebels score major victories to
follow up on their successes in July 2012. In particular, the continued defection of Sunni Arab
supporters undermines Assad's Alawite based regime; with the Alawites controlling only
approximately twelve (12) percent of the population.

       2. (Source Comment: This particularly sensitive individual stated that Assad does regularly
visit Latakia, which serves to inspire reports that he has or is about to permanently flee Damascus.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795668 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795668 Date: 01/07/2016




This source believes that this step will come only when it appears the Army has turned against him or
is falling apart in the face of FSA attacks.)

       3. In the opinion of this individual, the reverses suffered by the Syrian Army in July have been
offset by increased military supplies from their foreign allies, particularly Russia. This source adds
that the support from Russia for the Syrian helicopter forces has been particularly important. At the
same time, the Assad family and their closest supporters realize that if the FSA does capture
Damascus they will face violent retribution for their activities during the civil war. While Bashar al
Assad remains confident, his wife, and several other close relatives are focused on the fate of Assad's
former ally Muammar al Qaddafi of Libya, who was captured and killed by rebel forces while
attempting to flee to his home territory of Sirte. These individuals say in private that they do not
want Assad to make the same mistake and wait too long to retreat to a secure area. This individual
repeated that Assad had not, in his opinion, reached the point where he is willing to abandon
Damascus, and begin any possible partition of Syria.

        4. (Source Comment: According to a particularly sensitive source, President Assad is not
interested in fighting to the death, and is watching the situation in Damascus with great care.
However, for the present he is convinced that his forces are making advances against his enemies.
This source believes that Assad worries that to a certain extent he is the prisoner of his father's legacy
and there is a very real risk the Alawite commanders of the Army would move against him if he does
not continue to show resolve. Assad does realizes that if he is eventually forced to flee Libya and is
unable to reach Russia or another allied state, he will be detained and face a trial for human rights
violations at the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the Hague.)
       5. A separate sensitive source added that Assad's contingency plans take into consideration the
fact that Latakia Province is the heart of Alawite region. The village of Qardaha, located just outside
of Latakia in the al-Alawiyin Mountains is the Assad family's ancestral home, where Assad's father
Hafez al-Assad and his eldest brother, Basil, are buried in the family crypt. The Assad family tightly
controls an area of about 6o miles around Qardaha, in what was the short lived Alawite State set up
during the French mandate prior to Syrian independence in 1946. This region includes the city of
Latakia and the port of Tartus with its Russian naval base protected by 2,500 elite marines. The
Assad family advisors believe that if necessary the President, his family, and closest advisors can
retreat to this region, where they can continue to receive supplies via the Russian naval base for a
period of time. They also believe that the foreign supporters of the FSA will be reluctant to take direct
military action in the region around the Russian base, fearing a serious international incident if
Russia facilities or personnel are attacked by mistake.
        6. (Source Comment: A particularly sensitive source added that the planning for a fallback
position for Assad became more intense following July 18 attack on the National Security Building in
which Assad's brother-in-law and other senior officials were killed. But the President is for the
present reassured by the increased success of the Army, the continuing support of Russia, and the
failure of the FSA to form a united front, despite the efforts of Turkey, Qatar, and Saudi Arabia. That
said Assad's family advisors are also talking to Hezbollah leaders, who have promised to support the
Syrian President if he is forced to withdraw to Latakia, working out of their bases in the nearby Bekka
valley in Lebanon. According to this plan, the Assad clan could try to hold on to the strip of coastal
and mountainous land between the northern border with Turkey and the southern Lebanese frontier.


       7. According to a very sensitive source, Assad realizes that a retreat to the Alawite region will
be a very temporary solution at best. Even the President's closest advisors do not believe that they
can set up a separate Alawite state, and see any move in this direction as a last stand, from which
Assad's supporters could try to mount an insurgency against an SNC revolutionary government in
Damascus. At the same time it will provide the President and the ruling family with a secure escape
route via the Russian Naval base at Tartus.
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795668 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795668 Date: 01/07/2016




        8. (Source Comment: One particularly sensitive source added that Assad's closest advisors are
convinced that if the fighting goes badly for his government, the President will hang on in Damascus
until there is absolutely no chance for a successful counter-attack. They contend that he realizes that
a retreat to Latakia will be the beginning of what will be a very short lived endgame in the revolution.
At this point this source believes that Assad is still convinced his forces can maintain their advantage
over the FSA until internal conflicts in the SNC, and between Qatar and Saudi Arabia, undermine the
revolution.)




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795668 Date: 01/07/2016
