     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792439 Date: 01/07/2016

                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL




From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Thursday, August 9, 2012 1:40 PM
To:
Subject:                         Fw: UPDATED: TRIP CLIP: AP (Lee): Clinton pushes Nigeria on terrorism, corruption




From: Nuland, Victoria 3
Sent: Thursday, August 09, 2012 01:29 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3; Reines, Philippe I; Carson, Johnnie; Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Fw: UPDATED: TRIP CLIP: AP (Lee): Clinton pushes Nigeria on terrorism, corruption




From: PA Clips [mailto:paclips@state.gov]
Sent: Thursday, August 09, 2012 12:09 PM
To: PA-Monitoring-Group-DL; AF-Public Affairs-DL; DRL Public Affairs; Shore, Rhonda H
Subject: UPDATED: TRIP CUP: AP (Lee): Clinton pushes Nigeria on terrorism, corruption



Clinton pushes Nigeria on terrorism, corruption
By MATTHEW LEE I Associated Press —42 mills ago

ABUJA, Nigeria (AP) — U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton urged Nigerian
authorities Thursday to boost their intelligence capabilities to better combat growing
extremist violence.
Clinton is proposing that Nigeria create an "intelligence fusion cell" that would
combine information from the military, spy services, police and other federal, state and
local agencies. The cell would also coordinate counter-terrorism activities and serve as
a contact for foreign intelligence services, said State Department officials.
The officials said the US was ready to assist the cell with organizational expertise,
training and equipment, including computers, and would offer the aid to Nigerian
President Goodluck Jonathan and his new national security adviser, Mohammed
Dasuld, on whom the U.S. has high hopes for expanded intelligence cooperation.
The officials were speaking on condition of anonymity because Clinton had not begun
her meetings with Nigerian officials yet.
The US has become increasingly concerned about the threat posed by militant groups
in west Africa such as the Islamist Boko Haram in Nigeria and cells of al-Qaida linked
fighters in northern Mali.
The security situation in Nigeria has deteriorated to the point where the movement of
U.S. embassy workers is often restricted. Clinton will spend only about five hours on
the ground and will not spend the night in Abuja, where the hotel traditionally used by
visiting U.S. dignitaries has been the target of terrorist threats.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792439 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792439 Date: 01/07/2016




Boko Haram seeks the strict implementation of Shariah, or Islamist law, across
Nigeria. The terrorist group is held responsible for more than 650 deaths this year
alone according to an Associated Press count
The group's gain in strength and lethality has led some US lawmakers to demand that
Boko Haram be designated a "foreign terrorist organization" and subjected to
enhanced sanctions. The Obama administration has said it is reviewing the case but
notes that numerous individual members are already on US financial blacklists.
American officials also worry that Boko Haram's rise might destabilize the broader
region, particularly in Mali, where Islamist militants are taking advantage of a post-
coup power vacuum to sow unrest in the north.
Nigeria, Africa's most populous country, plays a dominant leadership role in West
Africa and Clinton will be urging the country to continue to support regional
peacekeeping and stabilization efforts.
In addition to security matters, Clinton was discussing good governance, rule of law
and corruption with Nigerian officials.
Nigeria is plagued with endemic corruption and after meeting the president, Clinton
was to speak to members of an anticorruption league.
Oil-rich Nigeria is the 5th leading exporter of oil to the United States and officials said
Clinton would raise the importance of approving new petroleum legislation designed to
attract more foreign investment. Clinton's brief stop in Nigeria comes as she winds
down an n-day, 9-nation tour of Africa that began in Senegal and has then taken her to
Uganda, South Sudan, Kenya, Malawi and South Africa. She will wrap up the Africa
portion of her trip in Ghana, where she will attend the state funeral for the late
President John Atta Mills who died in late July, and Benin.
After Benin, Clinton will fly to Turkey for talks on the growing crisis in Syria.

DGH




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792439 Date: 01/07/2016
