UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778763 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                            RELEASE IN FULL




                                          CONFIDENTIAL



                                                  February 21, 2011



   For: Hillary
   From: Sid
   Re: Libya intel

   I just received this, more to come:

   This is just in from Italian intel.

   Just in, we are getting good reporting from Libya, the sourcing is from the ruling family, the
   highest levels of the military, and diplomats/intel. Mostly via Italy.

   As of this hour, some units of the Peoples Militia have gone over to the demonstrators in
   Benghazi, and that is the origin of the report of mutinies. This is a possibility and the
   government no longer controls Benghazi, but it is too early for large scale mutinies.

   There are two subplots, tension between the eastern (Benghazi) and western (Tripoli) parts of the
   country, and tension between the two oldest Qaddhfi sons. In the east there is support for the
   former royal family, and modern reforms. This area also supports Saif al Isalm Qaddhafi
   (second son, living in London/Vienna.) At the same time there is a violent conflict between
   those portions of the Presidential Guard loyal to Saif, the bulk of the Peoples Militia which is
   loyal to his older brother, national security advisor Motasem Qaddahfi.

    Sisme is reporting that the Militia is firing on demonstrators who area attempting to surrender.
    Military officers, and the hospitals report that many of the wounds are being inflicted from close
    range.

    Sisme believes that once the regime resorts to extreme violence they have set the stage for their
    downfall; the people, particularly in the east, are enraged. The violence is following the coast
    highway moving from town to town toward Tripoli.

    These sources say that the situation is completely unpredictable and quite dangerous. They
    advise that all Americans should leave the country as soon as possible, as the Embassy has
    warned.

    While rumors of Qaddahfi's departure for Venezuela are apparently not true, it is important,
    however, that at this early stage in the struggle they are being taken seriously by some of his
    supporters. (Qaddahfi is a friend of Hugo Chavez.)




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778763 Date: 01/07/2016
