      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785715 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                          RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Wednesday, December 21, 2011 8:57 AM
To:
Subject:                           Maliki



Subject: UPDATE ON POLITICAL CRISIS



See below for Maliki press conference. He did not himself appeal for a gathering of leaders but rather made reference
to what was done in the CoM (bold under "General" category below). I will have coming in on high side some ideas on
next steps within 30 minutes. Below are summaries of where we are at today (Somewhat fewer Shia Asura flags on
military vehicles today, some are now sporting Iraqi flags, so this is one PM commitment at least partially kept):




lssawi: Sees unrest/demos throughout Sunni areas. People there see this as purely political, no one trusts judiciary, can
lead to civil strife. Iran is behind this, putting pressure on Sunnis to force Turkey to a deal—'you stop in Syria, and 'we'
(Iranians/Shia/Maliki) will stop in Iraq. This allegedly 'explains' why Shia leaders normally ready to trash Maliki (Jaferi-
see below, Al Hakim—tho he is off to Ankara, etc) are remaining quiet. US needs to use its carrots and particularly
sticks now. Kurds split—some of PUK/Talabani Kurds attended CoR, KDP MP's all stayed away. Somewhat the same in
CoM meeting. Said Maliki should not convene leaders, half or most of Iraqiyya would not attend, it should be Talabani
or Jaferi.

Chief Justice Medhat: Told me that contrary to Maliki to us and to media (below), Judicary specifically banned judge
participating in TV confession airing after Medhat tried to pull the plug (this was why two days ago the television
spectacle was first off, then later aired). Medhat has now thrown the whole investigation to a special Inquiry of five
justices, 'balanced' between Sunnis and Shia (he said he was embarrassed to even say this but felt he had to, we thus did
not press on 'ratio'). Only they can issue arrests, etc. Hashemi has an arrest warrant out on him from the Inquiry, and
due to a change in the law (ironically sponsored by Hashemi strongly) does not have any immunity. Medhat did see the
problem with a case based almost entirely on confessions, with only one piece of hard evidence (a VBIED), no known
motive, allegedly against someone who had just pressed to have his own immunity lifted. I pushed hard on the
credibility of the judiciary, and Sunni arguments that it was biased. He needed to make the point that the judiciary and
this investigation was independent, professional and transparent. After much back and forth he said his official
 spokesman, a senior judge, would speak to the public on the issue tomorrow. I told him to consider what he can do with
 Maliki (he has not spoken to him) and with the media. His spokesperson might not be enough.

Ex-PM Jaferi: He is being courted by everyone. He seemed to believe the charges against Hashemi, but understands the
gravity of the situation. Promised me he would do whatever he could to calm things.

SOL Bloc Leader Khalid Attiyah:




       The only real way forward was a political dialogue between Maliki and Nujaifi to address the underlying power-
 sharing disputes between SOL and Iraqiyya, Attiyah told us today. Nujaifi was "reasonable" and able to control the
 Sunni street; plus, Maliki could work with him.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785715 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785715 Date: 01/07/2016




      Everything should be on the table in these Maliki — Nujaifi talks: Sunni calls for new regions, the November 2010
Erbil Agreements, and Maliki's desire to build a functioning government. The Shia strongly prefer that Talabani convene.
They have two condition: (1) Maliki would not welcome Barzani's participation, as their personal relationship had
become too tense and mistrustful, and (2) the dialogue should take place in Baghdad (vice the IKR).




     The strong security presence in the IZ would continue through January 6 given specific threat information, but he
agreed that tanks/HMMVVs should be moved away from lraqiyya residences as an immediate step to calm things down.




•     SOL was "very uncomfortable" with ISCI leader Ammar Hakim's visit to Turkey. Trust between SOL and ISCI,
already weak, had reached a new record low. But the Turks will still not succeed in convincing Hakim to join lraqiyya in a
vote of no confidence against Maliki.




PRESS CONFERENCE




Summary: Maliki called for the KRG to turn in Hashimi to the judiciary, saying it should not "appear to be aiding a
wanted figure escape." He stated Parliament is required to dismiss Salih al-Mutlaq, and cabinet ministers not attending
cabinet meetings will be considered to have resigned. He said a majority government is the alternative "if the
constitution is not taken as a reference," and he himself calls for a majority government because "a partnership
government is not efficient." On the U.S., Maliki stated that 700 U.S. trainers will remain inside camps Iraq to train Iraqi
forces. He said the U.S. Embassy staff has not exceeded 2,000 employees, and will be subject to visa requirements
which will allow the GOI to know their number. In addition, Iraq itself has requested specialists in fields such agriculture
and industry, which might be a reason for the increase the number of employees.




 Detailed Highlights:




Security, Justice, and Political Issues

      Security is not a subject for negotiation with anyone, internally or externally. Security and justice are independent
 and nobody has the right to speak about justice.       There is no other option but to resort to the constitution, which is

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785715 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785715 Date: 01/07/2016




the key point in resolving any problems we have, which are many. All initiatives should be done according to the
Constitution, even in our initiative on Syrian crisis.•   When we disagree on the constitution, there are other channels
for resolving issues, such as Parliament, the Shura Council, Judiciary system, and others.•      I cannot say the
constitution is complete [without problematic issues], but working with it is far better than working without it and we
should not reject it.•     Justice and security should not be politicized, and we should separate between criminal and
political cases, and all should be done in accordance with constitution. There are mechanisms set forth by the
constitution to define the authorities vested in all government agencies and how to coordinate between them.•             A
majority government is the alternative if the constitution is not taken as a reference.•     I for one call for a majority
government in the next stage because a partnership government is not efficient.•         The judiciary is not perfect, but it
is not politicized.

Hashimi

•     The confessions [regarding Hashimi] were aired after permission from the judiciary, the Iraqi judiciary allows this.
Evidence is present at the judiciary, and it shows whether [the evidence and confessions] were taken under duress or
not.      Hashimi's case is not new, but it was delayed due to forming the government and reconciliation, and also the
continuation of killings prompted us to take action. I received new information on crime just before heading on my
recent trip abroad.•      Arab League intervention [in the Hashimi issue] is rejected•    The KRG should not allow VP
Hashimi to "escape," and should turn him in to the judiciary. Judicial orders apply to the entire country, including the
Kurdistan region. We hope that the KRG will not appear as if to be aiding a wanted figure escape.

Iraqiya Boycott

      Cabinet ministers not attending cabinet meetings will be considered to have resigned.          Only four ministers so
far have boycotted cabinet meetings.

Mutlaq

      I did not threaten to resign if Mutlaq was not voted out by Parliament, but Parliament is required to dismiss Salih
al-Mutlaq.•       Mutlaq's comments are detrimental to the political process, especially since he is a participant in the
political process, and it is not only comments, but other actions as well.

U.S. Relations

       700 U.S. trainers will remain inside camps Iraq to train Iraqi forces. U.S. Embassy staff numbers have not exceeded
2,000.•       U.S. Embassy personnel presence will be organized under visa regulations, we will know their numbers and
specialties [work.] We have requested certain specialists here in the fields of agriculture and industry. So our own
requests might be a reason for the increase in Embassy personnel numbers.             A meeting was held with the president
of ExxonMobil in the U.S., "pending issues" were discussed, and the president promised to look into them.             The
presence of foreign troops has ended and ISF has assumed full responsibility for security, which is considered a
successful return of Iraqi sovereignty and will.      We have intensifies our contact with countries with which we have
trust in their companies and expertise to participate in our reconstruction process. This is the reason for our visits and
delegations to China, Japan, Korea and to the U.S., to activate bilateral agreements and provide proper groundwork for
attracting companies, many of which have returned.•           My recent visit to the U.S. after the agreement on
withdrawing troops was in progress was to activate the Strategic Framework Agreement. We held meetings of the joint
coordination committee here and in U.S.•         Security has been in Iraqi hands years before the actual withdrawal, and
political issues have never been in U.S. control. •     Since the signing of the Security Agreement, we were have been
responsible for everything in this country.•      During visit to the U.S., we explained to U.S. officials our position
regarding events in Syria, and they understood our position that events in neighboring countries would affect Iraq, and
Iraq needs to take measures to protect itself.

Regional and International Relations


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785715 Date: 01/07/2016
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785715 Date: 01/07/2016




      Iraq is "recovering" and taking a place in the Arab world and region as a state with independent decisions. •
Iraq will not interfere in anyone's affairs, and will not allow anyone to interfere in its internal affairs.•    We seek
friendship, relations and cooperation, but we reject any external influence into our decision.            I hoped Gulf states
would propose mediating between Iraq and Kuwait over the issue of Port Mubarak, instead of taking sides. The issue is
politicized. A bilateral solution is the right way to address it.      The Gulf Cooperation Council's comments requesting
Iraq to clarify its regional policies is welcomed, we have clear policies towards the region and the Arab League and
Organization of Islamic Conference, we search for friends in the world, we do not want isolation or severed ties.
General/Internal Development•             Iraq is passing through a new phase ,and each stage has its priorities. All efforts
are dedicated to building state institutions, reconstruction, and better investment of Iraqi fortunes which were harmed
by wars and internal and foreign instability.       The Iraqi people suffered under the former regime, and we have
striven to rebuild the Iraqi state in which people enjoy security, stability and prosperity.     We need political stability
which will in turn lead to security and stability of the state.    We still have many problems that deserve more interest
and priority.•      Partnership among all [political] components is necessary because Iraq has many issues that need to
be resolved.        The Council of Ministers meeting yesterday called for a meeting with all political blocs, ministers, and
the three presidencies to discuss the reconstruction process.•       We thank everyone for all initiatives to reinstate
stability in Iraq. There are currently 5 such initiatives.

Economy

      Any revenue from oil produced in Iraq should return to the central government, the government will cover costs of
oil production in Kurdistan, but the revenues should return to the government.

Ashraf

     Camp Ashraf is a state within a state and we cannot allow that situation to continue. We have given them a grace
period until the end of 2011. Ban Ki-moon asked for an extension of six more months and we agreed, as long as half of
them leave.

Q&A:

       [answering McClatchy questions on Hashimi's trial fairness and Camp Ashraf] Judiciary in Iraq is different from
Saddam's time. We provided a fair trial to Saddam Hussein, and we will also provide this to Hashimi, it will not be
politicized. I did not allow Hashimi's residence to be searched. Camp Ashraf violates Iraq's sovereignty and the
constitution. The deadline for their presence should have been December 31, it has been extended six months starting
November based on UN SG BanKi-Moon's request. We have accepted to keep camp Ashraf open until April as long as
half of the residents are moved out now, while the other half is relocated inside Iraq before moving out later. An
agreement was reached through UNAMI to move 400 — 800 Camp Ashraf residents out of the country, but the residents
 rejected this and "have taken armed measures."

       [Questioned on possible U.S. interference towards a majority government]There is no interference in Iraq by any
 other country, but we do accept advice.

       [NPR question on the timeline of recent events regarding measures against senior Sunni figures just after the
 withdrawal of USF-I, and the arrests of Ba'athists] The GOI has been responsible for security since 2008, and we have
 conducted arrests against Ba'athists, even as U.S. forces were in Iraq, the Ba'ath party in constitutionally banned, and it
 is similar to the Nazis in Germany. It is a judicial issue not a political affair.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785715 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785715 Date: 01/07/2016




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785715 Date: 01/07/2016
