        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785618 Date: 01/07/2016




From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >                                  RELEASE IN
Sent:                                                                                           PART B6
                                  Monday, March 7, 2011 8:33 AM
To:                               'JilotyLC@state.gov'
Subject:                          Fw: H: Latest, Qaddafi fears & strategy this am. Sid
Attachments:                      hrc memo qaddafi fears interim govt 030611.docx



Pis print.


From: sbwhoeop
Sent: Sunday, March 06, 2011 06:08 PM
To: H
Subject: H: Latest, Qaddafi fears & strategy this am. Sid




                                        CONFIDENTIAL



                                                March 6, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Qaddafi fears interim government


Latest report:


During the afternoon of March 6, advisors to Muammar al-Qaddafi and his son Saif al Islam stated in
confidence that, while Qaddafi himself remains confident that his forces can gain the upper hand against rebel
forces throughout the country, Saif is increasingly concerned that the rebels will form an interim government
that will give the United States and the nations of Western Europe a focal point for providing both military and
humanitarian aid to the rebels. Saif is encouraging his father to continue to speak out accusing the rebels of
being puppets of these Western states. By the same token, Saif has instructed government spokesmen to return
to the idea that, if this revolution succeeds, Islamist groups such as al Qa'ida and the Libyan Fighting Group
(LFG), which Qaddafi has suppressed, will use Libya as a base for attacking the Western states and their
allies. Saif believes that pressing these two themes will, if nothing else, confuse the foreign governments, and
complicate their efforts to aid the rebels.

(Source Comment: One source with access to Saif stated that word had spread through the Qaddafi government
that NATO special forces troops —either Dutch or German -- had been captured by government forces outside of
Tripoli on 4 or 5 March. Their sources also reported they believe 8-10 British troops had been taken into
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785618 Date: 01/07/2016
          UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785618 Date: 01/07/2016




ustody by rebel forces in Benghazi on 4 March. Similar reports have appeared in the press, but there is no
adependent confirmation.)

Ls of 6 March, Qaddafi's military advisors, including his sons Montasem and Khamis are warning Qadddfi that
le 1500-2000 person rebel force advancing from Benghazi toward Tripoli presents the most immediate threat
) the regime. They are particularly concerned by the situation in Misrata, warning that if the rebels can
onsolidate their hold on this town, they will be able to threaten Sirte, the base of Qaddafi's tribe, the
?adhafah. According to some advisors, Qaddafi views Sirte as a fallback position if he cannot remain in
'ripoli; loss of this town would be a serious Psychological and Strategic blow to the regime. Government
Drees have used attack helicopters and ground support aircraft to attack the rebel forces at Misrata and, while
ley have been unable to secure the town, they have inflicted heavy casualties on the rebels and slowed their
dvance on Sirte.

Source Comment: Individuals with access to Qaddafi's military advisors believe government forces will make
acreasing use of their attack helicopters and the 250 combat air craft still under their control. They also state
lat Qaddafi believes that the rebels may soon receive more sophisticated anti-aircraft weapons from the
Vestern allies; weapons which will offset the government's air superiority. This would be particularly true in
le case of attack helicopters, which are vulnerable to modern, shoulder-fired anti-aircraft missiles.)

?addafi also wants his forces to continue to tie down rebel troops in and around the town of Zawiyah, 30 miles
test of Tripoli and any facilities that it can reach in the rebel held areas in the western part of the
ountry. Qaddafi is pleased with the performance of his troops, but according to these individuals he is
oncerned that Western governments, particularly the United States will soon begin to provide active support to
le rebel forces.

adividuals advising Mustafa Abdul Galil, the former Libyan Minister of Justice, and the current leader of the
.pposition National Libyan Council, (NLC), stated in confidence that Galil is now convinced that the NLC must
prm an Interim Government, and establish relations with the Western powers and the members of the Arab
,eague. Galil recognizes that the independent students and workers who make up the majority of the rebels,
articularly those engaged in fighting Qaddafi's forces, as well as various tribal leaders, including Senussiyyah
amily of former King Idriss, warn against this step. That said, Galil believes that without a major increase in
Vestern aid, the situation will deteriorate into a civil war with no end in sight.

Source Comment: Advisors to Saif al Islam Qaddafi added that his father will not leave Libya, and would
ather sacrifice his life in fighting the rebels, rather than turn over the country to the opposition forces. Also,
aif believes that the current forces loyal to his father will support him in this effort, as well as allies in Syria,
Lfrica, and among the Algerian military.)




          UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785618 Date: 01/07/2016
