     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779970 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                    B6


From:                              sbwhoeop
Sent:                              Saturday, February 26, 2011 6:46 PM
To:
Subject:                           H: FYI, article below, new intel coming soon. Govt in formation, Justice minister heading
                                   it. Sid




http://www.opendemocracy.net/shadi-mokhtari/george-bush-and-turn-to-human-rights-in-arab-world


George Bush and the turn to human rights in
the Arab world
Shadi Mokhtari, 25 February 2011

Some have linked the emergence of a strong human rights agenda in the Arab world with the policies of the last American
president. In a way they are right: post-9/11 abuses overseen by the Bush administration were the tragedy that brought to
light the urgency of claiming rights.

About the author
Shadi Mokhtari is Assistant Professor at the School of International Service at American University, Washington D.C.

In the stunning popular uprisings that have been sprouting up throughout the Arab world, the desire for the realization of
rights seems ubiquitous. For this, some have argued, George W. Bush deserves some credit. In fact, there is a link to be
made between recent developments and Bush administration policies. However, it is not so much that we are finally
seeing the fruits of the Bush era's democracy and human rights promotion agenda, or that a liberated Iraq has now set an
example for the rest of the region to follow. Rather, we are seeing the fruits of an Arab engagement with human rights
which was in part spurred by the Bush Administration's array of post-9/11 policies thwarting human rights.
Before 9/11, the human rights idea was widely debated in the Arab world. Many voices including among Islamists argued
that it was essentially a Western idea not compatible with Arab and Islamic values. It was also held that human rights
were mainly an instrument the United States used to paint a moral veneer on self-interested agendas in the region. These
arguments resonated with Arab populations because they tapped into widespread frustration with American policies.
While they paid lip service to human rights internationally, the Arab world's authoritarian rulers were all too happy to
exploit this popular disillusionment with human rights and even reinforce its association with American cultural and
political hegemony.


        "Abu Ghraib brought home the concept of human rights more strongly than anything else. People
        started debating human rights in talking about Abu Ghraib..."
        Arab activist

A particular event can trigger a rise or decline in rights consciousness in any country or culture in the world- East or West.
Abu Ghraib served as a pivotal moment for human rights consciousness in the Arab world. Because the torture and abuse
depicted was so widely seen as directed towards the Arab or Muslim man, many felt a profound sense of personal
violation. As they grappled to formulate a response, they often found themselves invoking human rights. "Abu Ghraib
probably brought home the concept of human rights more strongly than anything else. People started debating human
rights issues in talking about Abu Ghraib...What is your right to be treated like a human being in dignity?" an Arab activist
told me in Amman in 2006. Gauging public sentiment, some Arab leaders joined in. Hosni Mubarak called Abu Ghraib
"abhorrent and sickening, and against all human values and human rights confirmed and defended by the international
community".
Denials of fair trials in Guantanamo, CIA black sites, renditions of terrorist suspects to third countries known to torture,
and legal formulations paving the way for "enhanced interrogation techniques" all brought discussions of human rights
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779970 bate: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779970 Date: 01/07/2016




further to the fore of Arab consciousness. Instead of viewing human' rights as a Western imposition, increasingly it
became a language that Arab populations embraced to challenge America's post-9/11 policies.
Leaders in places like Yemen and Bahrain generally tolerated all of the local protests, conferences, media coverage, and
slew of other mobilizations decrying post-9/11 abuses because they was directed at the United States, not them. It did not
take long however for the focus to turn inward to the Arab world's own "Guantanamos", "Abu Ghraibs," and widespread
practice of torture. Activists began exploiting limited openings to draw compelling analogies to the repression pervading
their own societies. In Jordan, human rights forces were able to gain access to the Hashemite Kingdom's prisons for the
first time, initiate a public previously inconceivable debate on torture and eventually force King Abdullah to close down one
of Jordan's most notorious prisons which had also been the site of American "War on Terror" renditions. Thus, American
post-9/11 human rights abuses not only focused attention on and brought increased legitimacy to the human rights idea,
they also opened up important avenues for the expression of longstanding rights aspirations. As the post-9/11 era
progressed, the immense injustice of torture and false imprisonments- whether perpetrated by the United States or their
own governments- came to occupy a central place in Arab sensibilities.
Islamists were no exception. After 9/11, they were often tied to terrorism and targeted by local regimes. When this
happened, it was human rights defenders who often came to their aid, sometimes providing common cause between
forces that had traditionally been at odds. In 2007 Yemeni women's rights activists who had condemned denials of due
process to Islamists told me that they saw a new openness by lslah Party members to engage with them on women's
rights issues. Perhaps more importantly, accusations of human rights violations became an integral strategy in Islamists'
political challenges to local rulers. The Muslim Brotherhood's website has for years been replete with accusations of
human rights violations and torture committed by the Mubarak regime. It is difficult to determine how much of the Islamist
turn to human rights stems from a new consciousness and how much of it is purely strategic. But in the final analysis, it
may not matter all that much. Once they adopt the discourse, labeling human rights "a foreign imposition" becomes an
increasingly thorny undertaking.
Thus for some time now, as Americans have been gravitating towards the position that torture is sometimes necessary
and terrorism suspects can be held indefinitely without trial, the Arab world has been inching towards a consensus on
human rights. In many ways, the rise in rights consciousness evident in protests throughout the Arab world (epitomized by
the January 25th slogan of "revolt against torture, poverty, unemployment and corruption" or the centrality of the torture
case of Khaled Said in Egypt) follows this trend.
Undoubtedly, America's post-9/11 rights failings are just one of many factors coalescing to bring about the Arab world's
current engagements with the human rights paradigm. Indeed, the most powerful catalyst for the dramatic events of the
last two months is Arab populations' own lived experience of oppression. Still it is important to recognize that historically
societies have often embraced human rights on the heels of a human rights tragedy that profoundly impacts them. In
many ways, the post-9/11 denials of human rights that were overseen by George W. Bush were the Arab world's tragedy
that brought to light the urgency of claiming rights.
Shadi Mokhtari's new book is available in hardback and will shortly be published in the paperback by Cambridge
University Press




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779970 Date: 01/07/2016
