UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792441 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL




                                        CONFIDENTIAL



                                                October 3, 2012



  For: Hillary
  From: Sid
  Re: Turkey v. Syria (plus Iran)


  SOURCE: Sources with access to the highest levels of the Governments and institutions
  discussed below. This includes political parties and regional intelligence and security services.


          1. On October 2 and 3, 2012, Turkish and Syrian forces exchanged fire across their
  border near the Turkish town of Akcakale; several Turkish civilians (including children) were
  killed, while Syrian casualties are not yet known. According a sensitive source with access to
  the General Staff of the Turkish Army, the commanders of the Turkish National Intelligence
  Service (TNIO) and the Intelligence section of the Turkish National Police (TNP) are warning
  President Recep Tayyip Erdogan that the Syrian Government of Bashar al Assad is trying to
  draw Turkey into the fighting in Syria with the goal of giving Syria's ally Iran a reason to engage
  in the Syrian civil war in a more aggressive manner. This sensitive individual does not believe
  the Iranians will send their regular forces to Syria, but the deteriorating situation between Syrian
  and Turkey gives them cover to step up the number and level of activity of Hezbollah and the
  Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) forces, some of whom are already working with the
  Syrian Army.

           2. Erdogan's political advisors are telling him that the Turkish people do not want war,
  believing it will damage their very successful economy, but they are quite worried about the
  potential economic and security problems associated with the 100,000 Syrian refugees currently
  living in camps inside of Turkey. That said, this sources notes that Erdogan is now caught up in
  the momentum of the situation, and the Turkish Army commanders are pressing for stronger
  retaliation against Syria in response to the Akcakale incident. They are pressing the idea that this
  action must be taken for the honor of the Turkish Army, which they believe is attached to the
  security of the country. At the same time, Erdogan is sensitive to the Views of the Army after his
  government pursued legal action which sent several of its former commanders to prison for coup
  plotting.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792441 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792441 Date: 01/07/2016




         3. In the opinion of this source the Turkish General Staff will not launch a direct attack
 against Syrian forces without coordinating with their NATO allies, but they will step up aid to
 the particular factions of the Free Syrian Army with whom they are comfortable. Instead, this
 source believes the Turkish commanders will increase Special Forces operations in Syria, and
 conduct selected shelling of military targets by their heavy (155 mm) guns just above the Syrian
 border. If the situation along the border between Turkey and Syria continues to deteriorate, the
 Turkish commanders may also take steps to close the air space along their border to Syrian air
 craft. At the same time, the General Staff has an existing contingency plan to move 15 km inside
 of Syria, to establish a buffer zone. According to this individual, the Turkish commanders could
 take this action without NATO support or coordination, however; Erdogan has not decided to
 move, weighing the internal political and economic issues involved.

         4. (Source Comment: A sensitive source notes that Erdogan is aware of the possibility
 that a war between Turkey and Syria will have serious effect in Europe; this comes at a time
 when the countries of the Eurozone are working to maintain a stable international environment
 and to solve their debt/banking crisis. According to this individual, the government of French
 President Francois Hollande has been particularly active in urging Turkey to avoid allowing the
 current situation to deteriorate into open fighting.)

         5. According to a particularly sensitive source, if the Syrians, backed by the Iranians,
 take additional action inside of Turkey, Erdogan, pressed by the General Staff, will feel forced to
 retaliate on an increasing scale. Although many, if not most Turks want to avoid war, they are
 very patriotic, and more Turkish deaths at the hands of the Syrian Army will only serve to stir
 these feelings. This individual notes that it is not that difficult to stir up Turkish nationalism
 when Arabs or Kurds are involved on the other side of the matter

         6. (Source Comment: A sensitive source states that anyone watching the situation along
 Turkish/Syrian border should always remember that Turkey has approximately 1.3 million
 highly trained troops and ready reserves, equipped with the latest weapons and technology from
 the United States and NATO. As always, this source adds that perhaps the most important
 indicator regarding Turkish military activity will be the disposition of elite Special Forces and
 airborne units based near the Presidential palace in Ankara. These troops will be the spearhead
 of any force that moves on to the offensive in Syria.)




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792441 Date: 01/07/2016
