UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785339 Date: 01/07/2016


                                                                           RELEASE IN FULL

                                         CONFIDENTIAL



                                                 February 28, 2011



  For: Hillary
  From: Sid
  Re: State of play politically and militarily

  The latest report:

  On February 26, 2011, Professor Idris el-Sharif, the chairman of the committee
  formed in Benghazi to coordinate opposition military activities, made contact with
  the newly formed National Libyan Council (NLC) stating that the Benghazi
  military council would join the NLC as long as he was assured that the National
  Council was not acting as an interim government. According to el-Sharif it is too
  early to discuss an interim government. In addition, el-Sharif warned NLC leader
  Mustafa Mohamed Abud al Gilil that the opposition is made up of a wide variety
  of ad hoc groups of students, academics and professionals, and that the NLC must
  guide rather than try to control these groups. At the same time they have to
  maintain relationships with the National Conference for the Libyan opposition
  (NCLO) and other established opposition groups, without allowing these groups to
  establish control of the movement. El-Sharif warned that the NCLO and the
  largely exile groups that fall under its umbrella have little credibility with the
  current opposition movement, which is based on the problems and actions of
  average people living inside of Libya. El-Sharif added that the NLC is much more
  relevant to the current situation; however, it must resist the temptation to begin
  acting like a government or established political party.

  On the morning of February 28 sources with access to the various groups in the
  Libyan Opposition movement stated in confidence that while the NLC is working
  to establish itself as the central point for the opposition to Muammar Qaddafi, their
  leader, al Gilil, and other founding members realize that they must be careful to
 .‘,;A +1,                         +-                        -4- a                     _ _ _
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785339 Date: 01/07/2016
