      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Tuesday, October 4, 2011 2:25 PM
To:                                'JilotyLC@state.gov.
Subject                            Fw: CQ piece



PIs print.


From: Mills, Cheryl D [mailto:MillsCD©state.gov]
Sent: Tuesday, October 04, 2011 12:47 PM
To: H
Subject: FW: CQ piece

See highlights.


cdm


From: Shrier, Jonathan
Sent: Tuesday, October 04, 2011 12:15 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Toiv, Nora F; Laszczych, Joanne; Roth, Richard A
Subject: FW: CQ piece

Cheryl: Good, balanced piece below from CQ on U.S. food aid and ag development assistance. It quotes Secretary
Clinton's August 11 IFPRI speech. The reporter also spoke with both Richard Roth and me, and he quotes Richard on
HoA and me on food price volatility, Feed the Future, and L'Aquila.


The overall storyline is that the Administration is thinking smart about food security while facing a tough budget
environment.


Jonathan


P.S. Will write separately on productive meetings here in Addis. We go into a press briefing and more meetings
momentarily.


CQ WEEKLY — COVER STORY
Oct. 3, 2011 — Page 2038


Food and Consequences
By Jonathan Broder, CQ Staff

It's not easy to find good news these days from the Horn of Africa. The worst
drought in 60 years has spawned full-blown famine across the parched
savannah of southern Somalia, driving ragged clusters of people toward
neighboring Kenya and Ethiopia. The lucky ones survive robbery, rape and
murderous attacks by local armed gangs to reach overcrowded refugee camps
just over the border. The less fortunate — the weak, elderly and those
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016




prevented from leaving Somalia by soldiers of the Islamic al-Shabaab militia -
simply starve to death.

But far better news emerges from Ethiopia,
where officials appear to have learned
lessons from a 2002 drought that affected as
many as 13 million people. In the aftermath
of that devastating dry spell, Ethiopian
officials, working together with U.S
agronomists, invested in drought-resistant
crops and water-saving irrigation systems for
long-term food security. American officials
also helped them stockpile food for future    REFUGE: Displaced Somalis gather inside a
emergencies. By the time the current drought courtyard in the capital, Mogadishu, to receive
                                              food aid. War-torn Somalia has been hardest hit
struck the Horn, less than 5 million          by the drought affecting the Horn of Africa, but
Ethiopians were affected.                     large portions of the country are off limits to aid
                                                            groups. (ROBERTO SCHMIDT / AFP / GETTY
                                                            IMAGES)
"Now, that is still an unacceptably large
number," Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said last month. "But it is
also an astonishing improvement in a relatively short period of time. And it is
evidence that investments' in food security can pay off powerfully."

Still, the Horn of Africa drought coincides with global food prices sitting at
near-record levels. The price of corn jumped 84 percent between July 2010
and July 2011, according to the World Bank, while the price of wheat shot up
55 percent. The impact on poor people has been immense — and often
destabilizing.

The growing crisis has Clinton and other Obama administration officials urging
Congress to provide continued funds for both emergency aid and long-term
food-security aid —.a critical request because the United States provides
nearly half the food aid to the United Nation's World Food Program, the
principal distributor of such assistance worldwide. But,with the brutal budget
climate on Capitol Hill -- and a nation turning increasingly inward — foreign
food aid is likely to suffer significant cuts.

The effect is that America's budgetary politics could have global
consequences by diminishing the signature role the United States has played
for decades in feeding the world's hungry. "What does the United States stand
for?" says Democrat Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont, chairman of the Senate
Appropriations subcommittee that determines foreign. aid. "If we're going to be
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016




blessed the way that we are in this country, we have a certain moral obligation
to help others."

While trims of a few billion dollars may sound paltry at a time when lawmakers
are mulling more than a trillion in spending reductions, these cuts could not be
happening at a worse time globally. Already, the shock waves of food price
increases have rocked Tunisia, Egypt and Syria, where the large
demonstrations that became known as the Arab Spring began as angry
protests over a rise in bread prices, brought on by a drought and poor harvest
in Russia last year. Down the line, experts say, the consequences could be
much more disruptive. Pentagon planners say a food-related crisis could even
prompt the United States to intervene militarily for either strategic or
humanitarian reasons.

On Capitol Hill, lawmakers are worried about these scenarios, but there is little
agreement on a course of action for funding. With additional legislative steps
to be taken, the House and Senate are still a long way from reconciling their
differences.

"In the long run, investing in humanitarian aid to defuse civil wars and reduce
the number of countries that breed terrorism is a lot cheaper and more
effective than going to war everywhere around the world," says Leahy.

Among Republicans, however, the most immediate concern is to reduce
spending and bring the budget deficit under control. And Georgia Republican
Jack Kingston, chairman of the House Appropriations Agriculture
Subcommittee that funds emergency overseas food aid from an account
popularly known as PL 480, says the least politically sensitive place to find
such cuts is in the foreign aid budget.

"Unless a member of Congress can go back home and explain to a Rotary
Club why we're providing a billion dollars worth of PL 480, you're not going to
be able to protect that funding," he says. "And it's not easy because the aid is
so unpopular."

Back to the Future




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016




The Obama administration's difficulties in prying more
food-aid funding from Congress represent a sharp
departure from previous times that the United States
confronted regions facing widespread famine and
destabilization.

Back in the 1960s, when such threats played into Cold
                                                             Hunger Hot Spots: Click here
War politics and spending priorities, U.S.-led advances in to view chart
breeding high-yield seed varieties — dubbed the "Green
Revolution" — led to spectacular successes in food production in Asia and
Latin America, averting mass starvation. Developing countries like India,
whose starving children were often evoked to make truculent American
children eat their spinach, became self-sufficient in food production. By the
1990s, the amount of U.S. development aid that went to long-term agricultural
assistance had declined significantly.

"It was mostly felt that the food challenge had been resolved because of the
Green Revolution," says Simon Nicholson, an expert on global food security
who is on the faculty of American University's School of International Service.
"Numbers of hungry people were falling, and incomes around the world were •
starting to rise. In influential circles, food came to be considered as just a
technical challenge. The feeling was that if we can just get the right
technologies into the right hands, then it's just a short period of time before
this whole challenge goes away."

As a result, U.S. food-aid efforts were narrowed to shorter-term relief. Most of
these programs had been developed during the Cold War, when the federal
government already was buying up the surpluses of U.S. farmers to keep
commodity prices high. As storage fees mounted, officials decided to give the
food away to poor countries and earn some pro-American good will at the
same time. Congress got involved, passing laws that required half, then three-
quarters, of foreign food aid be delivered by U.S.-flagged ships. As surpluses
disappeared, the government began buying the food from big agricultural
conglomerates. (Delivery model, p. 2042)

But in 2008, the international aid community was jolted when global food
commodity prices suddenly shot up as several factors — the world's growing
population, rising demand for meat by wealthier populations in India and
China, and the relentless extremes of flooding and drought caused by global
climate change — converged to create worldwide shortages. Food riots
erupted across Africa, Asia, Europe and Latin America, shaking the political
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016




order in India, Pakistan and Mexico, and toppling governments in Haiti and
Madagascar.

"For you and me, if the price of a bag of Doritos goes up by 50 cents, we'd
probably just pay it and keep on eating," says Jonathan Shrier, head of the
State Department's Office of Global Food Security. "But if you're talking about
a corn-based commodity that is a major part of your weekly food basket, and
you're in a poor household where most of your income goes to food, then
those kinds of price differences really hurt."

The following year, in 2009, President Obama gathered in L'Aquila, Italy, with
leaders of the eight major industrialized economies to re-examine their food-
aid priorities and to focus on longer-term approaches that would help countries
enjoy greater food security. Of the $22 billion pledged to the effort at the
L'Aquila summit, Obama pledged $3.5 billion — the largest commitment of any
single country.

In late 2010, however, global food prices
again began to rise, provoking yet another
round of food riots in the Middle East and
South Asia. The most consequential
disturbances flared in Tunisia last December.
Those riots — and the Tunisian
government's harsh response — set the
stage for the self-immolation of a peddler
named Mohammed Bouazizi, an act of
despair that ignited the broader political    Kingston (BILL CLARK CC1 ROLL CALL )

protests that soon toppled Tunisia's pro-American President Zine El Abidine
Ben Ali after 23 years in power. The Arab Spring protests then spread to
Egypt, where President Hosni Mubarak, one of Washington's closest allies in
the Arab world for nearly three decades, also was forced from power. The rise
in food prices also sparked the anti-government protests that are still
challenging the autocratic government of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.

While the Obama administration has generally embraced the democratic
impulses behind the Arab revolutions, economists and development experts
caution that unless issues of long-term food security are addressed, more
political instability and long-term problems around the globe are looming.

Nayan Chanda, a scholar at Yale University's Center for the Study of
Globalization, notes that the political unrest in the Arab world has prompted
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016




food-importing countries such as Egypt and Libya to build up their stocks of
grain, rice and oil seeds as a buffer against further unrest. But as oil prices
also rise, he says the costs of food inputs — from fertilizer and irrigation to
transportation — are also rising, making food that much more expensive for
ordinary consumers.

Christopher Barrett, an economist and food-aid expert at Cornell University,
identifies a cycle of destabilization in poor countries that sets in with high
global food prices. First, he says, tens of millions of people around the world
are plunged deeper into poverty. With whole families now needed to earn
enough money to pay for food, parents pull their children out of school,
truncating their educations. Another problem of today's high food prices,
especially for impoverished young children, pregnant women and breast-
feeding mothers, is under-nutrition, which he fears will produce a generation
with permanent, irreversible physical and cognitive difficulties.

"That, too, should concern us because we're going to be relying increasingly
on workers overseas to produce goods and services for us," Barrett says. "If
those workers are not cognitively and physically at their optimum, we're going
to getting less reliable products. They'll be more expensive because workers
will be less productive."

To counter both potential instability and the concerns about human
development, Obama unveiled last year his Feed the Future initiative,
identifying some 20 countries that faced major challenges in food security but
also demonstrated the economic conditions and political will to justify U.S.
investments to improve food security there. Ethiopia and Kenya were among
the recipients.




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016




To qualify for Feed the Future aid, Shrier
explains, countries must have their own .
existing programs for agricultural
development, raising rural incomes and
increasing the agricultural share of gross
domestic product. U.S aid helps them
achieve these goals by providing improved
seeds and fertilizers; teaching new climate-
adapted farming techniques; and investing in
storage, transportation and local banks to
provide short-term loans. Officials at the U.S. FIRE: The protests that toppled the regime of
Agency for International Development closely Tunisia's Ben All began as riots against high food
                                                prices. (AFP / GETTY IMAGES FILE PHOTO)
monitor the program for results and make
adjustments when needed.

Shrier notes the administration also convinced the World Bank to establish a
fund called the Global Agricultural and Food Security Program, which acts
much like the Feed the Future initiative. With donations from the United
States, Canada, Ireland, South Korea and Spain, as well as the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation, the fund has awarded nearly half a billion dollars to
a dozen countries so far.

But progress on other fronts is lagging. Of the $22 billion pledged in L'Aquila
for long-term food-security assistance — also to be administered by the World
Bank — only around $4 billion has been delivered so far.

"Real results take time and investment," Shrier says. "So you have to do the
right things and do them long enough to make a difference. Well-run
development assistance requires a reliable stream of resources that allows us
to start programs and see them through until they can reach an effective point
where we can turn them over to a partner government."

Meanwhile, the famine in the Horn of Africa presents a different sort of
challenge for U.S. food-aid efforts. There, the response has been emergency
U.S. food aid — American-grown crops, sent on U.S.-flagged ships to the
Kenyan port of Mombasa, and then trucked hundreds of miles inland to the
refugee camps along Somalia's western border with Kenya and Ethiopia.
Working through World Food Program officials and other aid groups on the
ground, the United States has become the largest donor of humanitarian
assistance to the region, providing nearly $650 million worth of food to nearly
4.5 million people.
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016




Even so, the United Nations estimates that three quarters of a million people
face starvation within the next three months. The main culprit is al-Shabaab's
continued refusal to allow aid groups to carry food aid into the hardest
drought-stricken areas of Somalia. "It's very hard to get around the Shabaab,"
says Richard Roth, a senior State Department official in charge of the relief
effort. "They kill people."

In Clinton's speech last month, she sought to connect Washington's
emergency aid efforts to the Horn of Africa with the Obama administration's
longer-term food-security initiative. "Our goal is not only to help the region
come through this crisis, but . . . to do all we can to prevent it from ever
happening again," she said. "Food security is the key."

`Every Dollar Counts'
But that approach has proved to be a hard sell on Capitol
Hill this year, especially among House Republicans.                              OVER 15 YEARS:45.2%
                                                                                $16.8 billion of $37.2 billion
"In the past, we have been able to fund important projects
and take the long view, knowing that someday what we
plant would bear fruit," Texas Republican Kay Granger,
chairwoman of the House Appropriations subcommittee
                                                              Paying for U.N. Food Aid: Click
that doles out foreign aid, said in July, when her panel      here to view chart
approved a $39.6 billion discretionary spending bill for
fiscal 2012, effectively returning funding to fiscal 2008 levels.

"But today is a different time," she said. "We are facing a global recession
unlike anything in recent memory. Our debt is well over $14 trillion. Today,
every dollar counts. This bill reflects those new realities."

Her measure zeroes out last year's $100 million for the World Bank's long-
term food-aid account and provides $2 billion for overall development aid
nearly half a billion dollars less than fiscal 2011 and $850 million less than
Obama's request; The language does not specify how much of that aid goes
to Feed the Future, leaving that for the Obama administration to decide.

The Senate Appropriations State-Foreign Operations measure, which was
approved last month, would provide $44.6 billion in discretionary spending,
including $2.6 billion for development aid. Of that, $1.1 billion would go for the
Feed the Future initiative, and $200 million for the World Bank's long-term
fund. The development aid funding level is $30 million above the fiscal 2011
level and $368 million below Obama's request.
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016




A Democratic Senate aide says that the House subcommittee's approved level
of development assistance is "so low that there's no way the administration is
going to be able to fund many of the initiatives that are normally funded within
that account at anything like the levels currently or [those] being requested."

As for the PL 480 emergency food aid that is funded in the Agriculture
appropriations bill, the House-passed measure slashes funding by 31 percent
from fiscal 2011 levels to $1.04 billion.

Kingston, while stressing how "enormously unpopular" food aid, and foreign
aid in general, are back home, also suggests an element of payback in the bill,
noting that few countries in the world appreciate the fact that the United States
has provided such a large percentage of aid to the World Food Program. "I
don't think we get credit for that internationally, or at the U.N., or from some of
these blame-the-U.S.-for-all-the-world's-problems groups," he says.

Kingston also says that the spending cuts help prevent
                                                            Change in global food prices
further waste, charging that a significant portion of U.S.  Indexed to 2000 average
foreign aid is "siphoned off by dictators or oppressive
                                                             350
government leaders who are re-elected with 90 percent of         — All food
                                                                    Grains
the vote and stay in office for life." In a swipe at
                                                             250
Democrats who controlled the House before 2010, he
notes that despite such corruption, past appropriators did Peak Prices: Click here to view
not trim the PL 480 emergency food-aid account.            chart


"Our bill is a reflection of our financial situation," he says. "And remember, for
every dollar we spend, 40 cents is borrowed. So not only am I paying for
lunch, but I'm borrowing the money to pay for lunch."

Senate Democrats acknowledge the need to reduce spending, but they argue
such cuts must be done thoughtfully, keeping in mind U.S. national security
interests. "U.S. food aid can be a stabilizing force in the world's poorest
countries," says Herb Kohl of Wisconsin, chairman of the Senate
Appropriations Agriculture subcommittee, which passed a funding measure
that provides $1.56 billion for emergency food aid, roughly the same as last
year's level, but $124 million less than the president requested.

Nita M. Lowey of New York, the ranking Democrat on the House
Appropriations State-Foreign Operations Subcommittee, slams Republicans
on the panel for slashing development aid so deeply. "That money goes to

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016




programs that help anticipate future famines and develop agricultural practices
to prevent them," she says.

And Dan Glickman, a former Democratic House member from Kansas and
Agriculture secretary during the Clinton administration, says it's in the nation's
economic interest to help ameliorate the global food crisis. 'What happens in
Kenya or Tanzania or Indonesia affects us very directly," Glickman, now a
senior fellow with the Bipartisan Policy Center, told a food-policy conference in
Washington last month. "You see in the Arab Spring, the problems in North
Africa were in part due to lack of subsidized food in some of those countries. It
is in our interest to be engaged."

Such opposing views are destined to become just one more discordant note in
the partisan bickering over spending that now dominates Capitol Hill. But food-
aid experts warn that the proposed cuts — even the smaller trims proposed in
the Senate bills -- will have real consequences on the ground.

Allan Jury, director of the U.S. relations office of the World Food Program,
says it costs his organization roughly $40 to feed one person for about a year.
So he estimates that for every $100 million cut in funding, 2.5 million people
won't get fed. And as food prices continue to rise, he added, the number of
those affected by funding cuts only gets bigger. "The effects," Jury says,
"would be significant."

Food and Water Wars
Food prices today remain steadily high, and several
recent studies indicate that price could continue to grow                    U.S. International foo'
                                                                             In billions of inflation-adjusted
in the future, suggesting the global food crisis is only
                                                                             $8_
likely to intensify.
                                                                               6
The U.N.'s Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) says
food prices last December topped the 2008 prices that                 I
                                                          Putting Bread on the Table:
s parked so many food riots. The combination of high food Click here to view chart
prices and the global economic slump has left some 925
million people in poverty and hunger, according to the FAO.

The organization says food prices will continue to rise over the next 10 years,
threatening the food security of millions of people around the world. The World
Bank estimates that demand for food will rise by 50 percent by 2030, driven by
population growth, rising wealth and shifting diets. Layer on top the projected
effects of climate change, which could disrupt agricultural patterns and water
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016




supplies around the globe, and food security emerges as an important national
security issue.

"Along with tackling the linked problem of climate change, delivering global
food and nutrition security is the challenge of our time," former U.N. Secretary-
General Kofi Annan, told an FAO conference in Rome in June.

Among those studying the effects of drought, mass migration and the global
food crisis are U.S. military and intelligence analysts, who now warn such
conditions could prompt a U.S. military response or humanitarian-relief effort.

Indeed, three years ago, the Pentagon and the CIA began studying the
strategic challenges posed by climate change. The Defense Department's
2010 Quadrennial Defense Review concluded that in the decades ahead,
vulnerable regions such as the Horn of Africa, sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle
East, and South and Southeast Asia will face the likelihood of catastrophic
drought, flooding and food shortages that could demand U.S. intervention.

"Assessments conducted by the intelligence community indicate that climate
change could have significant geopolitical impacts around the world,
contributing to poverty, environmental degradation and the further weakening
of fragile governments," the review said. "Climate change will contribute to
food and water scarcity, will increase the spread of disease and spur or
exacerbate mass migration."

The climate analysis in the review was based on state-of-the-art Navy and Air
Force weather programs, as well as climate research by the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration and the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration.

It was Congress, in its 2008 defense authorization bill, that prodded the
Pentagon to include climate and food-security issues in its strategic
forecasting.

Until now, Democratic lawmakers had focused on passing energy legislation to
address climate-change issues. But with climate-change skeptics and coal-
state senators successfully blocking any comprehensive energy bill since
2007, some lawmakers regard food-aid funding as the next best way to
address the issue. Food-aid levels are expected to be a major point of partisan
contention when lawmakers consider a new farm bill next year.

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016




"I get the feeling. from so many in the Pentagon that if we could accomplish
something with humanitarian aid as compared to going to war, we're all
winners," says Leahy. "If there are massive displacements of people caused
by global warming or environmental reasons, as well as by war, our
international situation is such that we're going to get dragged in one way or
another. Humanitarian and development aid just makes it much easier to avoid
that."

Ellyn Ferguson and Lauren Gardner contributed to this story.

FOR FURTHER READING: Senate State-Foreign Operations appropriations
bill (S 1601), CQ Weekly, p. 1992; Senate Agriculture appropriations bill (HR
2112), p. 1870; House Agriculture appropriations bill (HR 2112), p. 1323; draft
House State-Foreign Operations appropriations bill, p. 1132; 2008 defense
authorization bill (PL 110-181), 2007 Almanac, p. 6-3; 2007 energy bill (PL
110-140), 2007 Almanac, p. 10-3; Agricultural Trade Development and
Assistance Act of 1954 (PL 83-480), 1954 Almanac, p. 120.

Source: CQ Weekly
The definitive source for news about Congress.
© 2011 CQ Roll Call All Rights Reserved.

CQ WEEKLY — COVER STORY
Oct. 3, 2011 — Page 2042


Food-Aid Model: No Easy Overhaul
By Finlay Lewis and Jonathan Broder, CQ Staff

When Congress began sending food aid abroad in 1954, it made sure that
starving populations overseas wouldn't be the only beneficiaries. Lawmakers
required most of the food to be grown by American farmers and a significant
portion of it to be shipped in U.S.-flagged vessels.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016




This structure helped ensure strong political
backing from an odd coalition of farmers,
shipping interests and aid groups. But over
the years, studies by the Government
Accountability Office, academics and others
have faulted the design of U.S. food aid
particularly the workhorse PL 480, or Food
for Peace, program — for diverting scarce
resources from needy populations abroad to
benefit those powerful domestic                            RELIEF: The United States was a major
constituencies. Past streamlining attempts                 supplier of food aid to Haiti after the 2010
have foundered, in part due to the lobbying                earthquake. By law, the food has to come
                                                           from U.S. farmers. (THONY BELIZAIRE /
clout of the maritime industry and others.                 AFP / GETTY IMAGES FILE PHOTO)

But with lawmakers struggling to shave the deficit, they could end up looking
beyond mere spending levels on foreign aid. At issue could be the very
structure of the American food-aid model itself.

Over the last decade or so, the United States has provided about $2.2 billion a
year in international food-aid financing, mainly for emergency famine relief and
for development projects aimed at teaching foreign farmers how to become
self-sufficient.

In 2009, for example, government food-aid shipments included about 824,000
metric tons of wheat, about 790,000 tons of sorghum and 286,000 tons of corn
— accounting for 79 percent of all food-aid cargoes.

But what started as a subsidy to struggling farmers has become a significant
boon for U.S. agriculture companies such as Cargill Inc. and Archer-Daniels-
Midland Co. John Gillcrist, chairman of the Bartlett Milling Co. in Kansas City,
Mo., and a prominent food-aid supporter, estimates that every $1 million
dollars worth of food shipped abroad under PL 480 sparks about $3 million
worth of economic activity at home.

The House voted last summer to appropriate slightly more than $1 billion for
emergency aid and development purposes for fiscal 2012 under the PL 480
program — significantly less than the $1.7 billion being sought by the Obama
administration and the $1.56 billion allocated by the Senate Appropriations
Committee's spending bill. Whatever the final number, it will represent a steep
cut.

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016




That reality, in turn, has sparked new conversations about restructuring U.S.
food assistance, which is largely administered by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture and the U.S. Agency for International Development, to be able to
provide more food aid for fewer dollars.

"If going forward, U.S. food aid is, in fact, a scare resource and not a means of
commodity surplus disposal, which it was in the past, then it really is
incumbent on Congress to make sure the program is given the opportunity to
operate as flexibly as possible," says John Hoddinott, a senior researcher at
the International Food Policy Research Institute.

Hoddinott's concerns appear to resonate with some in Congress. "U.S. food
aid should be used to save lives and not as a source of wasteful corporate
welfare," says Ed Royce, a senior Republican member of the House Foreign
Affairs Committee. "I think we have an opportunity for reform. The stars may
be aligned."

The agenda of those who want to overhaul food aid, such as Royce and
Democratic Rep. Jim McGovern of Massachusetts, includes targeting the
decades-old cargo preference law requiring that 75 percent of all U.S. food-aid
shipments be transported on U.S.-flagged vessels. The heart of the case
against the cargo rule comes from a year-old study headed by Cornell
University researchers that concluded that cargo preferences drained about
$140 million from the program in 2006, in part because it discriminates against
cheaper foreign-flagged vessels.

The maritime industry says the study's methodology is badly flawed and that
the cargo rule has the additional benefit of ensuring a reserve of U.S.
commercial ships and sailors for the Pentagon in the event of a national
security crisis.

"It's been a lot of work to explain to tea party Republicans how important these
programs are, not only for people overseas, but for providing jobs here at
home," says Bryant Gardner, a lobbyist at Winston and Strawn, whose clients
include the U.S. merchant marine carriers.

Critics of the current structure also want to remove the restrictions on buying
food from farmers in or near famine areas. Such food is often cheaper to
purchase — and significantly cheaper to ship. Indeed, the United States is the
only country to use domestically produced food for its aid efforts.

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016




Congress has authorized the use of cash in a few food-aid pilot projects, and
the GAO has concluded that the approach can speed deliveries at a significant
savings to the taxpayer, although it can also backfire by disrupting local
markets.

Another overhaul target could be a complex process known as monetization.
This entails the use of government grants by nongovernmental organizations
to buy U.S. commodities, which they then sell abroad in order to raise cash for
international development projects.

In a June report, the GAO concluded that monetization "is an inherently
inefficient way to fund development projects and can cause adverse market
impacts in recipient countries."

Christopher Barrett, an economist who conducted the food-aid study, says the
current structure makes no economic sense. "It's taking a dollar of taxpayer
money and turning it into 50 cents for the program," he says. "Why not just
give them 50 cents directly, rather than losing half of it along the way." Other
experts contend the return on the dollar is closer to 80 cents.

Either way, some aid groups have come to rely heavily on monetization. One
such group, Save the Children, derives about 35 percent of its revenue by
monetizing U.S. food aid, according to the group's head of government
relations, Michael Klosson. Those funds are then put back into other food-
related programs.

Of course, none of these changes would be easy. Most food-aid programs
come within the jurisdiction of the House and Senate agriculture committees,
where coalitions of farm interests usually trump partisan politics.

McGovern said he hopes the markup of a 2012 farm bill will provoke "an
honest and intelligent discussion on . . . how we can make our food-aid
programs more efficient and effective."

But significant changes could have the unintended effect of fracturing the
unlikely coalition that has sustained food aid for decades. For example, many
nonprofit groups support the greater use of cash in emergency situations.
Gillcrist, however, warns that support for food aid would wither among many
farm-related organizations if cash transfers were to become a major substitute
for commodities.

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016




"Quite frankly if the [food-aid coalition] breaks apart, we'll see the further
erosion of our funds going into some of these programs," McGovern said. "In a
perfect world, do you want to spend the money on shipping or on feeding
hungry people? In a perfect world, you'd say you want to feed the hungry
people, but the issues aren't black and white."
                                                                          Top of Form


                                                                        Bottom of Form
Source: CQ Weekly
The definitive source for news about Congress.
  2011 CQ Roll Call All Rights Reserved.


Jonathan Broder
Senior Editor, Defense and Foreign Policy
Congressional Quarterly
77 K St., NE, Suite 700
Washington, DC 20002
Tel.
Cell



----------------
This e-mail may contain confidential material. If you are not an intended recipient, please notify the sender and delete all copies. It may also contain personal
views which are not the views of CQ Roll Call or its owner, The Economist Group. We may monitor e-mail to and from our network. For company information go to
http://legal.economistgroup.com.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787176 Date: 01/07/2016
