      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793594 Date: 01/07/2016
                                                                                        RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                        B5,B6




From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                             Friday, January 27, 2012 7:15 AM
To:                               'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                          Fw: H: V good intel internal Libya. Sid
Attachments:                      hrc memo libya internal strife 012312.doa


Pis print.


From: sbwhoeop
Sent: Monday, January 23, 2012 12:11 PM
To: H
Subject: H: V good Intel internal Libya. Sid




                                         CONFIDENTIAL



                                                 January 23, 2012



For HRC
From: Sid
Re: Libya internal strife


SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as the highest levels of
European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.

         1. On the evening of January 22, 2012, according to an official with access to the leadership of the National
Transitional Government (NTC), Libyan President Mustafa Abdul Jalil spoke at length with Prime Minister Abdurrahim el-
Keib, stating in a heated exchange that el-Keib's government must take the steps necessary to address the complaints of
the demobilized fighters from the 2011revolution. Jalil pointed out that the new government has been discussing this
situation since it was formed in October 2011, and matters have now reached a crisis point, with a group of more than
2,000 disgruntled veterans, supported by students, attacking the NTC offices in Benghazi on January 21, destroying
computer equipment and NTC files. These demonstrators, some of whom threw Molotov cocktails at the NTC
headquarters building, continue to demand better medical care, jobs, payment for their time in the revolutionary army, and
a commitment to transparency on the part of the el-Keib regime; particularly the appointment of cabinet members and
senior officials.
         2. According to this source, when el-Keib replied, pointing out that demonstrators were camped outside of his
office in Tripoli. He added that the government had to proceed in a measured and professional manner, Jalil stated in
angry tones, that NTC staffers were beaten and could have been killed during the January 21 incident, pointing out that
this is how the rebellion against Muammar al Qaddafi began in February 2011. Jalil also warned that Islamist leader
General Abdel Hakim Alamin Belhaj and his supporters, particularly militia commanders from Zintan, Misrata, and other
western regions, are anxiously waiting for the NTC government to collapse. Their goal, in the opinion of this individual, is
to eventually move in and establish a strict Islamic state. Jalil, added that his contacts in the Egyptian Muslim
Brotherhood had been in touch during the preceding week, warning that the threat from Belhaj is very real. El-Keib stated
that he must press Minister of Defense Osama al-Juwali and Interior Minister Fawzi Abd Ali to be more efficient in
administering their positions. According to this individual, el-Keib fears that al-Juwali, who was a western commander
during the revolution, may be maintaining a secret relationship with Belhaj and his allies. In response, Jalil warned el-Keib

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793594 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793594 Date: 01/07/2016




to avoid trying to use the regular military forces posted around Benghazi under General Khalifa Belqasim Hefter in an
effort to restrain the former militia troops as such a step could lead to civil war.
         3. (Source Comment: In the opinion of an extremely well placed individual, el-Keib is, in fact, increasingly
frustrated by the inefficiency in his regime and the inability of his ministers and administrators to arrange contracts with
foreign firms. He complains that his principal advisors, Minister of Oil Abdulrahman Ben Yezza and Minister of Finance
Hassan Ziglam, have been too timid in resolving the questions associated with contracts involving foreign firms, both old
and new. At present it appears that whenever one official raises a question regarding an agreement the entire matter is
put on hold and delayed. In the opinion of this source, el-Keib knows that without these agreements he cannot meet the
demands of the veterans and the students. El-Keib stated in confidence, that he may have made a serious mistake in .
removing the former oil/finance minister Ali Tarhouni from the government. El-Keib also noted that Jalil is shaken by the
January 21 attack on NTC headquarters and is searching for ways to appease the demonstrators. Most recently he
asked Abdel — Hafidh Ghoza, his principal deputy and NTC spokesman to step down. Ghoza, who comes from the
Benghazi area, was particularly unpopular with the western troops.)
         4. Following the discussion with Jalil, el-Kieb ordered Ziglam and Ngeb Obeda, the head of the Stock Exchange,
to move with all possible speed to address the issue of the foreign contracts and arrange for new vendors to provide the
services demanded by the veterans and students. In this discussion he pointed out that if they cannot deal with this
situation they will not have to worry about the national elections in 2012, Libya will be an Islamic Republic, with Belhaj as
the ruler. El-Keib pointed out that foreign governments and large oil firms must be aware of this threat and that this will
frighten them into meeting the conditions for foreign contracts set out by the NTC.
         5. (Source Comment: According to an extremely sensitive source, el-Keib spoke secretly with Hatter, stating that
he, and those troops loyal to him, should be prepared to move to protect the government in the event of increased
violence. This effort could include moving against Belhaj and attacking militia forces before they can unite and organize.
 El-Keib emphasized that this is for planning purposes only, and no action should be taken until el-Keib gives the order.
 He emphasized that he will do everything possible to avoid civil war, but he is now concerned that Jalil will be unable to
deal with the level of hostility against the NTC, and cannot be counted on to take strong positions against Belhaj and his
supporters. In the opinion of this individual, el-Keib cannot back away from his commitment to technicians in senior
 positions, but he will press them as hard as he can to have the government respond to the needs of the veterans and
students. El-Keib believes it is not too late to address these problems, but they must move quickly.)




                                                                                   •••




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793594 Date: 01/07/2016
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793594 Date: 01/07/2016




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Friday, January 27, 2012 7:22 AM
To:                                'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                           Fw: Fareed Zakaria, "Obama's World - An Exclusive Interview with the President"



Pls print.

    Original Message --
From: Sullivan, Jacob J [mailto:SullivanJJ@state.govj
Sent: Wednesday, January 25, 2012 10:52 AM
To: H
Subject: FW: Fareed Zakaria, "Obama's World - An Exclusive Interview with the President"




"The pivot to Asia has been highly effective, taking advantage of China's belligerence. But the Administration must now
work to build an affirmative vision of an Asia that is not banded together against China but rather is open, diverse and
plural. The real challenge is to convince China that it benefits from the stability, rules and prosperity that such a vision
would produce (just as Germany benefited from a peaceful and prosperous Europe with it at the center) and to
persuade the Chinese that they are better off with such an Asia than one characterized by geopolitical competition. So
far, Washington's relations with China have not reached the level of serious strategic dialogue that will be necessary to
achieve any true global cooperation in the years ahead. Going forward, U.S. security and prosperity depends on a
productive relationship with China more than with any other country.

The challenge with China is the challenge with other great powers-and with Obama's foreign policy in general. It is
worthwhile to have good relations with countries. But it is crucial to have good relations in the service of a broader
vision of a world that is characterized by increasing levels of openness, economic interdependence, international
cooperation, peace, prosperity and liberty. Over the past 60 years, the U.S. has helped build an international order
characterized by institutions, policies, norms and best practices. The hundreds of organizations that help coordinate
countries' policies on everything from trade to disease prevention to environmental protection are all new creatures in
international life, and they have created a world of greater peace and prosperity than humans have even known. But
this world needs shoring up as new nations rise to power. The challenge for the U.S. is to make a stable structure for the
world that all the newly emerging powers can buy into and uphold. That means revitalizing global trade, pushing
through on a nuclear-nonproliferation agenda, working to integrate the emerging powers and, perhaps crucially,
articulating a vision of this world.

Henry Kissinger once said that the test for a statesman was to find the place between stagnation and overextension.
Good tactics alone would leave you reacting to events and stagnant in the stream of history. Too vast a vision would
leave you overextended, exhausted and inviting adversaries. Barack Obama is already pointed in the right direction on
foreign policy. The challenge for him is to find the sweet spot."




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793594 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793594 Date: 01/07/2016




                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                              January 23, 2012



  For: HRC
  From: Sid
  Re: Libya internal strife


  SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as
  the highest levels of European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.


           1. On the evening of January 22, 2012, according to an official with access to the
  leadership of the National Transitional Government (NTC), Libyan President Mustafa Abdul
  Jalil spoke at length with Prime Minister Abdurrahim el-Keib, stating in a heated exchange that
  el-Keib's government must take the steps necessary to address the complaints of the demobilized
  fighters from the 2011revolution. Jalil pointed out that the new government has been discussing
  this situation since it was formed in October 2011, and matters have now reached a crisis point,
  with a group of more than 2,000 disgruntled veterans, supported by students, attacking the NTC
  offices in Benghazi on January 21, destroying computer equipment and NTC files. These
  demonstrators, some of whom threw Molotov cocktails at the NTC headquarters building,
  continue to demand better medical care, jobs, payment for their time in the revolutionary army,
  and a commitment to transparency on the part of the el-Keib regime; particularly the
  appointment of cabinet members and senior officials.

           2. According to this source, when el-Keib replied, pointing out that demonstrators were
  camped outside of his office in Tripoli. He added that the government had to proceed in a
  measured and professional manner, Jalil stated in angry tones, that NTC staffers were beaten and
  could have been killed during the January 21 incident, pointing out that this is how the rebellion
  against Muammar al Qaddafi began in February 2011. Jalil also warned that Islamist leader
  General Abdel Hakim Alamin Belhaj and his supporters, particularly militia commanders from
  Zintan, Misrata, and other western regions, are anxiously waiting for the NTC government to
  collapse. Their goal, in the opinion of this individual, is to eventually move in and establish a
  strict Islamic state. Jalil, added that his contacts in the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood had been
  in touch during the preceding week, warning that the threat from Belhaj is very real. El-Keib


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793594 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793594 Date: 01/07/2016




   stated that he must press Minister of Defense Osama al-Juwali and Interior Minister Fawzi Abd
   Ali to be more efficient in administering their positions. According to this individual, el-Keib
   fears that al-Juwali, who was a western commander during the revolution, may be maintaining a
   secret relationship with Belhaj and his allies. In response, Jalil warned el-Keib to avoid trying to
   use the regular military forces posted around Benghazi under General Khalifa Belqasim Haftar in
   an effort to restrain the former militia troops as such a step could lead to civil war.

            3. (Source Comment: In the opinion of an extremely well placed individual, el-Keib is,
   in fact, increasingly frustrated by the inefficiency in his regime and the inability of his ministers
   and administrators to arrange contracts with foreign firms. He complains that his principal
   advisors, Minister of Oil Abdulrahman Ben Yezza and Minister of Finance Hassan Ziglam, have
   been too timid in resolving the questions associated with contracts involving foreign firms, both
   old and new. At present it appears that whenever one official raises a question regarding an
   agreement the entire matter is put on hold and delayed. In the opinion of this source, el-Keib
   knows that without these agreements he cannot meet the demands of the veterans and the
   students. El-Keib stated in confidence, that he may have made a serious mistake in removing the
   former oil/finance minister Ali Tarhouni from the government. El-Keib also noted that Jalil is
   shaken by the January 21 attack on NTC headquarters and is searching for ways to appease the
   demonstrators. Most recently he asked Abdel — Hafidh Ghoza, his principal deputy and NTC
   spokesman to step down. Ghoza, who comes from the Benghazi area, was particularly
   unpopular with the western troops.)

           4. Following the discussion with Jalil, el-Kieb ordered Ziglam and Ngeb Obeda, the head
   of the Stock Exchange, to move with all possible speed to address the issue of the foreign
   contracts and arrange for new vendors to provide the services demanded by the veterans and
   students. In this discussion he pointed out that if they cannot deal with this situation they will
   not have to worry about the national elections in 2012, Libya will be an Islamic Republic, with
   Belhaj as the ruler. El-Keib pointed out that foreign governments and large oil firms must be
   aware of this threat and that this will frighten them into meeting the conditions for foreign
   contracts set out by the NTC.

           5. (Source Comment: According to an extremely sensitive source, el-Keib spoke
   secretly with Haftar, stating that he, and those troops loyal to him, should be prepared to move to
   protect the government in the event of increased violence. This effort could include moving
   against Belhaj and attacking militia forces before they can unite and organize. El-Keib
   emphasized that this is for planning purposes only, and no action should be taken until el-Keib
   gives the order. He emphasized that he will do everything possible to avoid civil war, but he is
   now concerned that Jalil will be unable to deal with the level of hostility against the NTC, and
   cannot be counted on to take strong positions against Belhaj and his supporters. In the opinion of
   this individual, el-Keib cannot back away from his commitment to technicians in senior
   positions, but he will press them as hard as he can to have the government respond to the needs




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793594 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793594 Date: 01/07/2016




  of the veterans and students. El-Keib believes it is not too late to address these problems, but
  they must move quickly.)




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793594 Date: 01/07/2016
