UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785246 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL




                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                               March 1,2011



 For: Hillary
 From: Sid
 Re: Egypt in Libya; US rhetoric


 I am told this information is especially sensitive. Two points that can be drawn:

     1. The commitment of Egyptian Special Forces to the overthrow of Qaddafi is rooted in
        more than longstanding Egyptian hostility to Qaddafi, but also the Egyptians' belief that
        their economic future may be greatly aided by the outcome in Libya and the relationship
        with post-Qaddafi Libya.
     2. The personal name-calling by certain U.S. officials of Qaddafi is stiffening his resistance
        and he is using it internally to support his case with his followers that he is fighting
        Western/Israeli imperialism, foreign interests, etc., according to one of his advisers. This
        rhetoric differs from the formal condemnations of Qaddafi's abusive rule and policies by
        other senior officials and Western governments.




 During late February, 2011 Field Marshall Hussein Tantawi, Chairman of
 Egypt's ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) and Army
 Chief of Staff Sami Annan ordered elite, clandestine Special Operations Units
 of the Egyptian Army to begin carefully providing support to the forces
 fighting against Libya's Muammar Qaddafi. Officers from these clandestine
 units have crossed the border into Libya and made contact with
 representatives of the National Libyan Council (NLC) in Benghazi and begun
 discussing how to provide support and weapons to the opposition forces. This
 aid will be particularly valuable as these anti-government forces are formed
 into rudimentary military units by Libyan Army officers who have gone over
 to the opposition. These Egyptian troops are operating with great care, as
 Tantawi and the other members of the SCAF do not want this effort to come
UNCLASSIFIED    U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785246 Date: 01/07/2016
