UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776553 Date: 01/07/2016




     Sudan visit, January 5-16, 2011                                     RELEASE IN
                                                                         FULL
          Background
          The primary purpose of our trip was to lead the monitoring team
    for the referendum among South Sudanese to determine whether to remain
    part of a united Sudan or to form a new independent nation. In addi-
    tion, we wished to learn as much as possible about ongoing efforts to
    establish permanent accord in the region, based on the Comprehensive
    Peace Accord (CPA) of 2005, to enhance progress on our Center's health
    programs in Sudan, and to make plans for future projects. In addition
    to Rosalynn, I was accompanied by Dr. John Hardman, and in Sudan we
    were joined in Khartoum by David Carroll and other Center staff, by
    Justice Joseph Warioba from Tanzania, and later in Juba by Kofi Annan.
          I first met Dr. John Garang in 1986, and for 25 years The Carter
    Center has been actively promoting peace, democracy, health care, and
    agriculture in Sudan. A long-lasting conflict (costing more than 2 mil-
    lion lives) was interrupted in 1995 by a ceasefire we negotiated and
    again six years ago by the CPA. The referendum voting would begin on
    January 9 and continue for seven days, after which votes would be
    counted and results announced. This is the 82nd troubled or doubtful
    election that has been monitored by The Carter Center, and is among the
    most important. We have monitored the registration of about 3.9 million
    South Sudanese, including 116,000 in N. Sudan and 60,000 in eight other
    countries.

    Activities
           In Khartoum, we had briefings by former president Thabo Mbeki
    (who represents the African Union and is the chief mediator to imple-
    ment the CPA), members of the commission in charge of the referendum,
    special representatives of the U.N. and the European Union, domestic
    observers, opposition party leaders, ambassadors from Europe and Cana-
    da, Senator John Kerry,. and General Scott Gration.
           We absorbed as much information as possible before meeting with
    Sudanese President Al Bashir, with whom U.N. and many foreign leaders
    will not meet because of International Criminal Court (ICC) charges
    against him. During our long discussion, he informed us that:
           a) Despite strong opposition within his own party and among po-
    litical opponents, he will fully support any decision made by South Su-
    danese, including forming an independent nation.
           b) Southerners living in N. Sudan will continue to have freedom
    of worship as during present Sharia law, and all other rights except
    voting and holding military and civil service jobs.
           c) He is eager to have peace in Darfur but wants to ensure that
    peace talks involve local Darfuri populations, and not just rebel lead-
    ers who continue their effort to overthrow the government by force. He
    would also like to include public officials who were elected in April
    2010, plus nomad groups who miss most election opportunities.
           d) He opposes dual citizenship but will support "soft borders"
    between North and South to facilitate easy movement between the two na-
    tions.
          e) The debt of about $39 billion is the entire nation's and
    should not be divided, as this will complicate efforts to realize debt
    relief that is badly needed.
           f)He is eager for the U.S. to disavow the "false" claim that the
    Sudan government supports terrorism, and believes that sanctions should
    be lifted. This will strengthen his efforts for peace with S. Sudan.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776553 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776553 Date: 01/07/2016




           g) He is cooperating fully with President Mbeki in implementing
     all aspects of the CPA. Borders should follow those of 1956, and Abyei
     should be divided.
           h) After a successful transition period, a permanent mechanism
     will be needed to insure amicable relations with S. Sudan.
           i) He accepted my proposal for new Carter Center projects to
     train health workers ($12.3 million for 5 years), trachoma ($3.8 mil-
     lion for 5 years), and onchocerciasis ($600,000 for two years). He of-
     fered training for S. Sudanese health workers in northern universities.
           We flew to Juba on 1/9, were joined by Kofi Annan, and visited a
     number of polling sites. There were long and separate lines of men and
     women waiting patiently to cast their simple ballots: one hand for in-
     dependence and two clasped hands for unity. Voters assured us that the
     separate lines were not because of Sharia law. In one site, the women
     were permitted to vote first, because "they had work to do."
           We monitored 'voting sites each day and had various briefings from
     our staff and others on the referendum process, the future of S. Sudan,
     and health programs plus a number of media interviews. We also met with
     actor George Clooney and John Prendergast and then had a long discus-
     sion with President Salva Kiir. He informed us that:
           a) S. Sudan is determined to avoid conflict, even if taunted and
     challenged by the North.
           b) He is ready to resume talks on CPA issues as soon as referen-
     dum results are announced (about 1/29/11).
           c) Mini Minawi and other Darfur rebels have left S. Sudan to
     avoid any allegation that the South is supporting rebellion.
           d) Shortly after the referendum, an inclusive interim government
     will be formed. Task forces are preparing for a constituent assembly
     that will prepare a new constitution, decide on future elections,
     choose a name for the new nation, and prescribe standards for estab-
     lishment of political parties (probably a minimum of 500 proven members
     and pledge to honor S. Sudan principles).
           e) Human rights of northerners living in the South will be hon-
     ored.
           f)There will be no censorship of citizens or the news media.
           g) Three universities will be moved from the North to the South,
     which will take at least a year providing funds are available.
           h). Almost $1 billion in oil revenue is being withheld by N. Sudan
     banks, and S. Sudan is strapped for cash.
           i) Although President Mbeki is considered more favorable toward
     the North (as indicated by Abyei proposals), he is the only mediator
     and is acceptable to the South.
           j) Carter Center's health training is desired in the South, but
     not until it can be done locally. Guinea worm eradication has removed a
     terrible blight, and complete success is a high priority. Successful
     Sudanese leaders will not be changed.
           k) Southerners who wish to move from N. to S. will be welcome,
     because many of them are skilled and well educated. 160,000 have al-
     ready arrived, most of them going to the vicinity of their former homes
     and not into Juba.
           We visited port facilities alongside the Nile River, where sever-
     al thousand southerners were encamped after returning from Khartoum,
     most of them waiting for transportation by land to the three Equatoria
     states. Leaders said the upstream voyage by barge had taken from eight
     to twelve days, and expenses had been paid by the UN's International
     Organization for Migration. There were enormous supplies of soft drinks
     and dried fish, woven together in long plaited bands. All the people




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776553 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776553 Date: 01/07/2016




     seemed calm, patient, and determined to return to their former villag-
     es, from which many had departed more than 20 years ago.
           We continued to monitor progress of the referendum each day in
     different areas near Juba and to receive reports from throughout the
     nation. At the end of the third day it was obvious that the requisite
     60% of total registered voters was reached, although turnout in N. Su-
     dan was about 50%. Everything was orderly and peaceful, except in the
     Abyei area where a separate planned referendum on the future of the re-
     gion could not be held and fighting occurred between Misseriya nomads
     (loyal to the north) and Ngok Dinka tribesmen who were southerners.
           We had extensive discussions with S. Sudan government officials
     plus leaders of the World Bank, UNICEF, USAID, and others involved in
     shaping the future of the new nation. They were all eager to assist The
     Carter Center in completing the eradication of Guinea worm. It is im-
     portant that boreholes be drilled in the 85 most endemic G. worm vil-
     lages, each one of which has 5 or more cases, and the organizations
     mentioned above all agreed to help. They will also assist in planning
     and implementing a training program for health workers similar to ours
     in Ethiopia and now agreed to begin in N. Sudan. The big problem in the
     South will be establishing adequate educational facilities, perhaps at
     Juba, Malakal, and Wao. Twenty registered nurses and 20 midwives are
     now being trained.
           Back in Khartoum, we had a session with Salah Gosh, chief negoti-
     ator re CPA issues, and a long private meeting with Dr. Salahdien Gha-
     zi, in charge of Darfur peace efforts. These are two key players in N.
     Sudan diplomacy.

     Future political plans for South Sudan:
           Between visits to various poling sites, we had extensive discus-
     sions with President Salva Kiir, opposition party leaders, and Pagan
     Amum, Secretary General of the SPLM and chief negotiator on CPA issues.
     Educated in Cuba, Amum is very knowledgeable and obviously holds key.
     portfolios.
           Some opposition party leaders were concerned about SPLM dominance
     in the future. They acknowledged that the major party had received more
     than 90% of the votes in the April election, and doubted that commit-
     ments made in October would be honored concerning their involvement in
     multi-party decisions about a permanent constitution and other issues.
           Amum assured us that the October commitments would be honored,
     even including all of the 24 parties including tiny ones with just a
     few members. Multi-party consultations will begin in March 2011. The
     SPLM will vacate some cabinet posts during an interim period (probably
     of three years), decisions,to be made by Salva Kiir. During this time
     consultations will be held involving all political groups to determine
     the shape of the government, other constitutional issues, and the defi-
     nition or standards for political parties.
           A census and voters lists will be completed during the interim
     period, in time for elections to be held probably in (July) 2014. This
     may include all offices, including that of the president. The Carter
     Center will be expected to assist as requested in this long process,
     including monitoring the drafting of a constitution, the census, and
     future elections.
           Amum described the status of the CPA talks, which will recommence
     after results of the referendum are finalized. He outlined the six op-
     tions presented by Mbeki re Abyei. Two options are acceptable to the
     South that he claims are compatible with previous agreements and a rul-
     ing of the Permanent Court of Arbitration. (A different one is OK with




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776553 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776553 Date: 01/07/2016




     the North) He insists that the Misseriya will be guaranteed historic
     access to their southern grazing lands, which may have tO be ensured by
     a written agreement and perhaps UN monitors within Abyei.
           Regarding oil, Amum said that China produces about 70% of the
     oil, Japan 15%, N. Sudan 10%, and India a small amount. 2% of the total
     goes to Unity and Upper Nile states and the other 98% retained in Sudan
     is divided 50:50 between N. and S. Sudan. This agreement ends with the
     CPA on July 9, after which the South will be generous in allocating a
     certain amount of oil revenue (not a percentage) to the north to com-
     pensate for services rendered in pipelines and refineries.

     Concerns regarding Darfur
           Kofi Annan and I had extensive talks with Presidents Bashir and
     Kiir, ambassadors stationed in Khartoum, heads of U.N. agencies, Scott
     Gration, Dane Smith, and other leaders. There is a general acceptance
     of Thabo Mbeki as the chosen negotiator to address issues involved in
     the CPA. Bashir trusts him, and Kiir is willing to have him continue,
     but with some skepticism re Mbeki's objectivity. He and his limited
     support team are already heavily overloaded with CPA issues and Sepa-
     rate Darfur topics are extremely complex. Mbeki is the choice of the
     Government of Sudan for both assignments.
           Presuming that there is general awareness of impediments to fur-
     ther progress in Doha regarding Darfur, the next steps will involve ma-
     jor decisions regarding venue, participation of rebels, nomads, and
     elected officials in Darfur, further involvement of Qatar, and designa-
     tion of a mediator who is clearly in charge and singularly devoted to
     the task. Djibril Bassole' (Burkina Faso) was named by the U.N. and
     A.U. as chief negotiator in August 2008 but he has not become deeply
     engaged and has an uncertain relationship with Mbeki. UNAMID director
     Ibrahim Gambari (Nigeria) and Haile Menkerios (Eritrea) also have nota-
     ble diplomatic skills and knowledge of the key issues. The designee
     should have full international backing and reasonable trust of key par-
     ties. A special favorite of mine for some role is Kenyan general Sum-
     beiywo, who did a superb job in formulating the CPA in 2005.

     Final observations
           Before leaving Sudan early on January 16, voter turnout had ex-
     ceeded 90% in the South and 40% in the North among the 618 sites visit-
     ed by our observers. A few sites in S. Sudan had 100% turnout and were
     practically unanimous for independence. The entire exercise was order-
     ly, pleasant, and productive, and it is expected that the official re-
     turns will lead to a new nation, and that The Carter Center will remain
     involved in both countries in promoting peace, democracy, and better
     health and education.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776553 Date: 01/07/2016
