     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787666 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                             B6


From:                         H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                         Friday, October 21, 2011 2:32 PM
To:                           'sulliyanjj@state.goy'
Subject                       Fw: H: URGENT INTEL POST-Q INTERNAL NTC POLITICS. SID
Attachments:                  hrc memo urgent latest intel post q internal ntc 102011.docx



More from Sid.


From: sbwhoeop            [mailto:sbwhoeop
Sent: Thursday, October 20, 2011 12:23 PM
To: H
Subject: H: URGENT INTEL POST-Q, INTERNAL NTC POLITICS. SID




                                   CONFIDENTIAL



                                           October 20, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Libya post-Q, internal politics NTC



SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well
as the highest levels of European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security
services.

       1. Late in the day on October 20, 2011, the interim President of Libya Mustafa Abdel
Jalil received reports from General Abdel Hakim Alamin Belhaj in Tripoli, as well as
Hassan Ali al-Darwa, the National Transitional Council (NTC) leader for the City of Sirte,
stating that former Libyan leader Muammar al Qaddafi had been killed during fighting in
that city. Shortly after these messages arrived NTC Prime Minister Mahmoud Jibril began
discussions with the Jalil's representatives regarding the formation of a new interim
government. Jibril had notified Jalil on October 9 that he intended to step down once
Sirte fell, and that Jalil should form a new interim government of national unity to manage
the country until elections can be held, perhaps as early as May 2012.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787666 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787666 Date: 01/07/2016




       2. According to sensitive sources, Jalil and other senior officials of the NTC believe
that Jibril's withdrawal from the scene will allow them to take the difficult decisions
needed to stabilize the country prior to any elections. In the opinion of these
knowledgeable individuals, while Jibril gave the NTC credibility during the early days of
the revolution, he became increasingly reluctant to take any decisive action, particularly
regarding the formation of an interim government, and negation of new contracts with
foreign firms involved with the oil sector in Libya. This reluctance to act also delayed the
arrival of foreign companies interested in providing humanitarian aid. These
humanitarian aid projects are being coordinated by a senior NTC official, Moin
Mohammad Kikhia, who was extremely frustrated with Jibril's failure to resolve questions
involving foreign contracts that have been negotiated and, in some cases, signed by NTC
representatives in other countries. According to these individuals, Jibril is concerned
about involving himself in foreign commercial contracts that might leave him open to
charges of corruption. Kikhia argued that the need for medical and other humanitarian
assistance transcended these rather vague concerns. He also argued that waiting for
foreign governments to provide a sufficient degree of humanitarian aid could lead to
disaster, as the Libyan people become increasingly frustrated with the lack of action on the
part of the NTC.
       3. According to knowledgeable individuals, Jibril's close advisor Aref All Nayed may
also leave his position in the NTC regime. Aref is a senior diplomat, who, while based in
the United Arab Emirates (UAE), oversaw foreign commercial dealings and the
stabilization activities of the NTC between February and September 2011. Aref is seen by
many NTC members as a roadblock to dealings with foreign firms, reflecting Jibril's
caution in these matters. This NTC frustration is focused on Aref s reluctance to bring in
foreign commercial firms to provide desperately needed humanitarian aid. In one case the
U.S. firm Osprey Global Supply has been waiting since May 2011 for approval to provide
emergency hospital and battlefield medical support. These sources believe that Kikhia will
now conclude these agreements, and begin to bring needed medical and humanitarian aid
to Tripoli and other parts of the country.
       4. (Source Comment: Speaking in strict confidence, sources with direct access to
the NTC leadership stated that the NTC Finance and Oil minister, All Tarhouni, is also
meeting with Jail to discuss how to improve the functioning of the various parts of the
banking and oil industries, working with foreign financial institutions and energy
companies. Tarhouni is supporting the idea that Libya needs a separate Oil Ministry to
focus on bringing some order to the chaotic situation in that sector. However, Jibril had
resisted making a decision on this point, asking Tarhouni to handle both portfolios until
the military situation was resolved. This same source added that while Tarhouni is
frustrated by Jibril, the two are linked as academics with international experience, and it is
possible that Tarhouni may be forced out as well. In the opinion of this source, Jalil will
do everything he can to keep Tarhouni and his team in place, at least until national
elections in mid-2012. According to this individual, Jail sees Tarhouni as the type of
technocrat he will need to negotiate the foundation of a new government, at a time when
tribal and regional interests are beginning to pull at the unity of the NTC.)
       5. A separate sensitive source added that in their opinion, Belhaj presents a serious
threat to the effort to form a national government. This individual believes that as
commander of NTC forces in much of the western part of the country, Belhaj has
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787666 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787666 Date: 01/07/2016




established relationships with civilian and militia leaders in Misrata, Zintan, and the
Nafsurah Mountains. This source adds that at present the Misrata militia carries the bulk
of the fighting in Sirte, and in the hours following Qaddafi's death the Misrata Council
(within the NTC) has been making announcements without coordination, sounding as if
they are the National Government. These statements are particularly worrisome to Jalil
and Jibril.
       6. (Source Comment: According to these knowledgeable individuals, Nun Berruien,
the Chairman of the Board of Directors of the National Oil Company (NOC), is in close
contact with Tarhouni. Berruien is concerned that new agreements made between the
NOC and foreign oil/energy firms must be honored as they try to bring oil production up
to the levels seen before the revolution began in February 2011. Tarhouni is
communicating these concerns to Jalil and Jibril, pointing out that in these chaotic days
following the death of Qaddafi it is vital that the NTC establish a stable interim
government, aiming toward elections in May 2011. Without this stability Tarhouni is
convinced that the Libyan economy will be damaged for years to come, particularly as
Western firms and governments look for reassurance regarding their ability to work in
Libya with a degree of safety for their personnel and facilities.)




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787666 Date: 01/07/2016
