    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791967 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                      RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                         Sidney Blumenthal <
Sent:                         Monday, August 27, 2012 6:36 PM
To:
Subject:                      H: Intel, Libyan President. Sid
Attachments:                  hrc memo Libya President 082712.docx




                                   CONFIDENTIAL



                                           August 27, 2012



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: New President of Libya


SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as the
highest levels of European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.

        1. (Source Comment: As the new interim President of Libya Mohammed Yussef el Magariaf is
determined to establish a democratic state based on Islamic principles. In the opinion of an
extremely sensitive source, Magariaf sees this moment as the climax his entire life's work. Having
first served deposed dictator Muammar al Qaddafi as a policy advisor and diplomat, in 1979 Magariaf
became disenchanted with what he saw as the cult of personality that Qaddafi was building for
himself while turning against the basic beliefs of the Islamist movement. Magariaf was member of the
Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood in his student days and remains a devout Islamist intellectual, albeit
one who believes that Islam can coexist and even work with the non-Muslim world, particularly the
United States and Western Europe. This source also believes that Magariaf is convinced that Libya,
with its great natural wealth, can become a leading player in North Africa, as well as the rest of the
Islamic world. Magariaf is particularly well disposed toward the governments of the United States
and France, based on past experiences with each during his struggle with Qaddafi. This source also
believes that he remains hostile to the government of Omar al Bashir in Sudan. In 1989 Bashir
overthrew Magariaf s ally, then Sudanese Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mandi and expelled Magariaf and
his followers from Khartoum.)

        2. According to the same sensitive source, Magariaf will also seek a discreet relationship with
Israel. Political realities in Libya at present will dictate that this relationship be handled in a low key
manner, but the new President of Libya shares many common friends and associates with the leaders
of Israel and intends to take advantage of this situation to improve the lot of the Libyan people.
Magariaf may, at times, be forced to make statements critical of Israel for his own political purposes,
but believes he and his associates have the experience and sophistication to manage this issue. At the

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791967 Date: 01/07/2016            46335
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791967 Date: 01/07/2016




same time Magariaf intends to pursue aggressively the regional political initiatives begun by National
Transitional Council (NTC) President Mustafa Abdel Jalil. Magariaf will pursue the economic and
security cooperation set out in the Cairo Declaration of July 29, 2012 establishing a regional bond
between the new revolutionary governments of Tunisia, Libya and Egypt. This same individual notes
that Magariaf is aware of the fact that Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi sees Libya as a key factor
in Egypt's economic development; and the Libyan leader believes he can manipulate this situation to
the advantage of the Libyan people.

       3. A separate sensitive source stated on condition of strict secrecy that Magariaf intends to
work with his security advisors to develop a plan for disarming the Islamist militias who fought
against Qaddafi, without arousing their suspicion. He believes that the most important step in this
matter will be providing the medical and economic services demanded by these militias in return for
disarming. Magariaf also believes that he can manage the political ambitions of Islamist leaders like
General Abdelhakim Belhaj, while preventing the growth of radical groups who might see Libya as a
base of operations and support. Magariaf and his supporters believe that his Islamist/anti-Qaddafi
credentials will allow him to manage these challenges, and if he can do so he will be able to win the
presidency outright in the first full scale national presidential election in the spring of 2013.

       4. This source adds that, while avoiding direct involvement in the Syrian crisis, the Magariaf
government will support Turkey, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the rest of the nations calling for the end of
the regime of Basher al Assad. Magariaf harbors a particular sense of hostility toward Assad, who was
a longtime ally of Qaddafi, supporting him with equipment, intelligence, and advisors throughout the
revolution of 2011. Magariaf realizes that this stance will also bring him into conflict with Syria's ally
Iran, but does not believe Iran has a role to play in Libya, or the rest of North Africa.

       5. According to an extremely sensitive source, in 1979 Magariaf, having become increasingly
disenchanted with Qaddafi, fled Libya for Khartoum in Sudan, where in 1981, with the help of the
government of Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mandi, Chadian leader Hissene Habre, Iraqi President
Sadaam Hussein, and several Western states, he established The National Front for the Salvation of
Libya (NFSL), dedicated to overthrowing Qaddafi and establishing an Islamic democracy in Libya.
Under the auspices of the NFSL, Magariaf also organized the Libyan National Army (LNA), based in
Ndjamena, Chad. The LNA was commanded by the Colonel Khalifa Belqasim Haftar, who is now one
of the commanding generals of the new Libyan Army. Under Magariaf s authority the Haftar force,
which numbered between 2,50o and 3,000 troops, fought several battles with Qaddafi's troops, with
mixed results. These attacks included a raid on Qaddafi's compound at Bab al-Aziza in 1986. The
LNA also maintained a 50,00o watt radio station in Ndjamena, broadcasting anti-Qaddafi material
into Libya. This radio station was supported by Western governments and Iraqi Military Intelligence.

       6. The LNA's greatest success came in support of the Chadian Army under General Idriss
Deby, in their overwhelming victory over Libyan troops at the battle Ouadi Doum in 1987. This
victory forced the Libyan Army and Air Force out of Chad, and was supported by the French Air Force
and other Western personnel. Following the battle Deby became a national hero in Chad. In 1990,
with the support of Libyan intelligence officers, Deby, who had undergone military training in Libya
and France, rebelled against and overthrew the Habre Government. At that time Deby, under
Qaddafi's influence, forced the LNA to abandon Chad for Zaire, and eventually the United States.
Magariaf and Haftar both settled in the United States, and while the LNA no longer existed as an
effective force, Magariaf continued to maintain the NFSL as a political organization. In 2004
Magariaf and the NFSL joined the National Conference for the Libyan Opposition (NCLO), eventually
returning to support the 2011 revolution.

        7. (Source Comment: In the opinion of an extremely sensitive source speaking on condition of
strict secrecy, Magariaf views himself as an Islamist politician who can work with both Islamic and

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791967 Date: 01/07/2016           46336
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791967 Date: 01/07/2016




non-Islamic states, including Israel, if the relationships are properly managed. The Libyan President
also sees the current situation as vindication for all of the problematic experiences he encountered in
his long struggle against the Qaddafi regime. This individual believes that Magariaf intends to use his
reputation for integrity, commitment to Islam, and his ability to work with divergent groups to
establish himself as an effective interim President, and eventually the first elected Libyan Head of
State in mid-2013. Magariaf plans to draw on all political, religious, and ethnic groups to form his
cabinet, using his stature to form a representative government under the General National Council.)




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791967 Date: 01/07/2016        46337
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791967 Date: 01/07/2016




                                          CONFIDENTIAL



                                                 August 27, 2012



  For: Hillary
  From: Sid
  Re: New President of Libya


  SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as
  the highest levels of European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.

          1. (Source Comment: As the new interim President of Libya Mohammed Yussef el
  Magariaf is determined to establish a democratic state based on Islamic principles. In the
  opinion of an extremely sensitive source, Magariaf sees this moment as the climax his entire
  life's work. Having first served deposed dictator Muammar al Qaddafi as a policy advisor and
  diplomat, in 1979 Magariaf became disenchanted with what he saw as the cult of personality that
  Qaddafi was building for himself while turning against the basic beliefs of the Islamist
  movement. Magariaf was member of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood in his student days and
  remains a devout Islamist intellectual, albeit one who believes that Islam can coexist and even
  work with the non-Muslim world, particularly the United States and Western Europe. This
  source also believes that Magariaf is convinced that Libya, with its great natural wealth, can
  become a leading player in North Africa, as well as the rest of the Islamic world. Magariaf is
  particularly well disposed toward the governments of the United States and France, based on past
  experiences with each during his struggle with Qaddafi. This source also believes that he
  remains hostile to the government of Omar al Bashir in Sudan. In 1989 Bashir overthrew
  Magariaf s ally, then Sudanese Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mandi and expelled Magariaf and his
  followers from Khartoum.)

          2. According to the same sensitive source, Magariaf will also seek a discreet relationship
  with Israel. Political realities in Libya at present will dictate that this relationship be handled in a
  low key manner, but the new President of Libya shares many common friends and associates
  with the leaders of Israel and intends to take advantage of this situation to improve the lot of the
  Libyan people. Magariaf may, at times, be forced to make statements critical of Israel for his
  own political purposes, but believes he and his associates have the experience and sophistication
  to manage this issue. At the same time Magariaf intends to pursue aggressively the regional
  political initiatives begun by National Transitional Council (NTC) President Mustafa Abdel Jalil.
  Magariaf will pursue the economic and security cooperation set out in the Cairo Declaration of




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791967 Date: 01/07/2016               46338
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791967 Date: 01/07/2016




  July 29, 2012 establishing a regional bond between the new revolutionary governments of
  Tunisia, Libya and Egypt. This same individual notes that Magariaf is aware of the fact that
  Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi sees Libya as a key factor in Egypt's economic
  development; and the Libyan leader believes he can manipulate this situation to the advantage of
  the Libyan people.

          3. A separate sensitive source stated on condition of strict secrecy that Magariaf intends
  to work with his security advisors to develop a plan for disarming the Islamist militias who
  fought against Qaddafi, without arousing their suspicion. He believes that the most important
  step in this matter will be providing the medical and economic services demanded by these
  militias in return for disarming. Magariaf also believes that he can manage the political
  ambitions of Islamist leaders like General Abdelhakim Belhaj, while preventing the growth of
  radical groups who might see Libya as a base of operations and support. Magariaf and his
  supporters believe that his Islamist/anti-Qaddafi credentials will allow him to manage these
  challenges, and if he can do so he will be able to win the presidency outright in the first full scale
  national presidential election in the spring of 2013.

          4. This source adds that, while avoiding direct involvement in the Syrian crisis, the
  Magariaf government will support Turkey, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the rest of the nations
  calling for the end of the regime of Basher al Assad. Magariaf harbors a particular sense of
  hostility toward Assad, who was a longtime ally of Qaddafi, supporting him with equipment,
  intelligence, and advisors throughout the revolution of 2011. Magariaf realizes that this stance
  will also bring him into conflict with Syria's ally Iran, but does not believe Iran has a role to play
  in Libya, or the rest of North Africa.

          5. According to an extremely sensitive source, in 1979 Magariaf, having become
  increasingly disenchanted with Qaddafi, fled Libya for Khartoum in Sudan, where in 1981, with
  the help of the government of Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mandi, Chadian leader Hissene Habre,
  Iraqi President Sadaam Hussein, and several Western states, he established The National Front
  for the Salvation of Libya (NFSL), dedicated to overthrowing Qaddafi and establishing an
  Islamic democracy in Libya. Under the auspices of the NFSL, Magariaf also organized the
  Libyan National Army (LNA), based in Ndjamena, Chad. The LNA was commanded by the
  Colonel Khalifa Belqasim Haftar, who is now one of the commanding generals of the new
  Libyan Army. Under Magariaf s authority the Haftar force, which numbered between 2,500 and
  3,000 troops, fought several battles with Qaddafi's troops, with mixed results. These attacks
  included a raid on Qaddafi's compound at Bab al-Aziza in 1986. The LNA also maintained a
  50,000 watt radio station in Ndjamena, broadcasting anti-Qaddafi material into Libya. This radio
  station was supported by Western governments and Iraqi Military Intelligence.

          6. The LNA's greatest success came in support of the Chadian Army under General
  Idriss Deby, in their overwhelming victory over Libyan troops at the battle Ouadi Doum in 1987.
  This victory forced the Libyan Army and Air Force out of Chad, and was supported by the
  French Air Force and other Western personnel. Following the battle Deby became a national
  hero in Chad. In 1990, with the support of Libyan intelligence officers, Deby, who had
  undergone military training in Libya and France, rebelled against and overthrew the Habre
  Government. At that time Deby, under Qaddafi's influence, forced the LNA to abandon Chad




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791967 Date: 01/07/2016             463391
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791967 Date: 01/07/2016




  for Zaire, and eventually the United States. Magariaf and Haftar both settled in the United
  States, and while the LNA no longer existed as an effective force, Magariaf continued to
  maintain the NFSL as a political organization. In 2004 Magariaf and the NFSL joined the
  National Conference for the Libyan Opposition (NCLO), eventually returning to support the
  2011 revolution.

           7. (Source Comment: In the opinion of an extremely sensitive source speaking on
  condition of strict secrecy, Magariaf views himself as an Islamist politician who can work with
  both Islamic and non-Islamic states, including Israel, if the relationships are properly managed.
  The Libyan President also sees the current situation as vindication for all of the problematic
  experiences he encountered in his long struggle against the Qaddafi regime. This individual
  believes that Magariaf intends to use his reputation for integrity, commitment to Islam, and his
  ability to work with divergent groups to establish himself as an effective interim President, and
  eventually the first elected Libyan Head of State in mid-2013. Magariaf plans to draw on all
  political, religious, and ethnic groups to form his cabinet, using his stature to form a
  representative government under the General National Council.)




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791967 Date: 01/07/2016        46340
