UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786971 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                           RELEASE IN
                                                                           FULL




                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                              March 16, 2011



 For: Hillary
 From: Sid
 Re: Startling Libya developments; & UAE joining Saudi invation of Bahrain


     I.     First, a spot report on Libya:

     1. Confirmation by phone and email that a Libyan bomber pilot has crashed his plane onto
        Qaddafi's Bab-Azizya compound headquarters. One, if not two, of Qaddafi's sons have
        been confirmed badly hit. One may be transported to a hospital in Malta.
     2. At this moment, at the Hilton Hotel at Malta, one of Qaddafi's cousins is meeting with
        officers of the Malta Air Force offering bribes to purchase jet fuel from Malta. Qaddafi's
        planes have virtually run out of high quality jet fuel.
     3. Saif Qaddafi was in London last week meeting secretly with high officials in the UK and
        Italian governments. Saif told them that if they opposed the no-fly zone his father would
        no longer skim 20 percent off the top that he has been stealing from every oil transaction
        with Western government. Saif also joked that he did not want to spend the rest of his life
        in Ryadh.
     4. General Abdulfattah Younus, former Libyan interior minister, has been appointed general
        in chief of the Libyan rebel army. Jibril is traveling from Cairo into Libya to meet with
        Younus.


     II.    Bahrain

            This report confirms that the UAE is planning to send in 500 police in support of the
            Saudi invasion.


 During the early morning of March 16, 2011, according to individuals with direct access to the
 security forces of Saudi Arabia, the government of Bahrain's King Hamad bin Isa al Khalifa
 privately told military advisors to Saudi King Abdullah bin Abdul Aziz that the 1000 man Saudi
 security force which entered Bahrain on March 13 should shoot to kill, if needed, to aid
 overwhelmed Bahraini security forces in dispersing anti-government demonstrators. These
 individuals state that, in coordination with the Bahraini forces, the Saudi troops opened fire on



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786971 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786971 Date: 01/07/2016




 demonstrators in Pearl Square, killing at least 12 protestors and wounding another 30-50 people.
 A twelve hour curfew is now in place in Manama.

 According to these Saudi officers, King Khalifa, and Prime Minister Khalifa Bin Salman al
 Khalifa are increasingly concerned as the demonstrators rally around a call for the establishment
 of a constitutional monarchy in Bahrain, with the current rulers stepping down. The King is
 determined to use as much force as necessary to end this uprising, and regain control over the
 majority Shiite population in his country.

 In this regard, King Khalifa turned to the 2009 mutual defense agreement among the Gulf
 Corporation Council (GCC) states; and asked the Saudis to send in troops. The United Arab
 Emirates (UAE) will send in 500 police officers to support of this GCC operation. According to
 knowledgeable sources, these police forces will join Saudi and Bahraini troops in seeking out
 and detaining anti-government personnel outside of Manama over the next week.

 (Source Comment: Knowledgeable individuals state that King Khalifa and King Abdullah, as
 well as their senior advisors, realize that these military moves may further inspire unrest in the
 Shiite communities in both Saudi Arabia and Bahrain. At the same time senior security officials
 in both countries believe that clandestine operatives of the Iranian Ministry of Intelligence and
 Security (MOIS) are working in these Shiite communities to spread unrest. These officers
 believe that press reports regarding Bahraini troops firing on hospitals to prevent injured people
 from receiving treatment, were planted by covert action operatives of the MOIS. They also
 received reporting from sensitive sources that the leaders of Shiite mosques in Bahrain are now
 seriously urging people to commence a jihad against the government.)

  According to an individual with access to senior officials of King Abdullah's government, Saudi
  intelligence officials believe that Iran, through the MOIS intends to exploit the crisis in Bahrain
  to improve its position in the Gulf Saudi intelligence believes that if Teheran succeeds in
  transforming the issue from a political dispute to a Sunni versus Shia religious conflict it will be
  an important step in efforts by the Iranian leadership against the Saudi ruling family, whom they
  believe unworthy of guarding the holy places of Islam. In the opinion of these sources, the
  Iranian government has a long range strategy to establish its position as the defender of the Shiite
  community against the repression initiated by Saudi troops. These Saudi officers point out that
  the Iranians used a similar strategy in Iraq, establishing themselves, and their allies as the
  protectors of the Shiite population against the Saudis and the supporters of the United States.

  (Source Comment: While these Saudi officers are concerned by the unrest in the Shiite
  communities in their country and Bahrain, they believe they can eventually control the situation,
  as the most revered Grand Ayatollahs in Bahrain are Ayatollah Sistani in Najaf, Ayatollah
  Muhammad Sadeq Shirazi in Qom and Ayatollah Muhammad Taqi al-Mudarrasi in Karbala. The
  teachings of Ayatollahs Sistani and Shirazi are not in concert with Iran's theocratic ideology, and
  their concept of clerical involvement in politics is more in line with electoral politics rather than
  militant activism and the formation of an Iranian-style theocracy. That said, in their opinion the
  immediate issue is limiting the role of the MOIS, while quickly putting down the demonstration.)




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786971 Date: 01/07/2016
