       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795336 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                 B6


From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                               Tuesday, July 24, 2012 6:53 PM
To:                                 'sulliyanij@state.gov'
Subject:                            Fw: H: New intel Syria, Turykey, Israel, Iran. Sid
Attachments:                        hrc memo new intel Syria, Turkey, Israel, Iran 072412.docx



Fyi.


From: sbwhoeop
Sent: Tuesday, July 24, 2012 02:23 AM
To: H
Subject: H: New intel Syria, Turykey, Israel, Iran. Sid




                                                     CONFIDENTIAL


                                                        July 24, 2012




For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Syria, Turkey, Israel, Iran


SOURCE: Sources with access to the highest levels of the Governments and institutions discussed below. This includes
political parties and regional intelligence and security services.




         1. According to an individual with access to the highest levels of major European governments, the
intelligence services of these countries are reporting to their principals that the commanders of the Israeli
military and intelligence community believe that the civil war in Syria is spreading to neighboring countries,
including Lebanon, Jordan, and Turkey . These European officials are concerned that the ongoing conflict in
Syria will lead to uprisings in these countries that will bring increasingly conservative Islamic regimes into
power, replacing existing secular or moderate regimes. This individual adds that, Israeli security officials
believe that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is convinced that these developments will leave them
vulnerable, with only enemies on their borders.


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795336 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795336 Date: 01/07/2016




       2. In private conversations senior Israeli Intelligence and Military commaders state to their European
associates that they have long viewed the regime of Syrian President Bashar al Assad, while hostile, as a known
quantity and a buffer between Israel and the more militant Muslim countries, a situation that is threatened by the
growing successs of the rebel forces of the Free Syria Army (FSA). This source is convinced that these Israeli
leaders are now drawing up contingency plans to deal with a regional structure where the new revolutionary
regimes that take over the various countries will be controlled by the Muslim Brotherhood and possibly more
problematic groups such as al Qa'ida, which doesn't bode well for the Israelis.


       3. At the same time, looking at the tensions between Israel and Iran as part of the overall situation in the
region, these European heads of state are receiving reporting indicating that if Israel were to attack the Iranian
nuclear facilities at this time it would only exacerbate relations with their neighbors. In addition, such an attack
may lead to further deterioration in the world economy, which would in turn be blamed on Israel. These sources
believe that such an attack would also unite the Iranian population against the United States and strengthen their
ties to the Mullahs, rather than weaken them. These particular individuals fear that this in turn would accelerate
Iranian efforts at building a nuclear arsenal, seeking additional support from their contacts in Russia and China.


       4. According to a source with direct access, Turkish Army commanders have stated in private
discussions with the highest levels of their Government that an Israeli attack on Iran will surely start a regional
war "before the first Israel air-strike sortie has returned to base". Turkish intelligence estimates, supported by
their liaison contacts in Western European intelligence services, advise that thousands of missiles and rockets
would fall on Israel fired from Iran, Lebanon, Syria, and Gaza.


        5. (Source Comment: The Turkish Army estimates that Syria and Lebanon Hezbollah forces have
access to over 200,000 surface to surface rockets and missiles. Their military analysts also believe that an
assault from such a force would overwhelm Israel's defenses.)


        6. According to these individuals, the European intelligence sources are also advising their heads of
state that international economic sanctions are truly hurting the Iranian economy and have begun to foster
frustration among the Iranian people. Sources in Tehran report that this hostility is increasingly aimed at the
ruling party. These indivdivals also advise that an Israeli attack against Iran would immediately serve to
undermine this situation, turning the populaton against Israel, the United States, and Western Europe in support
of their rulers, both Islamic and Secular. In this regard, these European security leaders regularly site the words
of Prime Minister Netanyahu: "Iran in particular is susceptible to economic pressure. The oil-exporting Islamic
republic is virtually a single-crop economy, and imposition of a tight blockade against Iranian oil sales will
undoubtedly induce in Teheran a prompt revaluation of the utility of even indirect terrorist tactics."
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795336 Date: 01/07/2016
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795336 Date: 01/07/2016




           7. One particular source states that the British and French Intelligence services believe that their Israeli
    counterparts are convinced that there is a positive side to the civil war in Syria; if the Assad regime topples, Iran
    would lose its only ally in the Middle East and would be isolated. At the same time, the fall of the House of
    Assad could well ignite a sectarian war between the Shiites and the majority Sunnis of the region drawing in
    Iran, which, in the view of Israeli commaders would not be a bad thing for Israel and its Western allies. In the
    opinion of this individual, such a scenario would distract and might obstruct Iran from its nuclear activities for a
    good deal of time. In addition, certain senior Israeli intelligence analysts believe that this turn of events may
    even prove to be a factor in the eventual fall of the current government of Iran.


           8. (Source Comment: In the opinion of this particularly sensitive source, after discussions with Israeli
   contacts, if you consider Israel's position at this juncture, with all that is ongoing in the region, what position
   would you take? At present, considering that Israel is not prepared for an all out war with Iran, they may well
   continue to threaten action, giving the impression they are serious about pursuing aggresive Iranian anti-nuclear
    efforts. One way to do that is to update weapon systems; secure an air base in Saudi Arabia that would suggest a
    staging ground for an eventual attack, then "leak" the word to the media that their are eminent plans to carry out
   a bombing raid and do everything possible to persuade the world they mean business.)


           9. At the same time, a separate sensitive source added that the European security services are concerned
   that this brinksmanship could lead to missteps that could, in turn, lead to a regional war. In this regard these
   European services are staying in close contact with their Israeli counterparts as they attempt to manipulate
   events while avoiding a general conflict at this time. This individual stated that a senior Israeli military
   commander described the current situation from the Israeli perspective by quoting Sun Tzu wrote in THE ART
   OF WAR: "He will win who knows when to fight and when not to fight."




CONFIDENTIAL: This message is confidential, privileged, and is covered by the Electronic Communications
Privacy Act (18 USC 2510). This message and any attachments are intended for the sole use of the addresses(s)
and any discussion, copying and/or distribution is strictly prohibited. If you have received this message in error,
please notify the sender, and immediately delete from your computer system. Thank you.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795336 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795336 Date: 01/07/2016




                               CONFIDENTIAL/PROPRIETARY




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795336 Date: 01/07/2016
