     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791853 Date: 01/07/2016

                                                                                               RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                               B6



From:                          Sidney Blumenthal
Sent:                          Thursday, August 23, 2012 11:34 PM
To:
Subject:                        H: Intel on new Libya president. Sid
Attachments:                    hrc memo libya new president 082312.docx




                                     CONFIDENTIAL



                                             August 23, 2012



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: New president of Libya

SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as the highest levels
of European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.


        1. During early August, 2012, Libyan National Transitional Council (NTC) President Mustafa Abdel
Jalil held discreet meetings with Mohammed Yussef Magariaf, the then leader of the newly elected General
National Congress (GNC), who Jalil learned was to be named interim President of Libya when the NTC stepped
down. During these sessions the two leaders worked out the transition to a new, elected interim Government for
Libya; focusing on the need to restore stability and security by disarming the militia units which fought in the
2011 revolution against former dictator Muammar al Qaddafi. According to a source with excellent access to
both parties, Jalil came away from the meeting convinced that Magariaf is intent on becoming Libya's first
elected president following the overthrow of Qaddafi. Jalil was pleased to learn that Magariaf strongly supports
the three-party Cairo Declaration negotiated between the NTC and the Governments of Tunisia and Egypt in
late July allowing for increased trade and a relaxation of existing travel restrictions.
         2. According to this individual, Jalil and Magariaf agree that Tunisia and Egypt hold the key to Libya's
future economic success, with Libya providing the funding for new projects, while Egypt and Tunisia provide
technical expertise. Magariaf stated privately that this relationship marks a departure from the Qaddafi years
when Libya's natural resources fell under the control of foreign firms and governments. Jalil added that
Magariaf will welcome investment and cooperation from American and Western European banks and
corporations, but believes Libya, supported by the new governments rising out of the Arab Spring, must
maintain control over all aspects of the industries involved in exploiting its natural resources. In this regard,
with the support of both Jalil and Magariaf, the Libyan Ministry of Finance is increasing the level of Libyan
investment in the Cairo stock exchange. In turn, Magariaf and Egyptian President Mohamad Morsi discussed
increased Tunisian and Egyptian investment in the Benghazi stock exchange as the economic situation in Libya
becomes more orderly.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791853 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791853 Date: 01/07/2016

        3. In commenting on the new Interim President, Jalil added that Magariaf s current position is bolstered
by the fact that he is not tied to any particular faction. At the same time he has maintained the respect that is
attached to his role as the first Libyan leader to direct an armed revolt against Qaddafi. This fighting was
carried out by the rebel Libyan National Army in 1981. Magariaf is an academic and diplomat with well
established Islamist credentials and good relationships with business and government leaders in the United
States and Western Europe. A separate sensitive source noted that one interesting issue to watch is Magariaf s
relationship with General Khalifa Belqasim Haftar, the commander of one sections of the new Libyan Army.
Haftar has been at odds with many of the militia commanders and is currently leading Libyan forces in the
Kufra region, attempting to end local tribal fighting and block the smuggling of arms and supplies to pro-
Qaddafi militias by supporters based in South Sudan. In the years between 1981 and 1990 Haftar (then Colonel
Haftar) commanded the rebel Libyan National Army, under Magariaf s National Front for the Salvation of
Libya (NFSL). One source notes that Magariaf s opposition to Qaddafi was based on the dictator's betrayal of
Islamic principles, a position that, at that time, was supported by the Western Allies.

        4. According to this individual, Jalil also spoke with former Prime Minister Mahmoud Jibril, who
indicated that he and Magariaf agree on many issues, including the belief that they can build an Islamic state in
Libya that can function in the world economy and the international diplomatic community. He did note that he
believes Magariaf s view of the role of Islam in the day to day function of the government is more conservative
than his, but these are differences that can be sorted out in the GNC. In the opinion of this individual Jabril is
well aware of the fact that, while his National Force Alliance (NFA) controls a solid bloc of thirty nine (39)
seats in the GNC and Magariaf s National Front Party (NFP) holds no seats in its own right, the interim
President has established good working relationships with at least 100 of the 120 independent members of the
GNC. Magariaf received 113 votes in his election as Interim President. Again these independent deputies
respect Magariaf s role in fighting the Qaddafi regime.

        5. (Source Comment: This particularly sensitive individual stated in strict confidence that Magariaf sees
his role as establishing an efficient interim government, while overseeing the drafting of a new constitution and
election law. This individual believes that Magariaf is very interested in winning the presidency under this new
law. Besides meeting with Jalil and Jibril, Magariaf is talking to liberal politicians including former Oil and
Finance Minister Ali Tarhouni, and the leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood's (MB) Justice and Construction
Party (JCP), including Mohamad Sowan.)

       6. This individual adds that Jalil believes Magariaf will face a very difficult period as he addresses the
many issues left unresolved by the NTC and the interim regime of Prime Minister Abdel Rahman el-Keib. Jalil
has been highly frustrated by el-Keib's inability to disarm the many militia units left over from the 2011
revolution against Qaddafi. At the same time he has advised Magariaf to move quickly in replacing el-Keib's
cabinet while deciding which ministers to retain. The new interim government is facing a problem of
lawlessness and attacks against foreigners, including representatives of the Egyptian Government; this at a time
when the new Muslim Brotherhood government of Egypt is reaching out to increase business and diplomatic
contacts between the two countries. According to a sensitive source, Libyan military intelligence officers
believe these attacks are the work of Qaddafi loyalists, while former NTC officials fear that they may be carried
out by dissident Islamist groups, frustrated with the results of the national elections, which many of them
boycotted.

        7. (Source Comment: An extremely sensitive source stated in confidence that Libyan Military
Intelligence officers reported to Jalil and later Magariaf that a series of bombings in Tripoli and Benghazi
appear to be the work of Qaddafi loyalists looking to create tension between the Libyan and Egyptian
Governments. These attacks included the car of an Egyptian diplomat, which was blown up near his home in
Benghazi, a day after several deadly bomb attacks in the capital Tripoli. At the same time, a homemade bomb
exploded under the vehicle of the Egyptian consulate's first secretary Abdelhamid Rifai in one of the Tripoli's
most affluent neighborhoods. No one was hurt during this attack. Earlier in August, three car bombs exploded
near the Ministry of Interior in Tripoli, killing two people and wounding three others. This sensitive source


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791853 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791853 Date: 01/07/2016




 officers believe these attacks are the work of Qaddafi loyalists, while former NTC officials fear
 that they may be carried out by dissident Islamist groups, frustrated with the results of the
 national elections, which many of them boycotted.

         7. (Source Comment: An extremely sensitive source stated in confidence that Libyan
 Military Intelligence officers reported to Jalil and later Magariaf that a series of bombings in
 Tripoli and Benghazi appear to be the work of Qaddafi loyalists looking to create tension
 between the Libyan and Egyptian Governments. These attacks included the car of an Egyptian
 diplomat, which was blown up near his home in Benghazi, a day after several deadly bomb
 attacks in the capital Tripoli. At the same time, a homemade bomb exploded under the vehicle
 of the Egyptian consulate's first secretary Abdelhamid Rifai in one of the Tripoli's most affluent
 neighborhoods. No one was hurt during this attack. Earlier in August, three car bombs exploded
 near the Ministry of Interior in Tripoli, killing two people and wounding three others. This
 sensitive source added that security officers arrested 32 members of what they describe as an
 organized network of Gaddafi loyalists linked to the attacks. During this period, the Red Cross
 suspended its activities in Benghazi and Misrata after one of its compounds in Misrata was
 attacked with grenades and rockets. In late July seven Iranian relief workers associated with the
 Libyan Red Crescent were kidnapped by tribal troops still loyal to the Qaddafi family. Security
 officials have no word on the whereabouts of these relief workers.)

         8. According to this source, while the Cairo Declaration received a positive reception
 among Libyan political and business leaders, it also created a drastic increase in the number of
 Libyan's applying for Egyptian visas under the new, simplified process. This workload has
 created a backlog of applications, and in mid-August, a group of Libyan nationals frustrated with
 the Egyptian visa process attacked the interior of the Egyptian consulate in Tripoli. These
 Libyan applicants were angry about the time it was taking to receive visas to enter Egypt and
 were demanding that the staff work past their stated hours of operation. A sensitive source noted
 that a number of Libyans destroyed the furniture in the main waiting room and attacked the
 consulate. The Magariaf Government has assured the Egyptian ambassador that additional
 security personnel will be assigned to guard the Embassy, at least until the visa backlog is
 reduced.




 UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791853 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791853 Date: 01/07/2016




                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                               August 23, 2012



  For: Hillary
  From: Sid
  Re: New president of Libya

  SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as
  the highest levels of European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.


           1. During early August, 2012, Libyan National Transitional Council (NTC) President
  Mustafa Abdel Jalil held discreet meetings with Mohammed Yussef Magariaf, the then leader of
  the newly elected General National Congress (GNC), who Jalil learned was to be named interim
  President of Libya when the NTC stepped down. During these sessions the two leaders worked
  out the transition to a new, elected interim Government for Libya; focusing on the need to restore
  stability and security by disarming the militia units which fought in the 2011 revolution against
  former dictator Muammar al Qaddafi. According to a source with excellent access to both
  parties, Jalil came away from the meeting convinced that Magariaf is intent on becoming Libya's
  first elected president following the overthrow of Qaddafi. Jalil was pleased to learn that
  Magariaf strongly supports the three-party Cairo Declaration negotiated between the NTC and
  the Governments of Tunisia and Egypt in late July allowing for increased trade and a relaxation
  of existing travel restrictions.
           2. According to this individual, Jalil and Magariaf agree that Tunisia and Egypt hold the
  key to Libya's future economic success, with Libya providing the funding for new projects,
  while Egypt and Tunisia provide technical expertise. Magariaf stated privately that this
  relationship marks a departure from the Qaddafi years when Libya's natural resources fell under
  the control of foreign firms and governments. Jalil added that Magariaf will welcome
  investment and cooperation from American and Western European banks and corporations, but
  believes Libya, supported by the new governments rising out of the Arab Spring, must maintain
  control over all aspects of the industries involved in exploiting its natural resources. In this
  regard, with the support of both Jalil and Magariaf, the Libyan Ministry of Finance is increasing
  the level of Libyan investment in the Cairo stock exchange. In turn, Magariaf and Egyptian
  President Mohamad Morsi discussed increased Tunisian and Egyptian investment in the
  Benghazi stock exchange as the economic situation in Libya becomes more orderly.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791853 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791853 Date: 01/07/2016




          3. In commenting on the new Interim President, Jalil added that Magariaf s current
  position is bolstered by the fact that he is not tied to any particular faction. At the same time he
  has maintained the respect that is attached to his role as the first Libyan leader to direct an armed
  revolt against Qaddafi. This fighting was carried out by the rebel Libyan National Army in
  1981. Magariaf is an academic and diplomat with well established Islamist credentials and good
  relationships with business and government leaders in the United States and Western Europe. A
  separate sensitive source noted that one interesting issue to watch is Magariaf s relationship with
  General Khalifa Belqasim Haftar, the commander of one sections of the new Libyan Army.
  Haftar has been at odds with many of the militia commanders and is currently leading Libyan
  forces in the Kufra region, attempting to end local tribal fighting and block the smuggling of
  arms and supplies to pro-Qaddafi militias by supporters based in South Sudan. In the years
  between 1981 and 1990 Haftar (then Colonel Haftar) commanded the rebel Libyan National
  Army, under Magariaf s National Front for the Salvation of Libya (NFSL). One source notes
  that Magariaf s opposition to Qaddafi was based on the dictator's betrayal of Islamic principles,
  a position that, at that time, was supported by the Western Allies.

           4. According to this individual, Jalil also spoke with former Prime Minister Mahmoud
  Jibril, who indicated that he and Magariaf agree on many issues, including the belief that they
  can build an Islamic state in Libya that can function in the world economy and the international
  diplomatic community. He did note that he believes Magariaf s view of the role of Islam in the
  day to day function of the government is more conservative than his, but these are differences
  that can be sorted out in the GNC. In the opinion of this individual Jabril is well aware of the
  fact that, while his National Force Alliance (NFA) controls a solid bloc of thirty nine (39) seats
  in the GNC and Magariaf s National Front Party (NFP) holds no seats in its own right, the
  interim President has established good working relationships with at least 100 of the 120
  independent members of the GNC. Magariaf received 113 votes in his election as Interim
  President. Again these independent deputies respect Magariaf s role in fighting the Qaddafi
  regime.

          5. (Source Comment: This particularly sensitive individual stated in strict confidence
  that Magariaf sees his role as establishing an efficient interim government, while overseeing the
  drafting of a new constitution and election law. This individual believes that Magariaf is very
  interested in winning the presidency under this new law. Besides meeting with Jalil and Jibril,
  Magariaf is talking to liberal politicians including former Oil and Finance Minister Ali Tarhouni,
  and the leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood's (MB) Justice and Construction Party (JCP),
  including Mohamad Sowan.)

          6. This individual adds that Jalil believes Magariaf will face a very difficult period as he
  addresses the many issues left unresolved by the NTC and the interim regime of Prime Minister
  Abdel Rahman el-Keib. Jalil has been highly frustrated by el-Keib's inability to disarm the
  many militia units left over from the 2011 revolution against Qaddafi. At the same time he has
  advised Magariaf to move quickly in replacing el-Keib's cabinet while deciding which ministers
  to retain. The new interim government is facing a problem of lawlessness and attacks against
  foreigners, including representatives of the Egyptian Government; this at a time when the new
  Muslim Brotherhood government of Egypt is reaching out to increase business and diplomatic
  contacts between the two countries. According to a sensitive source, Libyan military intelligence




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791853 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791853 Date: 01/07/2016

added that security officers arrested 32 members of what they describe as an organized network of Gaddafi
loyalists linked to the attacks. During this period, the Red Cross suspended its activities in Benghazi and
Misrata after one of its compounds in Misrata was attacked with grenades and rockets. In late July seven
Iranian relief workers associated with the Libyan Red Crescent were kidnapped by tribal troops still loyal to the
Qaddafi family. Security officials have no word on the whereabouts of these relief workers.)

        8. According to this source, while the Cairo Declaration received a positive reception among Libyan
political and business leaders, it also created a drastic increase in the number of Libyan's applying for Egyptian
visas under the new, simplified process. This workload has created a backlog of applications, and in mid-
August, a group of Libyan nationals frustrated with the Egyptian visa process attacked the interior of the
Egyptian consulate in Tripoli. These Libyan applicants were angry about the time it was taking to receive visas
to enter Egypt and were demanding that the staff work past their stated hours of operation. A sensitive source
noted that a number of Libyans destroyed the furniture in the main waiting room and attacked the consulate.
The Magariaf Government has assured the Egyptian ambassador that additional security personnel will be
assigned to guard the Embassy, at least until the visa backlog is reduced.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791853 Date: 01/07/2016
