UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784038 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                          RELEASE IN FULL



                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                               October 22, 2011



 For: Hillary
 From: Sid
 Re: Intel on new Libyan government; conflicts with Belhaj



 SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as
 the highest levels of European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.

         1. On October 21, 2011 Ali Tarhouni, Libya's interim Minister of Finance and Oil stated
 in confidence that when President Mustafa Abdel Jalil and the National Transitional Council
 (NTC) begin to form a new government on October 22 and 23 he will press to separate the
 Finance and Oil ministries. According to this individual, Tarhouni believes that the combined
 ministry prevents him from giving full attention to either portfolio. He also believes that having
 the two issues under one ministry creates internal complications that hamper the function of
 each. Tarhouni stated in confidence that while the Finance Ministry must be dedicated to the
 earful management of the country's budget, the Oil Ministry should be aggressive and innovative
 in dealing with their foreign partners and customers. The two ministries must deal with each
 other as equals, and if they are under one minister, one or the other will suffer.
         2. According to this individual, Tarhouni, who is an economist and academic by
 profession, has been told by Jalil that he will remain as Minister of Finance, while Abdulrahman
 Ben Yezza remains the leading candidate to become Oil Minister. Speaking in strict confidence,
 this source stated that BenYezza is a long time associate of Jalil, who asked current Prime
 Minister Mahmoud Jibril to bring him into the government in early September 2011. Jibril did
 not debate this idea, but delayed making a decision, telling his closest associates that BenYezza,
 who is a senior executive with the large Italian Oil firm ENI SpA, represents the past in Libya's
 dealings with foreign oil companies, and that he preferred someone with an academic
 background in finance and economics fill the position, rather than an "oil man". For this reason
 he insisted that Tarhouni maintain his double portfolio until the security and political situation in
 the country stabilized.
         3. At the same time, according to Tarhouni, Jalil discussed the matter at some length
 with Abdullah al-Badr, the Secretary General of OPEC, who has advised that while a separate
 Oil Ministry is the best course, it is important for that Ministry to be focus on supporting Nuni
 Berruien, the Chairman of the Board of Directors of the National Oil Company (NOC). Al-Badr




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784038 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784038 Date: 01/07/2016




 believes that the NOC should have full authority to manage the oil industry, and deal with
 foreign energy firms. Later, in a private conversation, al-Badr told Tarhouni that Jalil shares his
 views on this matter. At the same time they are both concerned that rivals on the NTC, led
 primarily by General Abdel Hakim Alamin Belhaj in Tripoli, and Hassan Ali al-Darwa, the NTC
 leader for the City of Sirte, will press for greater government control of both the oil and banking
 sectors under a new Libyan Government.
          4. Jalil is also concerned that as the country moves toward national elections in May or
 June of 2012, Belhaj and other groups on the NTC will campaign against the interim
 Government, saying that, like former leader Muammar Qaddafi, they are allowing foreign
 interests to dominate the country's natural resources. Jalil stated that if they do choose
 BenYezza or another technocrat with experience in a foreign firm as Oil Minister, that person
 will become the focus of this campaign. In addition, according to this source, Jalil fears that
 Berruien will also be a target of these attacks. In this regard Jalil indicated that he needed
 Tarhouni to remain in government, complaining that Jibril, while a good and honest man, had
 been too weak to deal with these complications.
          5. (Source Comment: According to this very sensitive source, Jalil is concerned that
 Belhaj and his heavily armed troops in Tripoli and the Western part of the country, as well as the
 members of other regional and ethnic militias, will attempt to use the threat of force to impose
 their views on the NTC in the run up to the national elections. Jalil repeated that he is also
 concerned that these forces inside of the NTC want to establish a strong national authority in an
 effort to control the activities of foreign banks, corporations, and energy firms while managing
 and limiting the ability of these foreign institutions to influence the day to day life of the Libyan
 people. In Jalil's opinion this approach will only serve to delay the stabilization and
 reconstruction of the country. In a passing comment, Jalil added that he had not considered any
 role for former Chairman of the NOC Board of Directors, Shukri Mohammed Ghanem,
 particularly given the latter's close ties to the Qaddafi family. Jalil added that while he himself
 had been Minister of Justice under Qaddafi, he had maintained a professional distance from the
 internal machinations of the late dictator's family. Ghanem, on the other hand, was seen as
 confident of the family members, particularly Qaddafi's son Saif al-Islam Qaddafi. According to
 this individual, Ghanem's renunciation of Qaddafi and flight to Tunisia in June 2011 has not
 changed the opinion of Jalil and other NTC leaders in this regard on this matter.)




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784038 Date: 01/07/2016
