      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789513 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Thursday, March 31, 2011 6:04 AM
To:                                'sullivanjj@state.gov.
Subject:                           Fw: H: Mousa Kousa fallout. Sid
Attachments:                       hrc memo mousa kousa fallout 033111.docx



An interesting twist on the Mousa Kousa move. Also, I agree about the need to keep the attack tempo up. Let me know
how Bill's Quint call goes.

Also, re Iran mtg: have you asked people to come with prepared points as you did at the last S/P experts gathering?


From: sbwhoeop             [mailto:
Sent: Thursday, viarcn SI, 2011 0 :54 AM
To: H
Subject: H: Mousa Kousa fallout. Sid




                                          CONFIDENTIAL



                                                  March 31, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Mousa Kousa fallout


Latest report:

On the evening of March 30, 2011 individuals with access to the leaders of the National Libyan Council (NLC), speaking in
confidence, expressed concern that the resignation of the Libyan Foreign Minister Mousa Kousa and his travel to London
may be part of a plan created by Saif al-Islam Qaddafi designed to initiate a dialogue between the government of
Muammar Qaddafi and the Western allies, whose forces have been carrying out air attacks against Qaddafi's troops since
March 19. These officials believe that Qaddafi's military commanders are concemed that the current reduction in the
number of allied air attacks is simply the result of bureaucratic complications involved in turning over command of the
operation from the United States Military to NATO. These commanders fear that once this transfer is complete, the
number of attacks will increase. At the same time, Qaddafi's intelligence services are telling him that allied intelligence
and special forces officers are now working with the rebels and eventually the fighting performance of this force will
improve.

Accordingly, rebel commanders are concerned that Qaddafi, under advice from Saif, is sending envoys to friendly
business and political leaders in Europe in an effort to obtain their assistance in bringing an end to the allied attacks. In
this regard, the rebels believe that Mousa Kousa, in meetings with British officials, will raise the idea that a peace
agreement can be reached between the government and the rebels, one that will leave the Qaddafi family in power, while
guaranteeing economic and political reforms. Those individuals who subscribe to this point of view believe Saif still sees
himself as an acceptable replacement for his father.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789513 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789513 Date: 01/07/2016




(Source Comment: The leadership of the NLC remains committed to the goal of deposing Qaddafi and will not accept a
negotiated settlement that leaves the Libyan leader or his sons and close advisors in power.)

In commenting on the situation in Libya, a source with access to senior Western European officials stated in private that if
NATO does not maintain the same level of attack against Qaddifi's troops as the United States military, the situation will
become a stalemate in the next six weeks. In that case, these European officials add that Libya will divide into eastern
and western halves, with Germany, Turkey, and Italy having good relations with the Qaddafi regime in the west, while
France, Egypt, and Great Britain work with the NLC in the east.

These officials state that the Western powers must avoid the trap of making decisions based on domestic political
considerations, giving the NLC enough support to survive, without providing the material and training needed to win the
war.

(Source Comment: According to this source, the officials in question believe that the various European and NATO
countries have already begun to make plans for such a stalemate. They believe that Qaddafi will eventually fall, as his
inner circle is degraded, but they fear the process may take some time. These individuals qualify this position by adding
that if the NATO attacks resume at their previous levels, and the rebels improve their organizational structure, the Libyan
Army will not be able to hold captured areas, and will eventually give up the fight.)




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789513 Date: 01/07/2016
