      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788717 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                               RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                               B6


From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
Sent:                             Saturday, March 3, 2012 12:10 PM
To:
Subject:                           Re: H: FYI. You should get whole, translated article. US press should report asap. Sid



This is really intense. Will see what more we can turn up.


From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Saturday, March 03, 2012 10:48 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Fw: H: FYI. You should get whole, translated article. US press should report asap. Sid

More info.


From: sbwhoeop             [mailto:sbwhoeop
Sent: Saturday, March 03, 2012 10:25 AM
To: H
Subject: Re: H: FYI. You should get whole, translated article. US press should report asap. Sid



Here's why he was forced to resign (Article 1 below, from last May). Today, Bibi trying
to dismiss the latest Arad story in Yedioth Ahronoth with a story published by the
Jerusalem Post, right-wing Likud organ (Article 2 below). Yedioth has not posted its
piece on its English language website, YNet. Haaretz news story lacks many details of
the original Yedioth story, including on internal dispute over Iran policy (Article 3
below).



http://www.ynetnews.comiarticles/0,7340,L-4070193,00.html


Report: Uzi Arad leaked secret info to media
National Security Council head leaked information to media, then quit to avoid indictment, Channel 10 reports
Aviad Glickman
Published: 05.17.11, 21:47 / Israel News
Former National Security Council head Uzi 'Arad leaked sensitive information to the media, and then resigned to avoid
being indicted, Channel 10 reported Tuesday evening.

                                                                                                 Resignatio
                                                                                   Uzi Arad quits National Security
                                                                                   Council / Attila Somfalvi

                                                                                   Prime minister announces national
                                                                                   security advisor has asked to end his
                                                                                   term, says he is reviewing an overseas
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788717 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788717 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                  capacity for him together with
                                                                                  Foreign Minister Lieberman, who
                                                                                  blocked Arad's appointment as
                                                                                  London ambassador
                                                                                                         Full Story


According to the report, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and senior Shin Bet officials informed Attorney General
Yehuda Weinstein that Arad was responsible for the breach.

Weinstein asserted that Arad's disclosure of the confidential details was a slip of the tongue, and decided not to prosecute
him.

In July 2010, the Shin Bet was requested to investigate a leak of sensitive security information that originated in the Prime
Minister's Office. In addition to Arad, who failed the lie detector test, communications advisor Nir Hefetz and Cabinet
Secretary Zvi Hauser were also investigated. Both Hefetz and Hauser were found to be speaking the truth.



Leak damages ties with ally
The investigation came to a close, and in February Arad announced his resignation and intention to return to the
academic sector. But new evidence uncovered by the Shin Bet paint a new picture: Arad was the one responsible for the
leak that damaged Israel's ties with a significant ally.

It remains unclear which national security information was leaked. Elements involved in the case said after the
investigation was exposed that "apparently it wasn't a one-time event, but a series of sensitive leaks." Other sources
linked the Shin Bet query to the leak that touched upon a meeting between Netanyahu and Russian President Dmitry
Medvedev regarding the sale of Russian missiles.


When the investigation became public knowledge, the Prime Minister's Office said that Netanyahu did not instruct the Shin
Bet to use a lie detector, but asked to find out how the national security data was leaked.

'We are not in the habit of addressing investigation matters, even when the claims are fundamentally false and full of
inaccuracies," the Prime Minister's Office responded in a statement. "As it was previously stated, Dr. Uzi Arad has asked
of his own accord to resign at the end of his second term.

"Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu accepted the request, and acknowledged his significant contribution to Israel's
National Security Council... and his strict devotion to its rules and policies."

The Justice Ministry said in response that Arad took responsibility for the events leading to the publication of secret
information but denied doing it deliberately and later announced his retirement.


March 3, 2012 Saturday 9 AdarI 5772 10:16 1ST




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788717 Date: 01/07/2016
          UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788717 Date: 01/07/2016




1:1
                                                    PM counters former confidant Arad's criticism
                                                    By HERB KEINON
                                                    03/03/2012
                                                    Netanyahu says Uzi Arad shouldn't be judged "in his time of distress" after
                                                    slams him in interview.




Photo by: REUTERS/Gil Cohen
Magen
OTTAWA - Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and his longtime but now erstwhile ally and confidant Uzi Arad went head to head over the wi
giving a searing interview of Netanyahu to Yediot Ahnanot, and Netanyahu responding to Arad with a one line put-down during a press confer

"You don't judge a man during his time of distress," Netanyahu said, when asked to comment on Arad's interview.

Arad, who served as the head of the National Security Council until Netanyahu fired him in May 2011 for leaking sensitive security informatior
something Arad denies, charged that Netanyahu believes it is acceptable to lie to the state comptroller because he feels the comptroller, Mich
to destroy him."

Sources close to the prime minister, in an explanation of Netanyahu's comment, said that Arad -- who was in contact with Netanyahu on a reç
he was dismissed from his position -- was interested in serving as an envoy for Netanyahu, but that the plan did not materialize.

The implication was that Arad chose to air dirty laundry from the Prime Minister's Office publicly because of frustration at not getting a job he ■

"The true test of Israel's government," Netanyahu said to Arad's criticism at the press conference with Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harp
security, the economy and the diplomatic field."

Netanyhau said the country is strong and its deterrence is working, its economy is prosperous, and Israel has succeeded diplomatically in cor
leaders that a nuclear Iran is a danger to the entire world.

"Those are the true tests by which the government I head should be judged," he said.

Arad's interview detailing in uncomplimentary terms the workings inside the Prime Minister's Office comes as the office is still reeling from the
former chief-of-staff Natan Eshel for unbecoming behavior toward a female subordinate.




      •     Home
      •     News

      •     Published 09:33 02.03.12
      •     Latest update 09:33 02.03.12



Former top aide: Netanyahu thinks state comptro
wants to destroy him
Netanyahu's former national security adviser Uzi Arad was fired fr
post in May 2011, after allegedly being caught in a serious securit
 By Haaretz Tags: Benjamin Netanyahu

 Get Haaretz on iPhone
 Get Haaretz on Android

          UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788717 Date: 01/07/2016
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788717 Date: 01/07/2016




The former national security adviser of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Uzi Arad, leveled heavy criticism at the Prime Minister on Friday,
things, that Netanyahu believes it is acceptable to lie during audits.
In an interview to Yediot Aharonot, Arad said that Netanyahu is convinced that The State Comptroller Micha Lindenstrauss "wants to destroy I
consequently the prime minister believes it is acceptable not to tell the truth during audits as a consequence.
Asked about his departure from his former post, Arad miantained, "I never leaked." "About Bibi [Benjamin Netanyahu] you can say that whoev
in the past, easily accepts such an accusation when it is leveled at somebody else," Arad added.
Arad also blamed Netanyahu's military secretary, Yohanan Loker, for making up stories against him, and said Netanyahu criticized him and n•
he leaked information to journalists.
According to Arad, Sara Netanyahu also criticized him over the alleged leak, asking, "Why did you go to the comptroller?"
The Prime Minister decided to fire Arad from his post in May 2011, after he was caught in a serious security leak, which Arad now denies. ThE
end of which Arad was forced to resign, was opened after a request from the Obama administration, after details of classified conversations b
the U.S. related to the civil nuclear issue in june 2010.
The case began in the summer of 2010, when confidential security information was published in one of the Israeli news outlets. As a result, N
ordered the Shin Bet to investigate the matter and locate the source of the leak. Most of Netanyahu's closest aides were questioned and undE
Arad, who during his tenure routinely urged the prime minister to locate whistleblowers and punish them, was also questioned and was initiall!
many other government officials.
Meanwhile, the Shin Bet investigation had secretly carried on, and it was ultimately found that Arad was indeed the one responsible for the lei
let the information slip during a conversation with a reporter. The Defense Ministry later came to the conclusion that the leak caused significar
security.
 Read this article in Hebrew



More on this topic

     •    State comptroller secretly quizzed Netanyahu in 'Bibi-Tours' probe

          This story is by:




     •                  Haaretz




   Original Message
From: H <HDR22 clintonemail.com>
To: 'sbwhoeop            <sbwhoeor
Sent: Sat, Mar 3, 2012 10:11 am
Subject: Re: H: FYI. You should get whole, translated article. US press should report asap. Sid

Holy Moly! What more can you find out about this and why Arad had to resign?


From: sbwhoeor            Ernailto:sbwhoeor
Sent: Saturday„ 2012 09:19 AM
To: H
Subject: H: FYI. You should get whole, translated article. US press should report asap. Sid


 http://972maq.com/is-netanyahu-misleadinq-his-ministers-on-iran/36915/

 Friday, March 2 2012IYossi Gurvitz



 Is Netanyahu misleading his ministers on Iran?
 Former National Security Advisor Uzi Arad claims Prime Minister Netanyahu ordered him to refrain from
 providing ministers with contradictory data.
 Yedioth Ahronoth's weekend supplement published a very long and equally stunning interview with disgraced National
 Security Advisor Uzi Arad. Arad, who was forced to resign last year, was interviewed by Nachum Barnea and Shimon
 Shiffer, and told them about the Byzantine court surrounding Netanyahu, and exposed the shocking fact he was
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788717 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788717 Date: 01/07/2016




interrogated by the Israel Security Agency for hours in the Ben Gurion Airport as he came back from a mission in the US.
But there's one point which should trouble every Israeli, which was not emphasized enough.
During the interview, Arad — a long-time Netanyahu follower - says twice that he lost favor with the prime minister when
he began contradicting his position on Iran during discussions. Even worse from Netanyahu's point of view, he provided
the government with a different assessment about Iran and the way to thwart it. After one of those occasions, says Arad,
Netanyahu took him aside and ordered him to refrain from contradicting him in the presence of others. According to Arad,
Netanyahu was particularly worried that Arad's documents may serve the investigative committee which will follow the
Israeli attack on Iran. Netanyahu's bureau did not deny those accusations.
This is a point which must be investigated. Neither the PM nor the Minister of Security command the army; the
commander is the government, a collective body. A prime minister who refuses to divulge contradictory information to his
ministers is a prime minister who sabotages their ability to make an informed decision on that issue.
The government's control of the armed forces in Israel has a chequered history. To make a long story short, as long as
the government controlled the army, it succeeded or at least managed to avoid disaster. When it let slip of that control —
particularly when it allowed factions within the government, with the minister of security always a participant, take control —
calamity was often the result. The process' lowest point was probably in 2006, when Shimon Peres, then a minister of
something or other, opposed the decision to begin the Second Lebanon War — but voted for it anyway, telling the
Winograd investigative committee that you don't vote against the prime minister in a time of war." Such abdication of
responsibility is hardly surprising when you're familiar with Peres' history; yet we must not allow it to repeat itself.
Now we are being told by Arad that Netanyahu is blinding his ministers from seeing the full picture. One can hardly think
of a better reason for an investigatiive committee, which, should it find Arad told the truth, send Netanyahu home, and
irrevocably tarnish the careers of ministers who agreed to be turned into marionettes. One Shimon Peres is more than
enough.
This is particularly important as Israel and Iran are not, and have never been, In a state of'war. The two countries,
testified Foreign Minister David Levi a decade ago, never declared war on each other. Earlier wars and operations were
declared by the governments against countries with which Israel was at war; this is not the case with Iran. This war should
 be debated by the Knesset — particularly if it is true that Netanyahu is misleading his ministers.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788717 Date: 01/07/2016
