      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783872 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL


From:                            Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                            Thursday, July 14, 2011 1:01 AM
To:
Subject:                         Fw: To Track Militants, U.S. Has System That Never Forgets a Face (NYT)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Thursday, July 14, 2011 12:07 AM
To: NEWS-Afghanistan; NEWS-Iraq; SES-0; NEWS-Mahogany; Larkins, Neal B
Subject: To Track Militants, U.S. Has System That Never Forgets a Face (NYT)




WASHINGTON —         When the Taliban dug an elaborate tunnel system beneath the largest prison in southern
Afghanistan this spring, they set off a scramble to catch the 475 inmates who escaped.

One thing made it easier. Just a month before the April jailbreak, Afghan officials, using technology provided
by the United States, recorded eye scans, fingerprints and facial images of each militant and criminal detainee in
the giant Sarposa Prison.

Within days of the breakout, about 35 escapees were recaptured at internal checkpoints and border crossings;
they were returned to prison after their identities were confirmed by biometric files.

One escapee was seized during a routine traffic stop less than two miles from his home village. Another was
recaptured at a local recruiting station where he was trying to infiltrate Afghan security forces.

With little notice and only occasional complaints, the American military and local authorities have been
engaged in an ambitious effort to record biometric identifying information on a remarkable number of people in
Afghanistan and Iraq, particularly men of fighting age.

Information about more than 1.5 million Afghans has been put in databases operated by American, NATO and
local forces. While that is one of every 20 Afghan residents, it is the equivalent of roughly one of every six
males of fighting age, ages 15 to 64.

InIraq, an even larger number of people, and a larger percentage of the population, have been registered. Data
have been gathered on roughly 2.2 million Iraqis, or one in every 14 citizens — and the equivalent of one in
four males of fighting age.

To get the information, soldiers and police officers take digital scans of eyes, photographs of the face, and
fingerprints. In Iraq and Afghanistan, all detainees and prisoners must submit to such scrutiny. But so do local
residents who apply for a government job, in particular those with the security forces and the police and at
American installations. A citizen in Afghanistan or Iraq would almost have to spend every minute in a home
village and never seek government services to avoid ever crossing paths with a biometric system.

What is different from traditional fingerprinting is that the government can scan through millions of digital files
in a matter of seconds, even at remote checkpoints, using hand-held devices distributed widely across the
security forces.
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783872 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783872 Date: 01/07/2016




While the systems are attractive to American law enforcement agencies, there is serious legal and political
opposition to imposing routine collection on American citizens.

Various federal, state and local law enforcement agencies have discussed biometric scanning, and many have
even spent money on hand-held devices. But the proposed uses are much more limited, with questions being
raised about constitutional rights of privacy and protection from warrantless searches.

In Afghanistan and Iraq, there are some complaints — but rarely on grounds recognizable to Americans as civil
liberties issues.

Afghanistan, in particular, is a nation with no legacy of birth certificates, driver's licenses or social security
numbers, and where there is a thriving black market in forged national identity papers. Some Afghans are
concerned that in the future the growing biometric database could be abused as a weapon of ethnic, tribal or
political retaliation — a census of any particular group's adversaries. Even Afghan officials who support the
program want to take it over themselves, and not have the Americans do it.

"To be sure, there must be sound and responsible policies and oversight regarding enrollment and the storage,
use and sharing of private individual data," said Brig. Gen. Mark S. Martins, commander of the military's new
Rule of Law Field Force in Afghanistan.

But he stressed that biometric systems "can combat fraud and corruption, place law enforcement on a sounder
evidentiary footing, and greatly improve security."

Instant, computerized iris scans as a tool of population control used to be the monopoly of science fiction films.
Even real-world use of biometric identification technologies overseas was for years reserved for the intelligence
agencies and the military's elite hunter-killer commando units.

But a new generation of hand-held biometric systems has spread across the military.

"You can present a fake identification card," said Sgt. Maj. Robert Haemmerle of the Combined Joint
Interagency Task Force 435. "You can shave your beard off. But you can't change your biometrics." The task
force conducts detention, judicial and biometrics operations --- responsibilities that will be turned over to the
Afghan government.

Defense Department spending on biometrics programs is enormous, set at $3.5 billion for the 2007 through
2015 fiscal years, according to the Government Accountability Office.

The concept of expanding biometrics for wholesale application on the battlefield was first tested in 2004 by
Marine Corps units in Falluja, a militant stronghold in Anbar Province, Iraq. The insurgent safe haven was
walled off, and only those who submitted to biometrics were allowed in and out.

In late 2004, when an Iraqi militant was allowed on to an American base in Mosul, where he detonated a suicide
vest and killed 22 in a dining tent, commanders ordered a stringent identification program for Iraqi and third-
country citizens entering American facilities.

Gen. David H. Petraeus, reviewing these efforts when he took command in Iraq in 2007, ordered a surge of
biometric scans across the war zone to match the increase in American troops.

General Petraeus lauds the technology, not only for separating insurgents from the population in which they
seek to hide, but also for cracking cells that build and plant roadside bombs, the greatest killer of American
troops in Iraq and Afghanistan. Fingerprints and other forensic tidbits can be lifted from a defused bomb or
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783872 Date: 01/07/2016
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783872 Date: 01/07/2016




from remnants after a blast, and compared with the biometric files on former detainees and suspected or known
militants.

"This data is virtually irrefutable and generally is very helpful in identifying who was responsible for a
particular device in a particular attack, enabling subsequent targeting," said General Petraeus, who will soon
retire as commander in Afghanistan to become director of central intelligence. "Based on our experience in Iraq,
I pushed this hard here in Afghanistan, too, and the Afghan authorities have recognized the value and embraced
the systems."

Military officials acknowledge that the new systems fielded by American, coalition and Afghan units do not all
speak to one another. The hand-held devices fail in the awesome heat of the Afghan summer. Screens break
when dropped. But a significant challenge in spreading biometric devices among an illiterate Afghan security
force was resolved when the operating system was changed from English to an easy-to-teach system of color-
coded commands.


NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783872 Date: 01/07/2016
