     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793759 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                     B6



From:                         Sidney Blumenthal
Sent:                         Sunday, November 11, 2012 8:51 AM
To:                           H
Subject:                      H: Here it is, what did Eric Cantor know and when did he know it. Sid



http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/11/usgbi-said-to-have-stumbled-into-news-of-david-petraeus-
affair.html?pagewanted=all


Eric Cantor, the House majority leader, said Saturday an F.B.I. employee whom his staff described as
a whistle-blower told him about Mr. Petraeus's affair and a possible security breach in late October,
which was after the investigation had begun.
"I was contacted by an F.B.I. employee concerned that sensitive, classified information may have been
compromised and made certain Director Mueller was aware of these serious allegations and the
potential risk to our national security," Mr. Cantor said in a statement.
Mr. Cantor talked to the person after being told by Representative Dave Reichert, Republican of
Washington, that a whistle-blower wanted to speak to someone in the Congressional leadership about
a national security concern. On Oct. 31, his chief of staff, Steve Stombres, called the F.B.I. to tell them
about the call.
"They took the information," said Doug Heye, Mr. Cantor's deputy chief of staff, "and gave the
standard answer: they were not able to confirm or deny any investigation, but said that all necessary
steps were being taken to make sure no confidential information was at risk."
White House officials said they were informed on Wednesday night that Mr. Petraeus was considering
resigning because of an extramarital affair. On Thursday morning, just before a staff meeting at the
White House, President Obama was told....

On Saturday, the two government officials who had been briefed on the case dismissed a range of
media speculation that the F.B.I. inquiry might have focused on leaks of classified information to the
news media or even foreign spying. "People think that because it's the C.I.A. director, it must involve
bigger issues," one official said. "Think of a small circle of people who know each other."
The F.B.I. investigators were not pursuing evidence of Mr. Petraeus's marital infidelity, which would
not be a criminal matter, the official said. But their examination of his e-mails, most or all of them
sent from a personal account and not from his C.I.A. account, raised the possibility of security
breaches that needed to be addressed directly with him.
"Alarms went off on larger security issues," the official said. As a result, F.B.I. agents spoke with the
C.I.A. director about two weeks ago, and Mr. Petraeus learned in the discussion, if he was not already
aware, that they knew of his affair with Ms. Broadwell, the official said.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793759 Date: 01/07/2016
