UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786407 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                           RELEASE IN FULL



                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                               January 31, 2011



  For: Hillary
  From: Sid
  Re: Intel on Egypt

  I have had conversations today with Tyler Drumheller and Pat Lang on the Egyptian crisis.
  Drumheller has been in close contact with high level European intelligence officials with direct
  sources on the ground in Egypt. Lang is an old friend of Omar Suleiman. Below are notes on
  their information, followed by options based on our conversations:

     1. The situations in Alexandria and Suez are exponentially worse than in Cairo—no police,
        no government, no magistrates, more violence, more deaths. The military wants to
        maintain itself and that means Mubarak will have to go. He wants to hold on for a couple
        of weeks so he doesn't have to flee.
     2. Last fall Suleiman fell out of favor Mubarak for an unknown reason, probably because of
        Gamal's ambition. Suleiman has been much abused and tormented by Mubarak. He has
        been promised the VP job for 15 years, but never got it because Mubarak was afraid he
        would succeed him instead of Gamal. It was supposedly planned that Suleiman was to be
        in place while Gamal was trained, but it never happened. Suleiman is not popular with
        rest of military. He's from intelligence, not the army. He's not disliked, but the military
        also knows he's unacceptable to the people now.
     3. The military knows it must reach an accommodation with the Muslim Brotherhood and is
        reaching out to the MB. Most of radical MB leaders are imprisoned; the military is
        talking to moderates. There's no Khomeini or Nasralluh out there. The problem is not the
        MB. The problem is the general level of religiosity among the lower classes that lack
        jobs.
     4. The military wants a general as president and a civilian, someone like ElBaradei, as PM,
        but probably not EB, who has no political base, though his standing is growing.
     5. The army has control of the situation, at least for now. This is not a bunch of young
        people playing with social media as depicted in the US press. The situation, however, has
        potential to go either way. But suppressing the crowds would mean a bloodbath,
        unacceptable to the military. The army hates the police. In 1985, the army fought the
        police in the streets. The police are disappearing or in some places completely gone. The
        police are burning their uniforms.
     6. The military knows Mubarak must go. But when? If he holds on too long the situation
        will spin out of control. Another week may be too long. The general staff has to look
        Mubarak in the eye and tell him to go. Have they done it? Can they? They know he can't
        stay, but will they force him to leave?
     7. The best case scenario would be a transition to elections with Suleiman as an interim
        head of state. But even that may be dicey at this point. Every day Mubarak stays the
        potential for disaster looms greater.
     8. After some poor initial positioning, the US government has it right with your statements
        on Sunday. The idea of propping up Mubarak is gone. Obama calling Mubarak would do
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No.-F-20:14-20439 Doc No. C05786407 Date: 01/07/2016
