        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785896 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                                   RELEASE IN
                                                                                                   PART B6



From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Friday, April 8, 2011 7:56 PM
To:                                Oscar Flores
Subject:                           Fw: Libya objectives and messaging



PIs print.


From: Sullivan, Jacob J [mailto:SullivanJJ@state.gov]
Sent: Friday, April 08, 2011 07:53 PM
To: H
Subject: FW: Libya objectives and messaging

Interesting analysis, actually.


From: Tom Malinowski [mailto:
Sent: Friday, April 08, 2011 4:01 PM
To: brhodes                Sullivan, Jacob J; Burns, William J; ablinken           spower(
dshapirc              ; dchollet
Subject: Libya objectives and messaging

Dear all,

You must be frustrated after days of stories about the alleged diminished focus and effectiveness of the
military campaign in Libya following the transfer of authority to NATO. This narrative may not be entirely
fair. But it is a problem, especially insofar as the Qaddafi regime and the Libyans being protected may
misinterpret what's going on. A few thoughts on how this might be addressed:

         You have a positive story to tell about how this coalition was put together and why you did it this way -
         about the merits of multilateralism and burden sharing and of the United States not playing such a
         visibly dominant role.

    -      At the end of the day, however, the only thing that will matter is whether the mission in Libya
           succeeds. A year from now, if Benghazi and other threatened cities have been protected and Qaddafi
           is gone, your strategy will be deemed a success, and the "theory of the case" behind the strategy will
           be vindicated, with all the hopeful precedents we want to see established. But if those objectives
           aren't achieved, no one will give you the slightest credit for having forged an unprecedented UNSC
           resolution, or gotten Arab League buy in, or mobilized NATO to take on most of the burden.

    -      For this reason, I think you would benefit by placing less emphasis in your public messaging on the
           mechanics of what you're doing, and much more emphasis on the concrete objectives you are
           determined to achieve on the ground

    -      Unfortunately, the currently stated objective — civilian protection — is vague. NATO obviously can't
           protect all civilians in all of Libya from Qaddafi, and can't credibly enforce a demand that he cease
           threatening civilians everywhere at all times. In practice, the mission seems to be to create a shield
           around Ajdabiya and Benghazi, but you haven't said so. The coalition has not spelled out in concrete
           terms what actions by Qaddafi will trigger a military response, or what he must do for air strikes to
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785896 Date: 01/07/2016
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785896 Date: 01/07/2016




         stop. There are sometimes advantages to maintaining ambiguity, but in this case it may give Qaddafi
         the sense that he has room to maneuver and it creates panic among the opposition leaders and
         civilians, who don't know where the lines are drawn.

         One solution to this problem would be to issue a clear set of war aims as we did in the roughly
         analogous situation in Kosovo in 1999 (analogous in the sense that military force was used to protect
         civilians in one part of a country, while political means were used to dislodge a dictator from the
         country as a whole).

         In Kosovo, NATO spent almost two weeks bombing Serbian forces without a well defined objective
         (apart from the broad goal of civilian protection). Then, the alliance settled on a concrete set of
         demands: primarily that Milosevic withdraw behind a line on the map (the border of Kosovo), which
         would allow Kosovar refugees to return home and peacekeepers to deploy. Until Milosevic met that
         demand, NATO made clear that it would strike military targets not just in Kosovo but across
         Serbia. President Clinton and other NATO leaders repeated that demand every day, which conveyed a
         sense of determination, and kept public attention focused on the mission objective, rather than the
         day to day muddle on the ground. No matter what question we faced, we were able to say: "We'll
         have better days and worse days on the battlefield, but this can only end in one way."

         An analogous approach in Libya might look something like this: NATO could issue a demand that
         Qaddafi (1) withdraw all his forces in the east behind a defined line on the map (far enough from
         Ajdabiya so that civilians can go back there and feel somewhat secure) and (2) withdraw to a perimeter
         outside the city of Misrata, while restoring water and electricity to its civilian population. Until Qaddafi
         meets these demands, NATO would continue to strike not just in the exclusion zones but at any
         military assets and facilities throughout the country that could be used to support operations within
         the exclusion zones. NATO would also make clear that it will not provide support to any rebel military
         operations outside the exclusion zones.

         If you all were to do this, there would be absolute clarity about the objectives of the mission. The
         answer to every question about day to day events or coalition dynamics could be: "What matters here
         is that Qaddafi must withdraw his troops from X, Y, and Z, and until he does, we are going to keep
         hitting him." End of story. Qaddafi would know that he can't improve his strategic position or get
         himself a better deal by continuing to push to see how far we'll let him go. The rebels would know
         what you won't do for them. Just as important, they wouldn't be as paranoid that NATO will let
         Qaddafi march on Benghazi again, or cut some secret deal to sell them out. This would stabilize the
         situation on the ground sooner, so that you can move on to achieving the ultimate political objective
         faster.

          I suppose one argument against drawing lines on the map is that it would suggest that Qaddafi can do
          what he wants on his side of the lines. But he already can, and he knows it. NATO is not going to use
          F-15s to protect protesters in Tripoli. If the real military objective is to protect the east and to relieve
          Misrata, it would be best to say so, to convey a sense of determination that the objective will be
          achieved, and to tell Qaddafi what price he will pay until it is. The mission would benefit from that
          clarity, as would your ability to address the concerns being expressed.

Best,

Tom

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785896 Date: 01/07/2016
