      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785244 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                                RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                               Wednesday, March 2, 2011 7:18 AM
To:                                 su I I iva njj@state.gov'
Subject                             Fw: H: Very latest, Egypt special forces now in Libya, more... Sid
Attachments:                        hrc memo v sensitive egypt in libya 030111.docx



FYSA--pls don't share until we can talk. I will call you around 7:45.


From: sbwhoeop
Sent: Tuesday, March 01, 2011 11:06 PM
To: H
Subject: H: Very latest, Egypt special forces now in Libya, more... Sid




                                          CONFIDENTIAL




                                                   March 1,2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Egypt in Libya; US rhetoric


I am told this information is especially sensitive. Two points that can be drawn:

    1. The commitment of Egyptian Special Forces to the overthrow of Qaddafi is rooted in more than
       longstanding Egyptian hostility to Qaddafi, but also the Egyptians' belief that their economic future may
       be greatly aided by the outcome in Libya and the relationship with post-Qaddafi Libya.
    2. The personal name-calling by certain U.S. officials of Qaddafi is stiffening his resistance and he is using
       it internally to support his case with his followers that he is fighting Western/Israeli imperialism, foreign
       interests, etc., according to one of his advisers. This rhetoric differs from the formal condemnations of
       Qaddafi's abusive rule and policies by other senior officials and Western governments.




During late February, 2011 Field Marshall Hussein Tantawi, Chairman of Egypt's ruling
Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) and Army Chief of Staff Sami Annan

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785244 Date: 01/07/2016
            UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785244 Date: 01/07/2016




ordered elite, clandestine Special Operations units of the Egyptian Army to begin
:arefully providing support to the forces fighting against Libya's Muammar
)addafi. Officers from these clandestine units have crossed the border into Libya and
nade contact with representatives of the National Libyan Council (NLC) in Benghazi and
regun discussing how to provide support and weapons to the opposition forces. This aid
vill be particularly valuable as these anti-government forces are formed into rudimentary
nilitary units by Libyan Army officers who have gone over to the opposition. These
 gyptian troops are operating with great care, as Tantawi and the other members of the
;CAF do not want this effort to come to light in any way.
kccording to knowledgeable individuals Tantawi, Annan, and the staff of the SCAF want the
pposition forces to succeed in their fight against Qaddafi, and restore stability to Libya. The
,7gyptian leaders are deeply concerned about the refugee crisis along their border, and the
[anger of potential terrorists taking advantage of the situation to enter Egypt.
['he Egyptian military commanders harbor longstanding animosities toward Qaddafi,
)articularly regarding territorial disputes over the oil rich region along Libya's Southeastern
)order. The Egyptian authorities are also allowing NLC supporters to bring cash across the
)order to support the activities of the anti-Qaddafi opposition forces. This program is being
nanaged under very tight security controls; however, one particularly sensitive source added
hat a small number of these Egyptian Special Operations officers are assisting opposition
brces in their successful defense of the town of Zawiyah against repeated attacks by up to 2000
roops loyal to Qaddafi.
Source Comment: According to knowledgeable individuals the Egyptian Special Operations
roops are working in small teams under cover as Libyans from the border region with
'3gypt. Also, Tantawi, Annan, and the other leaders of Egypt want to see the Libyan oil fields
.eturn   to full capacity as soon as possible. The cash remittances sent home by the Egyptians
vorking in these fields are a major source of revenue for the country. These payments will be
)articularly important as the SCAF, and the new government that follows, attempt to improve
:3gypt's economic situation.)


            UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785244 Date: 01/07/2016
            UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785244 Date: 01/07/2016




t.ccording to sources in Libya, the NLC and its leader, former Minister of Justice Mustafa
&flamed Abdel Gall!, are working to establish an orderly system to provide food and other
ssential materials to the people of Benghazi and Eastern Libya. The NLC is proceeding
;autiously in this effort, resisting the temptation to call itself an interim government in an effort
CI   avoid angering the other anti-Qaddafi groups; however, they are faced with shortages that
Ernst be addressed.
q the same time an adviser to Qaddafi states that the Libyan leader remains confident he can
urvive this crisis and regain control of the country. As the revolution has continued, the circle
,f people around Qaddafi has contracted to a group of family members and longtime
upporters, many of whom feel that if Qaddafi falls they will be held to account for activities
:onducted on his behalf. According to this individual Qaddafi and his sons are prepared to
any on this struggle as an all out civil war if a revolutionary government is established in
3enghazi. These individuals add that Qaddafi also believes the revolution against his
;overnment is being funded and supported by foreign regimes, business interests, and Islamists
lostile to him and his family. This individual added that policy statements by senior officials of
he United States government continue to anger Qaddafi, who feels betrayed by Western
;overnments. However, Qaddafi and his sons believe that personal attacks by the United States
 t-nbassador to the UN, and various U.S. politicians, characterizing the Libyan leader as insane
>r "delusional," serve to give credence to his claim that the revolution is being organized and
[riven by foreign interests.




            UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785244 Date: 01/07/2016
