     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793654 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                           B6


From:                           Lanny Davis
Sent:                           Thursday, December 20, 2012 3:56 PM
To:
Subject:                        The Rice Controversy: Lessons for Avoiding the Cliff



December 20, 2012

The Rice Controversy: Lessons for Avoiding the Cliff
By Lanny J. Davis and Michael S. Steele

http://www.huffingtonpost.com/lanny-davis/the-rice-controversy-less b 2330456.html

While we are from different parties and political philosophies, we agree that Susan Rice was treated unfairly by
the media, disrespected by Republican senators, and virtually abandoned by the White House.

Yet, there are a few valuable lessons to be gleaned from the Rice affair that both the President and the Congress
can apply to avoid going over the "fiscal cliff' on January 1, 2013.

The first lesson is the need to focus on facts and not to confuse them with innuendo and partisan attacks. For
example, the indisputable fact is that Ambassador Rice, appearing on behalf of the Secretary of State, delivered
almost verbatim the talking points given to her by the CIA, including her use of the expression "spontaneous
demonstration" associated with the anti-Muslim video demonstrations in Cairo. Still, some Republican senators
blamed her rather than the CIA and the media did very little to correct the record based on the facts.

The second lesson is the need for presidential leadership. The president admirably and publicly defended
Ambassador Rice — challenging Republicans to go after him instead of her. But then his White House was
strangely passive when it came to correcting the misstatements about Ambassador Rice's role and the source of
those talking points. Speculation about a potential nomination of Ambassador Rice for Secretary of State was
allowed to further distort the Ambassador's role. The president should have just as publicly set the record
straight and had his White House press operation backup his assertions.

Third, the issue of fundamental fairness — which resonates with most Americans, regardless of party — should
have been the dominant theme in defending the ambassador. For example, the suggestion that Ambassador Rice
was "soft" on Rwanda President Paul Kagme because she worked for a company that years ago sold software
products and provided advice to Kamage's government was patently unfair. So was the suggestion that
somehow, she was responsible for the violence against our embassy in Benghazi because two embassies were
attacked by al Quaeda in 1998 when she served as an assistant secretary of state for African Affairs.

So facts, presidential leadership, and fairness should have been applied in the matter of Ambassador Rice and
must be applied to the critical issue of avoiding the fiscal cliff.

First, the facts have all but been forgotten as the two sides argue over whether there should be more taxes or
more spending cuts and entitlement reform. But the most important fact is at the core of the bi-partisan
Simpson-Bowles Commission report: America has to have all three to get the job done or America will drown
in debt and risks becoming another Greece.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793654 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793654 Date: 01/07/2016




Second, while the president may want to blame much of the stalemate on Republican ideological rigidity,
especially in the House, he could still demonstrate leadership by acknowledging that just raising tax revenues
on incomes over $250,000 per year won't seriously dent the $16 trillion debt. Moreover, if the president
unilaterally endorsed Simpson-Bowles, which relies on closing tax loopholes to raise revenues, and then
challenged the Republicans to join him in that endorsement, he not only would avert falling off the fiscal cliff
but would be the catalyst for building the kind of consensus around big ideas expected of presidents.

And finally, the president needs to frame the whole fiscal cliff debate in the context of fairness: not just touting
an increase in taxes on the wealthy in order to "pay their fair share", but the need to pay down the national debt
in fairness to our children and grand-children instead of continuing the immoral act of passing along our credit
card receipts for them to pay.

In his 1961 inuaugural address, President Kennedy famously challenged all Americans, not just the wealthy, to
"Ask not what the country can do for you — ask what you can do for your country."

By presenting the facts, showing leadership, and demanding fairness, the president and responsible GOP leaders
can come together — as presidents and congresses have in the past for our generation — to lessen the financial
burden on future generations and to ask everyone to share in the responsibility of putting the national interest
first. It is not only the right public policy and ultimately smart politics for both parties in congress and the White
House, it is the right thing to do.



Mr. Davis, former special counsel to President Clinton, is a Democratic contributor for Fox News Channel. Mr.
Steele, former chairman of the Republican National Committee, is a Republican political analyst for MSNBC.
Both are partners in a public affairs/strategic communication firm, "Purple Nation Solutions."



This message was sent to hdr22@clintonemail.com from:                                                          Email
                                                                                                               Marketing
Lanny J. Davis & Associates LLC I 655 Fifteenth Street, NW Suite 810 I Washington, DC 20005                    by
Manage Your Subscription




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793654 Date: 01/07/2016
