     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786989 Date: 01/07/2016
                                                                                        RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                        B6




From:                           H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                           Thursday, March 17, 2011 8:46 AM
To:                             'sullivanjj@state.gov'
Subject:                        Fw: H: Q momentum stalled, Khamis Q badly burned, more. Sid



Pls forward as appropriate.


From: sbwhoeop
Sent: Thursday, ILlarch 1/, 2011 08:06 AM
To: H
Subject: H: Q momentum stalled, Khamis Q badly burned, more. Sid




                                     CONFIDENTIAL



                                             March 17, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Q momentum stalled; Khamis Q severely injured; IDs of NLC

Latest:


During the afternoon of March 16 individuals with access to the National Libyan Council (NLC) stated in
private that, while rebel forces had lost a good deal of ground to forces loyal to Muammar Qaddafi, the NLC
leadership believes these Libyan military and security troops have overextended their supply lines and are
beginning to lose momentum in their advance on the rebel center of Benghazi. The NLC leadership was
particularly encouraged by the suicide attack carried out by a Libyan Air Force Pilot, who crashed his plane into
Qaddafi's headquarters at Bab-Azizya in Tripoli. Qaddafi was apparently uninjured in the attack, but two of
his sons were injured, including Khamis, the commander of the 32nd brigade of the Libyan army, who was
severely burned. Khamis led the eastern advance of the Libyan army, and his troops are believed by the rebels
to have committed particularly violent attacks against civilians in recaptured towns like Ras Lanuf.

These rebel leaders believe this incident was a shock to Qaddafi, who in an effort to distract the Western
Nations and weaken the rebel's morale, allowed his son Saif al Islam to issue statements regarding the
impending fall of Benghazi. Saif also revealed that Qaddafi covertly provided funds to support the 2007
election campaign of French President Nicolas Sarkozy. According to these individuals this statement was
intended to punish Sarkozy for recognizing the NLC government, while deflecting any potential action by other
Western Nations to move against Qaddafi's forces.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786989 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786989 Date: 01/07/2016




At the same time, individuals with access to advisors to Qaddafi stated in confidence, that while Libyan military
and security forces had made significant progress against dissident troops in their drive toward the rebel center
of Benghazi, Qaddafi's troops were beginning to experience logistical problems that may slow their
progress. The Libyan forces are moving farther from their bases around Tripoli and are suffering from
exhaustion after ten days of continual fighting.

 At present, the bulk of the combat is being born by Qaddafi's Special Forces units and mercenary troops drawn
primarily from Chad, Nigeria, and the Taureg tribe of Southern Algeria. These forces have sufficient
ammunition and other supplies, but they are experiencing technical difficulties with their tanks, armored cars,
and attack helicopters, all of which require regular maintenance and replacement parts. At present their most
effective and durable weapons have been their 155 mm motorized guns. They are using these weapons to attack
rebel held population centers; the guns firing from beyond the reach of rebel counter fire. (Source Comment:
According to sources with knowledge of the Libyan military, their mercenary troops believe that the rebels
summarily execute any foreign fighters they capture.)

For their part, rebel forces under General Abdulfatth Younus continue to hold out against the Libyan military,
while reinforcing their facilities in and around Benghazi. Younus believes that despite their losses, the rebel
forces will be able to hold Benghazi and the area twenty five (25) miles to the west. He is convinced that with
the loss of Khamis, added to their logistic and morale problems, the Libyan government forces will be unable to
capture a large, well defended city like Benghazi. That said, Younus is pressing NLC leader Mustafa
Mohammed Abdul Jalil to lobby Western Governments for support. Without this foreign aid, Younus believes
the fighting will settle into a costly stalemate.

(Source Comment: Some NLC officials believe that Qaddafi has approached the government of Malta to obtain
fuel for his attack aircraft. At the same time NLC officials stated that they continue to hope that the United
States and Germany will join France in officially recognizing the Council as an interim government. They
believe that this step will provide a significant morale boost to the rebels and, by the same token, will
discourage the loyalist troops.)

Knowledgeable individuals provided the following details on the NLC:

The Council is composed of thirty one (31) members representing the various regions and cities of Libya. A
number of these members have been identified; however the names of the individuals representing Ajdabiya, Al
Kufrah, Ghat, Nalut, Misratah, Az Zintan and Az Zawiya will not be identified in an effort to protect their
families if these areas are captured by Qaddafi's troops. The Council is anticipating the selection of
representatives from Central and Southern Libya, and Tripoli.

The following are the names of Council members who have been identified:

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786989 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786989 Date: 01/07/2016




It was also announced that Mr. Omar Al Hariri will chair the military affairs committee, supporting
Younus. Mr. Mahmood Jibril and Ali Al Issawi are responsible for foreign affairs and international liaison.

 Mustafa Abdul Jail Fudail was born in the city of Bayda, east Libya in 1952. He graduated from the
department of Shari'a and Law in the Arabic Language and Islamic Studies faculty from The Libyan University
in 1975. AbdulJalil was appointed assistant to the Secretary to the Public Prosecutor in the city of Al Bayda, he
was appointed as a judge in 1978. In 2002 he became President of the Court Appeals, and then President of the
Court in Al Bayda. He was chosen as Minister of Justice in 2007.

 Mr. Mahmood Jibril:
Born in Libya in 1952, fibril earned a degree in Economics and Political Science from Cairo University in 1975.
He later attended the University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania earning a Masters degree in 1980 and a PHD in
Strategic planning and decision-making in 1984. fibril remained at Pittsburgh as a professor of Strategic
planning, and he has published 10 books on this subject. He also led the team who drafted and formed the
Unified Arab Training manual, and organized the first two Training conferences on this subject in 1987 and
1988. Jabril later took over the management and administration of many of the leadership training programs
for senior management personnel in Arab countries including Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Libya, UAE, Kuwait,
Jordan, Bahrain, Morocco, and Tunisia, as well as Turkey and Britain

Mr. Ali Al Issawi
Born in the city of Benghazi in 1966, Issawi holds a PhD in privatization from the Academy of Economic
Studies in Bucharest Romania. He occupied the position of Minister of Economy, Trade and Investment in the
Qaddafi government, and was the youngest minister appointed by Qaddafi. Before taking the ministerial
position, he founded the Centre for Export Development in 2006, and became the first Director General. He also
became Director General for the Ownership expansion program (privatization fund) in 2005.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786989 Date: 01/07/2016
