     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793780 Date: 01/07/2016


                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                  B6



From:                         Sidney Blumenthal
Sent:                         Tuesday, November 13, 2012 9:40 AM
To:
Subject:                      Re: More questions. Sid



His "worldview" was right wing R. (See NYT below.)
P's R registration and heroic image has become irrelevant to Rs and wingers. He was an Obama
official. Fox News and other R & winger media were filled with Benghazi conspiracy theories for
weeks. Rs and wingers believed--and believe still--that there was a Watergate-level coverup that if
exposed would bring down the administration. Rs created the pseudo-leaks scandal, the pseudo-
Benghazi scandal--and if Obama's CIA director were brought down--in the R and winger mind all
connected to the Benghazi coverup--it would be the trifecta. Then Obama could be charged with a
complete national security breakdown--the issue would dominate the final weeks and days of the
campaign--and Romney would win the election. Cantor must have known he could not leak to the
press--leaking of an espionage investigation is a felony. His ex post facto statement is absurd on its
face, as though written by Kafka. The FBI director hardly need to be informed that the FBI had
conducted an investigation that was already over and exonerated Petraeus. The reason Cantor was
informed was that the FBI agent was outraged that Petraeus was exonerated or being exonerated.
Cantor informed Mueller to put him on notice and pressure him--creating the series of events that in
fact occurred--informing Clapper and forcing Petraeus out. What began as an investigation into
Broadwell's emails escalated and was transformed into an October Surprise that failed.
But the timing did not work out to turn the election.
Footnote: For what it's worth: I would imagine Broadwell might be an R, too. She is reported to have
breathlessly cited false Fox News stories as true.

See NYT report today:
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/103/us/timeline-shows-fbi-discovered-petraeus-affair-in-
summer.html?pagewanted=i&ref=us

Ms. Kelley, a volunteer with wounded veterans and military families, brought her complaint to a rank-
and-file agent she knew from a previous encounter with the F.B.I. office, the official also said. That
agent, who had previously pursued a friendship with Ms. Kelley and had earlier sent her shirtless
photographs of himself, was "just a conduit" for the complaint, he said. He had no training in
cybercrime, was not part of the cyber squad handling the case and was never assigned to the
investigation.
But the agent, who was not identified, continued to "nose around" about the case, and eventually his
superiors "told him to stay the hell away from it, and he was not invited to briefings," the official said.
The Wall Street Journal first reported on Monday night that the agent had been barred from the case.
Later, the agent became convinced — incorrectly, the official said — that the case had stalled.
Because of his "worldview," as the official put it, he suspected a politically motivated
cover-up to protect President Obama. The agent alerted Eric Cantor, the House majority leader,
who called the F.B.I. director, Robert S. Mueller III, on Oct. 31 to tell him of the agent's concerns.


    Original Message
From: H <HDR22@clintonemail.com>
To: 'sbwhoeop
Sent: Tue, Nov 13, 2012 9:23 am
Subject: Re: More questions. Sid
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793780 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793780 Date: 01/07/2016



What was his "worldview" and why would he think hurting P furthered it? Why would Cantor want to
hurt P (beloved by Rs)?

From: Sidney Blumenthal [mailto
Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2012 09:13 AlV1 hastern standard Time
Subject: More questions. Sid

Read Washington Post report below...

More questions:

Who else in the Congress besides congressmen Reichert and Cantor knew of the Petraeus
investigation before it became public? How many congressional staffers were informed? What roles
did they play in deciding who to inform about it? What were their communications among themselves
and with others outside their offices if any? Did any of them discuss the matter with anyone in the
Romney-Ryan campaign?
Why was Cantor intent on informing FBI Director Mueller of the existence of an FBI investigation
that was already resolved? Cantor would have been keenly aware that his referral put Mueller on
notice that the investigation could not be contained, indeed, was already known, and put pressure on
him to tell James Clapper and to make it public as soon as possible.
What were the internal discussions between Cantor and his staff on his referral to Mueller?
Did Cantor refer the matter to Mueller in order to punish the rogue FBI agent, who informed Reichert
and Cantor? If not, why not?
Did Cantor understand that the FBI agent was acting illegally? Is that why he did not leak the matter
to the press and instead referred it to Mueller in a transparent effort to pressure him?
Did Cantor inform Speaker Boehner? Did Cantor inform Congressman Mike Rogers, chair of the
House Intelligence Committee? Why did Cantor keep them in the dark? What discussions did he
have with his staff or others about who not to inform, as well as who to inform?
When Mueller learned of the illegal leak to Cantor did he launch an internal investigation? Was the FBI
Inspector General informed? Is there such an investigation? If not, why not?
Was the supposedly rogue FBI agent, described in the Washington Post as motivated by his "worldview," acting
alone? Did he discuss the investigation with any individual either inside or outside the bureau before he went to Reichert
and Cantor?
Disclosure of an espionage investigation is a felony. Will a grand jury be empaneled by the Justice
Department?
When will Senator Patrick Leahy, chair of the Judiciary Committee and a former FBI agent, begin an
investigation of this matter?
http://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/petraeus-told-bioqrapher-to-stop-harassing-familv-friend-officials-
say/2012/11/12/6ccb325c-2d00-11e2-a99d-5c4203af7b7a story.html

What remains unclear is why, after it was decided that criminal charges would not be filed, the FBI informed Clapper
about the investigation. Another question is why the notification was made on Election Day about a case the Justice
Department had declined to pursue weeks earlier.
At some point during the summer, the Tampa FBI agent whom Kelley had first approached for help was taken off the
investigation. Frustrated and concerned that an inquiry into what he thought may be a possible national security breach
had not progressed, he got in touch with the office of Rep. Dave Reichert (R-Wash.). Reichert passed the information on
to House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R-Va.).
"I was contacted by an F.B.I. employee concerned that sensitive, classified information may have been compromised and
made certain Director Mueller was aware of these serious allegations and the potential risk to our national security,"
Cantor said in a statement.
Cantor contacted FBI Director Robert S. Mueller III on Oct. 31, and a week later Clapper told Petraeus he needed to
resign.
"I don't know if it would have taken this course without Cantor," a person close to the inquiry said.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793780 Date: 01/07/2016
