      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793411 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL



From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                               Friday, January 13, 2012 12:53 PM
To:                                 'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject                             Fw: QDDR Gender Implementation Memorandum


Pls print.


From: Mills, Cheryl D [mailto:MillsCD@state.gov]
Sent: Friday, January 13, 2012 12:48 PM
To: H
Subject: FW: QDDR Gender Implementation Memorandum




From: Verveer, Melanne S
Sent: Friday, January 13, 2012 12:09 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: RE: QDDR Gender Implementation Memorandum

It looks excellent, let's discuss on the plane going to Liberia. Will this work?

Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov


From: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Friday, January 13, 2012 2:13 AM
To: Verveer, Melanne S
Subject: Re: QDDR Gender Implementation Memorandum

Look forward to discussing


From: Verveer, Melanne S
Sent: Thursday, January 12, 2012 08:56 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Re: QDDR Gender Implementation Memorandum

Thx
Working through this with Jen.


From: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Monday, January 09, 2012 09:47 PM
To: Verveer, Melanne S


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793411 Date: 01/07/2016
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793411 Date: 01/07/2016




Subject: QDDR Gender Implementation Memorandum

Melanne

Hope your travels were productive.

I have been trying to be productive on key QDDR implementation priorities as the Secretary as you know is committed
to seeing it fully implemented in this year.

Below and attached is a memo that outlines my thinking after speaking with her, reviewing the QDDR requirements and
closely examining Maggie's communications strategy memorandum.

I welcome your thoughts as I would like to move forward quickly in ensuring you have the established team to achieve
the objectives.

Best.

Cdm


                                                MEMORANDUM
                                                 January 9, 2012


TO:              MelanneVerveer

FROM:            Cheryl Mills

SUBJECT: QDDR and Institutionalizing Gender in Foreign Policy


        This memorandum shares my thoughts after reviewing the gender communication plan that Maggie
Williams prepared and reflecting on the larger strategic imperative set forth in the QDDR to "integrate gender
issues into policies and practices" and "ensure that gender is effectively addressed throughout all bureaus and
missions."

        In your role as Ambassador for the Global Women's Initiative, you have championed issues of
opportunity, inclusion, and safety for women and girls around the world. Your office also has been dedicated to
integrating gender throughout the work of the Department and USAID. The strategic communication plan
outlines a vision for solidifying the QDDR's imperative for gender integration and recommends dedicated
resources to achieve this goal over the course of the next year and beyond. After reviewing the plan and
discussing it with the Secretary, these are my implementation recommendations that I believe we need to put in
place in short order.

         Gender Integration Work Plan. Maggie's document outlines an internal and external communication
strategy to support the institutionalization of new approach to foreign policy that includes a focus on women
and girls for more effective diplomacy and development outcomes. The document contains 15 work streams
that fall roughly into four categories. The document sets out an aggressive outreach and communications
strategy to make the public case that foreign policy interests are best served if a focus on women and girls is
integral to our diplomacy and development. It then underscores the importance of building a narrative to
describe how, using this approach, the Secretary and Department have changed the way in which we engage in
foreign policy to generate results. In support of the communications strategy, the document makes a series of
policy and structural recommendations to help achieve its goals, including building and presenting the evidence
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793411 Date: 01/07/2016
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793411 Date: 01/07/2016




base to support the "theory of the case." The communications strategy also outlines opportunities to use your
and the Secretary's time effectively over the next year and to enlist others — inside and outside the department -
to amplify this work.

        Staffing. Heather Samuelson worked with me to identify, given the composition of the personnel in
your office, what might be additional staffing needed to achieve the outcomes anticipated by the QDDR and
through this aggressive communications plan. Based upon that review, I recommend the addition of another
team reporting to you that augments the existing team currently in place. This additional team would allow the
existing team, managed by Anita Botfi, to maintain the current functioning of the office (interfacing with other
offices and bureaus within State, conducting diplomacy with foreign governments, managing existing programs,
supporting your travel, etc.). The additional team, which I think should be led by Jen Klein as a second Deputy,
would be the QDDR implementation team — as well as a strategic planning arm. It would be charged with
implementing the QDDR imperative on women and girls, including the communications strategy set forth in
Maggie's document, while working closely with the broader Department QDDR implementation team.

        In addition to Jen, the QDDR and communications implementation team likely would need to include
the following positions:

   •      Communications Director. The Communications Director would lead outreach and communications,
          including: engagement to communicate the vision and strategy to the foreign policy community, the
          American public and other audiences; to develop validators and surrogates to support the message; to
          enlist the support of the business community and other key constituencies; and to use new media and
          other innovative communications tools (which, depending upon her time commitments, might be
          Victoria Esser, who is new in Public Affairs and came from The Glover Park Group).



    •     Director of Research and Data. The QDDR predicates the focus on women and girls based upon an
          evidence basis for better outcomes — which requires a rigorous approach to building the database on
          gender. For example, the communications strategy suggests a day-long high level conference on data,
          development of effective visual communication on gender, as well as a thorough analysis of the gender
          indicators that we currently use internally. Cindy Huang could initially cover this role.



    •     Director of Policy. A key piece of this plan is the integration of gender into the policies and programs
          of the State Department and USAID. This is being done through the QDDR implementation (e.g.,
          looking at the systems for recruiting, promoting and training Foreign Service Officers), the policy
          directive from the Secretary on gender, and through the implementation of the National Action Plan on
          Women, Peace and Security. In addition to shepherding these areas from a policy standpoint, this role
          will also seek to ensure successful integration of gender into key policy initiatives (e.g., Feed the Future,
          the Global Health Initiative, the Partnership for Growth, the Climate Change Initiative). I understand
          that Rachel Vogelstein already is undertaking this work so it likely makes sense to have Rachel formally
          assume this role.



    •     Director of Special Projects. The communications plan demands that through powerful written and
          visual tools, a narrative be created and communicated about the work that you and the Secretary have
          done at the State Department. In addition, the next year will present myriad opportunities to solidify the
          gains you and she have made by using travel, media, and technology creatively. June Shih could
          manage these projects (as well as support Rachel on policy).

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793411 Date: 01/07/2016
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793411 Date: 01/07/2016




   •     Special Assistants. I am committed to finding two additional staff positions to implement this plan.

     In addition to this new team, I will seek to formally ensure contacts are designated in key supporting offices,
listed below:
     • COS (Nora Toiv)

   •     S/P (TBD)

   •     Scheduling (Lona Valmoro)

   •     Innovation (Katie Dowd)

   •     Strategic Communications (Caroline Adler)

   •     Protocol (TBD)

   •     Educational and Cultural Affairs (Meghann Curtis)

   •     Global Partnerships Initiative (Kris Balderston)

   •     USAID (Caren Grown, Karla Coppell)

   •     Others? (TBD)

   I look forward to talking with you about this. Implemented properly, the goal is ensure we deliver on the
QDDR's gender integration imperative and this approach to foreign policy delivers the results that you and the
Secretary anticipate in the upcoming year and beyond.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793411 Date: 01/07/2016
