      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784145 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                          RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                            McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sent:                            Saturday, May 7, 2011 1:47 PM
To:                              H; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject:                         Fw: PAKISTAN MEDIA ANALYSIS -- May 7, 2011
Attachments:                     StateSeal.gif; StateSeal.gif


Fyi


From: Douglas, Walter T
Sent: Saturday, May 07, 2011 01:27 PM
To: McHale, Judith A
Cc: Kenna, Corley; Cormack, Maureen E; Martino, Kitty
Subject: Fw: PAKISTAN MEDIA ANALYSIS -- May 7, 2011

Dear Judith,

Below is our media analysis from today. Not much came out of Friday prayers. The action is the debate among
Pakistanis. Regards. Walter.



From: SMART Core <svcSMARTBTSRctSPrec@state.gov>
To: Rodriguez, Alberto; Jones, Anthony M; Miller, Thomas S (Athens); Davidson, Mark J; Mathews, George D;
Vydmantas, Rima J; Beemer, Brent T; Douglas, Walter T
Cc: Munter, Cameron P; Johnson, Eric N; Craig, Theodore J; Foley, Rafael P; Polacheck, Joshua W; York, Bonnie K;
Peccia, Jonathan R; Bergemann, John C; Brown, Thomas E; Nash, Louise A; Pratt, Jonathan G; Herbol, Denise
(USAID/Pak/DIR); Ingalls, Linda C; Jea, David 3; Ahlers, Ralph C; Bennett, Anne M; DeAngelis, Christian R; Richards,
Marie 3; Gonzalez, Francisco J; Holstege, Brian C; Sanneh, Fatuma Y; Birkinshaw, Laura M; Martin, Jamie; Bergen, Joseph
G (Islamabad); Murthy, Kalpana; Hoagland, Richard E; Baker, Sherri X
Sent: Sat May 07 15:19:50 2011
Subject: PAKISTAN MEDIA ANALYSIS -- May 7, 2011

                                                  UNCLASSIFIED




Action Office:                PAS
Info Office:                  POL_INFO

MRN:                          11 ISLAMABAD 1294
Date/DTG:                     May 07, 2011 / 071018Z MAY 11
From:                         AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD
Action:                       WASHDC, SECSTATE IMMEDIATE; SECDEF WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE; LONDON,
                              AMEMBASSY ROUTINE; PARIS, AMEMBASSY ROUTINE; MOSCOW, AMEMBASSY
                              ROUTINE; USUN NEW YORK, USMISSION IMMEDIATE; USNATO, USMISSION IMMEDIATE;
                              WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE; JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
                              IMMEDIATE; USPACOM HONOLULU HI ROUTINE; NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784145 Date: 01/07/2016
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784145 Date: 01/07/2016




                             WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE; HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL ROUTINE; DIA
                             WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
E.O.:                        13526
TAGS:                        01IP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, KMDR, PK
Captions:                    SENSITIVE
Subject:                     PAKISTAN MEDIA ANALYSIS -- May 7, 2011


Note: This is an SBU product and must not be forwarded outside of the U.S. government.

                                       PAKISTAN MEDIA ANALYSIS
                                              May 7, 2011

   •     Media reflect vicious debate within GOP and military/intelligence establishment over failures
   •     Blame game begins; Air Chief Marshall accepts responsibility for not detecting U.S. operation
   •     Some Urdu TV and print commentary pushing past previous limits in criticism of the establishment
   •     English and Urdu social media limited in reach but also critical of the military.

The internal debate and blame game over who is responsible for the Pakistani government's failure to detect
either Osama bin Laden or the U.S. operation against him is being played out through the media. We have
seen unprecedented levels of criticism of the military, particularly in the Urdu television talk shows, where
hosts are reflecting the nation's shock, confusion, and embarrassment over the week's events. Subsidiary to
criticism of the Pakistani military, but palpable, is anger toward the U.S. for violating Pakistan's sovereignty in
the operation. Curiously, though, there has been muted comment regarding yesterday's alleged drone strike;
we assess this signals the continued internal disarray regarding what to say to the Pakistani people. Pakistani
social media — while of very limited reach and impact -- appear to be amplifying questions raised in the
international press about the Pakistani military and intelligences services' knowledge about bin Laden. Aside
from bin Laden's death the killing of eight Shiite Muslims in Quetta and the imposition of 2 percent surcharge
on the power tariff were significant stories today.

As the media continues to question the military's failures, Pakistani leaders are trying to explain their way out
of domestic and international criticism without addressing the core issues of who knew what and when did
they know it regarding bin Laden's presence in Pakistan. The leading Urdu paper, "Jang," its English language
counterpart, "The News," and the largest television network, Geo TV, prominently covered Air Chief Marshal
Rao Qamar's statement accepting responsibility for the air surveillance failure. They emphasized his
contention that that Pakistani radars were inactive, rather than jammed, over Abbottabad during the
operation. This confession, particularly by a military official, is rare in Pakistan's history, and reflective of the
enormity of the humiliation that the Pakistan Army is facing. The PML-N has demanded the resignation of top
officials, and rumors abound in the press that ISI Chief General Pasha may be sacked.

Statements by U.S. officials acknowledging Pakistan's contributions in the war on terror received positive
coverage. State Department spokesman Mark Toner's comments brushing aside the possibility of an Indian
adventure against a terrorist hideout, citing the "unique" nature of bin Laden's case, made headlines in "Nawa-
i-Waqt," "The Nation," and other rightist papers. Several dailies reported Congressional support for Pakistan,
particularly statements by Kerry, Lugar, and Boehner about the need to continue cooperation. However, media
also accused the U.S. of playing a "double game" with Pakistan, expressing pique over Senate Armed Services
Committee Chairman Carl Levin's remarks that Pakistani officials were aware of bin Laden's whereabouts
and. Urdu daily "Jang," in front-page analysis, pointed out discrepancies in statements made by President
Obama and Secretary Clinton extolling Pakistan's role versus Director Panetta's remarks blaming Pakistan for
its connivance with terrorists.


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784145 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784145 Date: 01/07/2016




Journalists are finding a voice and testing the limits in their criticism of the Pakistani military. Some English
editorials are taking the more daring step of suggesting that the military was aware of and/or supporting bin
Laden in Abbottabad, while Urdu editorials spew anger towards the U.S. over putting boots on the ground to
kill bin Laden. Urdu daily "Jang" observed that "The manner, in which the American commandos conducted
their operation in Abbottabad, has, justifiably, plunged the entire Pakistani nation into utter shock." The
reliably anti-American Urdu daily "Nawa-i-Waqt" concluded that "there is no justification for the deployment
of even a single American soldier on our soil. They should be allowed to retain their diplomatic staff here and
that too, only on reciprocal basis." Another major Urdu paper, "Express," complained that "Pakistan is getting
negligible assistance as compared to the massive losses we have suffered, and are still suffering, in the war
against terrorism."

Continued criticism on the television talk shows of the Pakistani military, especially the ISI, and its inability to
hunt bin Laden or disrupt the U.S. mission in Abbottabad is exposing a trust deficit between the Pakistan Army
and the nation unparalleled in recent Pakistan's history. In another scathing tirade from a previously pro-Army
host, Geo's Kaman Khan asked "After Monday's incident, why should the nation trust that the country's
security system does not need an overhaul and our security agencies are alert enough to counter the
enemy?" Talat Masood, a highly respected strategic analyst, asserted on the same program that the Pakistani
government bears the responsibility to satisfy not only the Americans, but also its own masses.

Although many Pakistanis reacted positively to bin Laden's death on social media platforms, English and Urdu
speakers expressed outrage and anger on Twitter and Facebook towards their security agencies for "failing" the
Pakistani people. President Obama's speech was generally well received,. but Pakistanis are demanding a
better explanation about exactly what Pakistan did to assist the U.S. forces. Many social media postings are
linking to international articles, in particular about American concerns over the military's possible support for
bin Laden.

Urdu Editorials:

"Leadership Needs To Realize Its Responsibilities," an editorial in the leading mass circulation populist, often
sensational Urdu daily "Jang" (cir. 300,000) (05/07)

"The manner, in which the American commandos conducted their operation in Abbottabad, has, justifiably,
plunged the entire Pakistani nation into utter shock and is a serious concern. People think that our leadership is
unable to comprehend the implications of further deterioration in Pak-U.S. relations. Perhaps, this is the reason
that we did not see any considerable reaction from the government on the operation in Abbottabad operation,
especially at a time when the U.S. is severely criticizing our security forces... We think that opposition parties
should ask Prime Minister Gilani what strategy his government has devised to cope with the unfolding
dangerous situation."

"Americans Should Answer in the Language They Understand," an editorial in the second largest, nationalist
Urdu daily Nawa-i-Waqt" (cir. 150,000) (05/07)

"What is the point in asking the U.S. to curtail its military presence in Pakistan? There is no justification for
the deployment of even a single American soldier on our soil. They should be allowed to retain their
diplomatic staff here and that too, on reciprocal basis. In the wake of the Abbottabad operation, China is the
only country that has expressed its support for Pakistan. We think the Pakistani leadership should get rid of its
habit to devise ad hoc policies and say goodbye to Washington's blackmailing tactics. China is our time-tested
friend upon whom we can rely in our times of dire need. In contrast, the U.S. always ditches us after its
interests are served."



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784145 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784145 Date: 01/07/2016




"Osama Operation: U.S. Mindset and Pakistan's Clear-Cut Stand," an editorial in liberal Urdu daily "Express"
(cir. 25,000) (05/07)

"The U.S. operation in Islamabad has exposed loopholes in our security system which we need to address as
soon as possible, so that it not be possible for any country, of terrorist organization, to challenge our
sovereignty. Pakistan is getting negligible assistance compared to the massive losses we have suffered, and are
still suffering, in the war against terrorism. The U.S. administration should keep in mind the ground reality not
only in this region, but also in the entire world, before undertaking any adventure, or before taking any
decision. Washington also needs to stop exerting unjustified pressure on Islamabad."

Editorial Cartoons

Daily Times (05/07)



                . • . AND 110t4
                             UMER
                  TR014 ileR POCKETS




The Nation (05/07)




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784145 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784145 Date: 01/07/2016




TV Talk Shows:

For the third consecutive day, Pakistan's most-watched talk show host, Geo TV's Kamran Khan, kept up his
attack on the country's military and intelligence leadership for their handling of the Abbottabad incident. Khan
addressed President Zardari, Prime Minister Gilani, Army Chief General Kayani and ISI Chief General Pasha
and said it is a matter of grave concern that the nation now has grave concerns about the efficacy of the defense
institutions. "After Monday's incident, why should the nation trust that the country's security system does not
need an overhaul and our security agencies are alert enough to counter the enemy," asked Khan. "Monday's
incident has severely shaken the sense of security of the entire nation. This is a three-pronged failure of our
security agencies. Our security system, just like any other national institution, is going down the hill." Khan
said that the nation demands that those officials responsible for allowing the attack on the General
Headquarters [GHQ], the release of Ray Davis and the Abbottabad incident should be held accountable. Khan
concluded by noting that Pakistanis are being threatened by a double-edged sword: One edge of this sword is
the United States which is cutting the people of Pakistan and the other edge is terrorism which is also cutting
the people of Pakistan.

Another leading talk show host, Nasim Zebra, of Dunya TV, said that 'red lines' between Pakistan and the
United States have been violated in the heart of Khyber Pukhtoonkhwa and Pakistan military leaders were
caught unaware. "How come this could happen?" Zebra demanded. Those people responsible for protecting the
sovereignty of Pakistan should resign or be fired over the Abbottabad incident. Zebra's guest, journalist Rauf
Klasra, asked, Why are we so surprised? Pakistan is a country where the military repeatedly meddles in the
politics of the country, and runs its nuclear and foreign policy with India, Afghanistan and the United States, so
it makes it really meaningless to ask why this incident happened. The problem today confronting Pakistan is
that the role of army in the national level has increased to such a great extent that the civilian government is
just a cover for the army.

In an Aaj News program, host Nadia Naqi noted that in the wake of the Abbottabad operation, the U.S. has
called on Pakistan to answer questions about the presence of OBL a military city under the very nose of the
country's intelligence and security agencies. One guest, a senior defense analyst, said that the Pakistani
government needs to provide answers, not just to the Americans but also to Pakistanis. He added that it is
matter of serious concern that our intelligence agencies failed to track down such a high-value target who was
residing in a sensitive area of the country. The U.S. operation has exposed the weakness of our intelligence
services, the former general added. Another guest, a A PML-Q leader, said that Pakistan should refuse to
surrender to the American's pressure to provide information. He went on to defend the ISI, saying that even the
CIA has also failed on several occasions. For instance, it failed to inform the U.S. government before the 9/11
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784145 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784145 Date: 01/07/2016




attack. Another guest said that the civilian government and military of Pakistan are not on the same page. The
contradictions in the statements given by the Foreign Office and the military clearly demonstrate these
differences.


Information Office
Public Affairs Section
U.S. Embassy Islamabad
Pakistan
Stay connected with http://islamabad.usembassy.gov/

     YdEd
Courtney Beale
Deputy Information Officer
Public Affairs Section
U.S. Embassy Islamabad Pakistan
Mobile:
Stay connected with http://islamabad.usembassy.gov/


                      Tube




Signature:                   Munter

Drafted By:                  ISLAMABAD:Beale, Courtney A.
Cleared By:                  Islamabad:Beale, Courtney A Kramer
Approved By:                 Islamabad:Davidson, Mark J
Released By:                 ISLAMABAD:Beale, Courtney A.
Info:
Attachments:                 Metadata.dat

Action Post:
Dissemination Rule:          POLINFO, PAS




                                              UNCLASSIFIED




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784145 Date: 01/07/2016
