       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763762 Date: 01/07/2016

                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART B5




From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SuIlivaral@state.gov>
Sent:                              Sunday, August 16, 2009 12:46 PM
To:
Cc:                                Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:                           FW: TIME-SENSITIVE: HONDURAS
Attachments:                       Note on Honduras8.15.docx



FYI.

    Original Message
From: Slaughter, Anne-Marie
Sent: Sunday, August 16, 2009 12:23 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Cc: Abedin, Huma; Mills, Cheryl D; Chollet, Derek H
Subject: TIME-SENSITIVE: HONDURAS

Jake -- Peter Harrell and I have been concerned all last week that we are really losing the initiative on Honduras and that
some more forceful intervention is needed. I think this is a real opportunity for S to get her first real diplomatic win on
resolving a crisis. She looked great at the outset of this crisis, but now American policy seems to be drifting. It's also a
chance to turn her and POTUS's recent words on democracy into action. Pse get the attached 1 page memo to her
today; I have been working w/ WHA but they take forever and Tom is obviously in a delicate position. I'm also pasting it
in below, in addition to a cable from our ambassador that she has probably seen making some of the same points. We
really need to move here to avoid further damage; on the upside we have the possibility of a real win. I'll make the
argument directly in the early morning mtg tomorrow, but I'd like her to see this first.
AM

UNCLASSIFIED

FOR THE SECRETARY

FROM: Anne-Marie Slaughter
SUBJECT:    Moving Forward on Honduras

         I got lots of signals last week that we are losing ground in Latin America every day the Honduras crisis continues;
high level people from both the business and the NGO community say that even our friends are beginning to think we
are not really committed to the norm of constitutional democracy we have worked so hard to build over the last 20
year. The current stalemate favors the status quo; the de facto regime has every incentive to run out the clock as long as
they think we will have to accept any post-election government You played an important leadership role at the outset of
the crisis; I urge you to think about taking bold action now to breathe new life into the process and signal that regardless
what happens on the Hill, you and the president are serious. WHA and I are working on a memo proposing some
options, but experience has taught me that this could take several days. So I wanted to give you a heads up this
weekend.

         We need to strengthen both the carrots and the sticks in this process. Re the de factos, we should find that coup
was a "military coup" under U.S. law and revoke the visas of more de facto regime members. We should also go after
the visas of a few prominent de facto supporters in Honduras's business community, signaling that we'll widen this net
if negotiations fail. We should also make noises about prohibiting U.S. companies from doing business with companies
controlled the de factos, though we have to be careful about the impact on Honduran institutions.


                                                             20
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763762 Date: 01/07/2016
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763762 Date: 01/07/2016




        We also need to work on carrots to encourage both sides to accept the Accords. I had lunch Wednesday with
Mexican Ambassador Arturo Sarukhan, who also thought we were losing ground and proposed a "Gruppo de Amigos"
approach involving the U.S., Mexico, Costa Rica, Chile, Spain, and possibly Brazil that would make clear that if Zelaya
returns we are prepared to flood the zone with international observers to guarantee an honest election process..


                                                               If you're interested in considering these and other ideas
in more detail, you would probably speed up the process by asking for options.

CABLE FROM AMB. Llorens, SENT YESTERDAY MORNING.

AIL: I received a call from Arias late last night. He seemed to be recovering well from the flu but was at his home
resting. I briefed him on how I saw the situation in Honduras. I stressed the importance of a successful visit by the OAS
FMs. I agreed M's recent public comments again suggesting that Insulza was not welcomed were unhelpful. I noted that
somewhat better was the statement made by the Corrales delegation yesterday at a press conference in Toncontin
Airport upon returning from DC reaffirming that Insulza was expected to be with the delegation. I told Arias the
importance of arranging a substantive schedule for the FMs w regime, civil society, business, and religious leaders as
well as pro-Zelaya social sector supporters. I also stressed the importance of giving these folks a fair hearing but also
that it was critical that the FMs explain the international community's expectations and strong hope that both sides
return quickly to San Jose and reach and sign a final agreement.

Arias concurred that that was also his expectation. He expressed concern that the regime may be seeking to stall and
delay. He said the regime delegation did not seemed fully committed to reaching a deal and seemed focused on
tinkering with the political amnesty question. Arias believes that the core regime supporters in the business community
were still strongly resisting an agreement. He suggested that the US needed to increase the pressure on these folks and
consider taking away their visas and possibly freeze their bank accounts. I said I would pass on his suggestion. I said we
were reaching out to people in Honduras and urging the importance of a succesful FMs meeting as a prelude to a final
agreement. I said I would also speak to Corrales and get him focused on having the regime prepared for the FMs with
creative and concrete ways of bolstering the enforcement aspects of a final deal. Arias thanked our support and we
agreed to speak again over the weekend. Hugo




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case NO: F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763762 Date: 01/07/2016
