UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782335 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL


                                        CONFIDENTIAL



                                               August 31, 2011



 For: Hillary
 From: Sid
 Re: NTC politics of humanitarian aid


 During the morning of August 31, 2011, sensitive sources with excellent access stated in strict
 confidence that Prime Minister Mahmoud Jabril, President Mustafa Abdul Jalil, and the other
 leaders of the Libyan National Transitional Council (NTC) continue to debate how best to
 organize their efforts to deal with foreign governments and firms in an effort to address the
 humanitarian and security needs of the Libyan people, as they attempt to form an effective
 government. The recent success of the rebellion against the regime of Muammar al Qaddafi has
 surprised these NTC leaders, and they are now struggling with the divisions inside of the
 movement. Jabril and Jalil realize that the real success or failure of their rebellion depends on
 their ability to form an administrative structure that can deal with other governments and major
 foreign business interests on behalf of the people of Libya.

 (Source Comment: According to an extremely sensitive source, the NTC leadership is
 increasingly concerned over the failure of the rebel National Libyan Army (NLA) to capture
 Qaddafi or his remaining family members, particularly his son Saif al-Islam Qaddafi. They are
 especially worried that the former dictator may take advantage of tribal loyalties in the Southern
 and Western parts of the country, in order to carry on a guerrilla war against the new NTC
 government. At the same time they believe that certain governments will continue to hold back
 full recognition and cooperation until the Qaddafis are removed from the scene. In this regard
 Jalil is pressing the idea of asking the United Nations to provide experts to organize and
 administer any humanitarian aid the NTC receives, believing that this will give the new regime
 greater credibility as a national government. Jabril has not yet commented on this idea, and it
 has not been fully debated in the NTC.)

 At present, these sources note that various European governments and firms are working with
 their particular friends on the NTC to gain favorable positions for future business opportunities.
 These sources believe that the private talks between NTC members and these foreign officials
 and businessmen involve discussions regarding how best to meet the needs of the population.
 For his part Jabril is concerned that many of the tentative offers of assistance appear to be linked
 to business concessions for the donor countries, particularly in the oil industry. One advisor to




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782335 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782335 Date: 01/07/2016




  Jabril has stated in private that if the NTC accepts this assistance without question, Libya will
  become a client state of the major European powers.

 At present, senior NTC officials believe that the government of the United Kingdom is working
 to strengthen the position of British Petroleum (BP), pointing out that, while in the past BP was
 forced to deal closely with the Qaddafi regime, the UK was among the first of the major powers
 to come to the aid of the rebels. By the same token, the French government has quietly but
 forcefully continued to remind Jalil and other NTC leaders that they were the first major country
 to support the rebels. At the same time, the French, who feel that in the past firms like
 TOTAL/ELF were not fairly treated by the Qaddafi regime are looking for the NTC to open up a
 greater percentage of the Libyan oil fields to their operations.

 The NTC continues to maintain a correct but cool attitude toward the Italian government and the
 Italian oil firm ENI. The NTC leadership believes that the Italians quietly dealt with Qaddafi
 regime well into the rebellion, and the new government will continue to move very carefully in
 dealing with either the Italian government or ENI.

 At the same time, both Jabril and Jalil are particularly suspicious of the intention of the
 government of German Chancellor Angela Merkel toward the new Libyan regime, and have
 taken steps to monitor the activities of German diplomats and businessmen in the rebel
 stronghold of Benghazi. By the same token, the NTC has received unconfirmed reports from
 their security officers and military commanders in the field that officers of Germany's external
 intelligence service (Bundesnachrichtendienst — BND) are maintaining clandestine contact with
 Qaddafi's forces in and around the city of Sirte. These NTC officials believe strongly that the
 Germans continue to hedge their bet on Libya, in the event that Qaddafi can continue to fight
 until the political, tribal, and regional divisions on the NTC weaken their efforts to form a
 government.

 (Source Comment: In the opinion of a source with excellent access to the NTC leadership, Jabril
 and his advisors are working to bring in private firms to meet their pressing humanitarian needs.
 The Prime Minister believes that if they wait for foreign governments to provide this assistance
 the death toll among the wounded and injured will continue to rise, and the NTC will be held
 responsible for failing to bring in emergency and battlefield medical support. To this end they
 have signed an agreement with the Osprey Security Group (OSG), a U.S. firm specializing in
 emergency medical care and humanitarian assistance. OSG is prepared to deliver the aid
 immediately upon receiving the funds from the NTC. Jabril's advisors believe that the use of this
 American firm will not only allow the NTC to meet a pressing need, but will also serve to
 cement good relations with the U.S. government and business community. One NTC official
 noted that OSG's ability to provide this medical and humanitarian support sets it apart from
 firms like the French security group SECOPLEX, which look to provide foreign fighters to
 support the rebel's NLA. Jabril continues to emphasize that unlike the Qaddafi army; the NLA
 does not, and will not use foreign mercenaries for military operations.)




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782335 Date: 01/07/2016
