      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776954 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Tuesday, January 4, 2011 8:25 PM
To:
Subject:                           FW: from sy hersh



FYI
  -          —
From: Einhom, Robert J
Sent: Tuesday, January 04, 2011 3:06 PM
To: Burns, William 3; Catalano, Elisa; Wells, Alice G; Crowley, Philip 3; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Steinberg, James B; Van Diepen,
Vann H; Nephew, Richard M; Timble, James P; Kemp, Scott; Yu, Alan K; Kim-Scott, Patricia Rvu, Rexon Y.; Samore,
Gary S.; Talwar, Puneet; 'Hammer, Michael A.'; 'Magsamen, Kelly E.'; 'Benjamin_Chang                       'Rhodes, Benjamin   B6
J.'; Davies, Glyn T; Wood, Robert A; McDonough, Denis R.; 'Ross, Dennis B.'
Subject: FW: from sy hersh

All,
Below is an email from Sy Hersh saying he is now ready to write a story for the New Yorker claiming that the US and its
allies have "no empirical evidence of any nuclear weaponization facilities in Iran." He will also deal with alleged special
ops and the "newly proposed NIE" (which he says doesn't have USG unity). He seems to conclude that "it is also a fact
that Iran just may be telling it the way it is when it says — as it has forever—that they are not interested in the
bomb." Like many of Herth's sensationalist and inaccurate pieces, this one may cause a stir, and it could give
ammunition to Iran in the months ahead. I pass this on for situational awareness and early warning. Unless otherwise
instructed, I don't plan to respond to him. By the way, his reference to "our last chat" was when I called him to say that
his Pakistan piece about a year ago — claiming that Pakistani generals were sharing with us information about the
locations of Pakistani nuclear weapons so that we could gain control over them in a crisis — was totally inaccurate,
irresponsible, and very damaging to U.S. interests. That was just before I called his editor to say the piece amounted to
journalistic malpractice and was far below New Yorker standards.

Bob


From: Seymour Hersh [mailto                                                                                                    B6
Sent: Tuesday, January 04, 2011 12:00 PM
To: Einhorn, Robert J
Subject: from sy hersh

okay robert persuant to our last chat, i am contacting you about a story i have been researching for months
(actually years, indirectly) and am now ready to write. simply put, i am doing a piece for the new yorker saying
that the the u.s. and its major allies have no emperical evidence of any nuclear weaponization (is there such a
word?) facilities in Iran. i shall also be writing about the extensive special operations activities inside Iran, and
the great lengths our boys have gone in the past six years or so -- often with passive collection devices -- to find
such. e.g., lots of photo reconnaissance work looking for air vents. i also shall deal with the newly proposed
NIE that is having its troubles, in terms of obtaining unity inside the u.s. government. of course, i understand
that many in the community believe that Iran has the intent to go nuclear, but it is also a fact that iran just may
be telling it the way it is when it says -- as it has forever-- that they are not interested in the bomb.
   Got the Flu now -- hateful stuff -- but any day next week would be fine for a chat, on any basis you
wish. You have my email and my office phone is                           sy hersh                                              B6




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776954 Date: 01/07/2016
