      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787908 Date: 01/07/2016


                                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Wednesday, February 1, 2012 7:45 AM
To:
Subject:                          FYSA re HAK



Here is the last update I had on HAK matter (4 January), which I am following up on today to see what is the issue. This
memo was from Pat and Peggy:



                                       Update on Dr. Kissinger's Request
                                                January 4, 2012

Context

The Secretary met with Dr. Kissinger on October 27. At the meeting, Dr. Kissinger presented the
Secretary with a document regarding the creation of a new center for his papers at Yale University.
This new center presents the opportunity to try to move forward by leveraging already declassified
collections of State documents from his tenure as Secretary (see attached).

Background

In 1976, Dr. Kissinger deeded to the Library of Congress copies of records covering his tenure as
Secretary of State, in addition to other documentation covering his U.S. government service (and some
materials related to periods prior to his government service).

In accordance with established Department procedures, the original records of his tenure as Secretary
were reviewed for declassification and transferred to the National Archives (NARA) consistent with
our ongoing program to open permanent historical records to the public. All the documents that can be
declassified have been publicly available at NARA for the past decade. The copies of State records at
the LoC have not been reviewed for declassification since they are already available at NARA for
unrestricted public access. Several years ago, Dr. Kissinger gave the LoC $150,000 to have the
material he deposited there (which include materials from period of his life other than when he was
Secretary) there scanned into the Remote Archive Access system used by NARA/the National
Declassification Center and reviewed by those agencies with equities. This would enable this non-
State material to be reviewed for declassification by the relevant agencies and subsequently made
available to the public at both the LOC and the National Archives, as well as at Yale.

As the Department only conducts a single review of such records for public dissemination, we have not
reviewed the copies of Dr. Kissinger's State Department records that were provided to the LoC.

We understand that in 2006 Dr. Kissinger deeded additional papers to the LoC that related to the time
period after his tenure as Secretary; we have no been privy to the details of this deed.

As stated at the October meeting, Dr. Kissinger has recently established a relationship with Yale
University to establish a center and donate his papers as his "legacy." This new focus presented an
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787908 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787908 Date: 01/07/2016




opportunity for the Department to decouple the ongoing issue regarding copies of State records at the
LoC to a new initiative to contribute already declassified records to this collection. Dr. Kissinger
seemed pleased with this approach, so since then, we have pursued working with his representatives
from Arnold and Porter, as well as from Yale University.

On November 16, Deputy Assistant Secretary Peggy Grafeld (Bureau of Administration) and Assistant
Legal Advisor Josh Dorosin met with Yale's Vice President & General Counsel and the Assistant to
the President (who represents the University on the Kissinger Project). This meeting was arranged by
Jeffrey Smith (currently Dr. Kissinger's counsel from Arnold and Porter, and formerly CIA General
Counsel and State Assistant Legal Adviser). The Yale team was in Washington to meet with
representative from the legal counsels from the LoC and NARA. This meeting focused on what the
Department could do to assist Yale develop a collection that represents Dr. Kissinger's tenure as
Secretary of State, including the declassified materials in the attachment. The Yale reps acknowledged
that they had focused their attention on the collection deeded to the LoC in 2006, but not the materials
covered by the 1976 deed, or any other documents covering his tenure. The State reps provided a
"tour" of the declassified records currently available online, as well as the search functionality
associated with it. While impressed with the sophistication of what State could offer and appreciative
of our willingness to collaborate, the Yale reps indicated that they needed to further consider whether
and how to focus on materials beyond the 2006 collection, and appeared overwhelmed by the
possibilities.

The Department reps offered the Yale archivists and librarians the opportunity to visit State for a
"deeper dive" into the material. We have followed up with emails toJeff Smith and are awaiting
further contact from Yale. Mr. Smith also committed to pursuing getting a progress report from the
National Declassification Center regarding their efforts to coordinate the inter-agency review of the
Kissinger collection from the LoC.

Summary

At the both the meeting with Dr. Kissinger and the follow-up meeting with the Yale reps and his
counsel, State reps identified several ways in which it could assist Yale, leveraging already
declassified, publicly available documents (many of which were available online):

   • Provide electronic copies of State cable traffic from Dr. Kissinger's tenure, (approximately one
     million cables) or a link to the public site.
   • Provide electronic copies of Dr. Kissinger's declassified telephone transcripts or a link to the
     public site.
   • Facilitate access by Yale staff to declassified State records at NARA for reproduction (copies of
     which are in the collection at the LoC).
   • Provide electronically copies of nomination material which may or may not be at the Library of
     Congress.
   • Provide copies of roughly 2500 pages of memoranda of conversation and nomination papers that
     have not yet been transferred to NARA.
   • Facilitate a meeting between the technical professionals from State and Yale to discuss any
     issues.

Next Steps

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787908 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787908 Date: 01/07/2016




The decision regarding how — or if -- to proceed with the Department's offers remains with Dr.
Kissinger's representatives and those from Yale University.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787908 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787908 Date: 01/07/2016




                                  Inventory of Kissinger Collections

State Documents

Copies of State records (paper) from HAK tenure at State
  • NARA (declassified)

   • LoC (not reviewed)

Copies of HAK Telephone Transcripts
  • State FOIA website (declassified - online)

   • NARA (declassified - paper)

   • LoC (paper)

State cables covering. HAK tenure at State (1 Million)
   • NARA (declassified — online via web)

   • State (declassified)

State Memcons and confirmation materials
   • State (declassified - paper) [the only collection not available elsewhere,

                                     but which can be made available to an entity

                                     Dr. Kissinger requests]

   • LoC (?)


The materials at the LoC cover a wide range of documents from Dr. Kissinger's life, including personal
papers.
We have also learned that there are documents (including memcons with Putin) in the custody of
Arnold & Porter.
We are uncertain regarding the contents of the documents Dr. Kissinger recently donated to Yale, but
have been led to believe that they are mostly personal in nature.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787908 Date: 01/07/2016
