    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788340 Date: 01/07/2016


                                                                                               RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                               Sunday, November 27, 201110:36 AM
To:                                 Oscar Flores
Subject:                            Fw: H: 2 intel reports Libya internal politics. Sid
Attachments:                        hrc_memo_2_intel_reports_libya_internal_politics_102811.docx



Pls print.


From: sbwhoeop@[mailto:sbwhoeop
Sent: Friday, October 23, 2011 04:05 PM
To: H
Subject: H: 2 intel reports Libya internal politics. Sid




                                           CONFIDENTIAL



                                                   October 28, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Two (2) intel reports on Libyan NTC internal politics


SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well
as the highest levels of European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security
services.


      1. During the week of October 24, 2011, Jalal Muhammad Mansur al-Digheily, the
coordinator of defense and military affairs for the Libyan National Transitional Council
(NTC) stated in confidence to a sensitive source that President Mustafa Abdel Jalil, and
the leaders of the Interim Government are extremely concerned with four internal
problems; all interrelated. Debate on these matters will begin at the first session of the
new Interim Government, scheduled for October 30 in Tripoli.
       2. These individuals state that the first of these concerns is related to the need to
resolve the differences between the many groups that make up Libyan society, reducing
the potential for conflict among the more than 30 different ethnic and regional militias
operating under the NTC. These militias must be disarmed or brought under a centralized
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788340 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788340 Date: 01/07/2016




NTC command, however; any effort to use force in this matter could backfire on the
government, and possibly lead to civil war.
       3. At the same time, according to this source, Jalil and his associates want the
Council to concentrate on steps to arrange the surrender of former Dictator Muammar al
Qaddafi's son, and heir apparent, Saif al-Islam Qaddafi, and former Chief of Intelligence
Abdullah al-Senussi. An extremely sensitive source added that both men are fugitives,
despite early reports of their deaths, and that both men have reached out to Jalil through
mutual contacts in the governments of Algeria and Syria, offering to surrender to
international authorities, who will then transport them to The Hauge, where both are
wanted for human rights abuses, under warrants issued by the International Criminal
Court (ICC). Jalil stated in private that while surrendering the two fugitives to the ICC will
cause criticism in some quarters regarding national sovereignty, it will serve as a major
step in gaining the trust of the United States and Western Europe. This is particularly true
in the case of al-Senussi, whom Jalil stated can provide the true details of the Lockerbie
bombing.
       4. In the opinion of these knowledgeable sources, Jalil and his allies on the NTC,
recognize the need to establish a government which, while based on Islamic/Sharia
principles, can deal with the non-Muslim world, particularly the United States and
Western Europe. In this regard, the NTC is concerned that excesses by their militia forces
in dealing with Qaddafi supporters may complicate this process. For this reason,
according to an extremely sensitive source, Jalil and the other leaders for the NTC are
planning to launch an investigation of Muammar al Qaddifi's death while in the custody of
the Misrata militia, after the fall of his last stronghold in Sirte. This is being done despite
the fact that they are aware of reports that General Abdel Hakim Alamin Belhaj, the NTC
commander in the Tripoli region, ordered Qaddafi's execution. By the same token,
Digheily has ordered NTC forces to end the practice of summarily killing foreign fighters
captured while serving with Qaddafi's forces.
       5. Extremely sensitive contacts add that early in the week of October 24 the NTC
was concerned that Saif would attempt to lead an ongoing guerrilla war against the new
government. However; they now have sensitive reporting that the bulk of the foreign
fighters who had been serving with the Qaddfi's are fleeing the country. Many of these
individuals are members of the Taureg and Garang tribes from southeastern Algeria and
Northern Chad respectively. A current concern of Digheily, and the other military
commanders linked to Jalil, is what one source described as the enormous number of
weapons circulating throughout the country and the region; material associated with the
fighting during the revolution. Most worrisome for these officials are the 15,000 -20,000
SA-7 and SA-24 shoulder fired (manpad) antiaircraft missiles. These weapons were
obtained by Qaddafi's forces over the years under agreements with Russia, Belorus, and
China, and during the revolution many were either issued to the mercenaries fighting for
Qaddafi, or these forces seized them from armories as they began to withdraw from the
country.
       6. In The opinion of these individuals, Digheily is particularly concerned about the
Tauregs, who move freely through the Sahel region and are extremely active in the illicit
weapons trade. One particularly sensitive source noted that in February and March 2011
contacts in Mauritania stated that Taureg traders were negotiating the sale of manpads
from Libya to supporters of al Qa'ida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM). While they do not
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788340 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788340 Date: 01/07/2016




have additional details, these sources indicate that the NTC officials fear that an attack
against an aircraft by AQIM, using a missile associated with the Libyan revolution, will do
serious damage to their efforts to establish Libya as a responsible member of the World
community. For this reason, Jalil and the NTC will cooperate with the efforts of Western
military personnel to locate these weapons, resisting complaints from Belhaj regarding the
presence of foreign troops on Libyan soil.
       7. (Source Comment: During its initial session the new NTC lead interim
government will also begin debate over how to organize national elections in 2012, as weel
as a consistent national policy for dealing with foreign firms and banks, particularly those
associated with the oil sector of the economy. Jalil recognizes that there will always be
corruption in Libya regarding this sector, but he is determined to avoid the system that
was in play under Muammar al Qaddafi. At the same time, he has to continue to protect
the new government from charges by Belhaj, and other more radical members of the
leadership, that foreign governments, banks, and oil companies are manipulating the more
moderate members of the NTC to gain control of the country and its natural resources.)


       1. On the evening of October 24, 2011 Libyan National Transitional Council (NTC)
President Mustafa Abdel Jalil told a close advisor that he is concerned over the reaction in
the United States and other Western countries to his October 23 speech to the nation
regarding Libya's future. According to an extremely sensitive source, this statement
reflects Jalil's concern over the strength of radical Islamist groups inside of the NTC. In
the opinion of these individuals, Jalil believes that he and his more moderate supporters
must position themselves carefully, establishing their identities as devout Moslems in
order to prevent radical Islamist leaders, particularly General Abdel Hakim Alamin Belhaj,
from gaining greater popular support in their efforts to dominate the NTC and eventually
the Interim Government.
       2. This knowledgeable individual adds that Jalil recognizes the fact Belhaj is
popular particularly among the militia troops from Misurata, Zintan, and the Nafusah
mountains, which did the bulk of the fighting in the final battle against the forces of
former dictator Muammar al-Qaddafi in the city of Sirte. These militia forces suffered
heavy casualties during the fighting, which led to the death of Qaddafi, one of his sons, and
several senior advisors. Accordingly, these troops now want a significant voice in the NTC.
(Source Comment: According to a sensitive source, Belhaj is the most popular
commander among these troops, who see him as a fighter with real combat experience,
and not just a politician who sat through the rebellion at the old NTC headquarters in
Benghazi. The source noted that this point of view also represents the ancient animosity
between Tripoli and Benghazi; a competition that has begun to reassert itself now that that
the common foe, Qaddafi, has been removed from the scene.)
       3. These sources believe that finding a balance where religious matters are
concerned is one of the greatest challenges facing Jalil as he begins to form an Interim
Government and prepares for the first national elections in mid — 2012. He must establish
a government that reflects the Islamic history and culture of Libya, while fostering
economic, and where appropriate, political cooperation with the non-Muslim world,
 particularly the United States and Western Europe.

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788340 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788340 Date: 01/07/2016




        4. (Source Comment: Jalil is a member of the Muslim Brotherhood, having
maintained contacts with brothers in Egypt even as he served as Minister of Justice in the
Qaddafi regime. He considers himself to be a devout Muslim, but politically moderate,
and he believes the majority of Libyans hold similar beliefs. Jalil is convinced that most
Libyans are conservative on religious issues and either politically moderate, or
disinterested in the political machinations of the Middle East. In this regard Jalil stated
privately that while Libya will not maintain political or diplomatic relations with Israel,
they can work with the United States and the countries of Western Europe. Jalil believes
this is possible in part because Libya is not torn by the Shia — Sunni conflict that
dominates much of the Muslim world.)
       5. While meeting in Qatar with officials representing NATO and the NTC's allies in
the region, during the week of October 24, Jalil requested that NATO forces remain
involved in Libya until the end of 2011 to guard against a potential counter revolution lead
by Qaddafi's son Saif al Islam Qaddafi. Speaking in private with senior Qatari officials,
Jalil stated that he will continue diplomatic and commercial efforts to make it clear to the
leaders of the United States and Western Europe that, while Libya will recognize a
conservative form of Islam, this does not equate to political or military hostility.
According to knowledgeable individuals Jail confided to his associates in Qatar that by
recognizing the role of Islam, and Sharia law in the day to day life of Libya, he can counter
the efforts by the more radical members of the NTC, particularly Belhaj, to deal with the
Western nations as potential threats, intent on the recolonization of Libya.
        6. As Jalil works to establish an efficient interim government, sources state that he
continues to discuss the departure of Prime Minister Mahrnoud Jibril while increasing his
reliance on Interim Economic and Oil Minister All Tarhouni and the NTC Executive
Committee member for defense and military coordination Jalal Muhammad Mansur al-
Digheily. Jalil believes that these moderate NTC members, who are loyal to him, will help
dispel fears in Western Governments that Libya will become an isolated, hostile state.
        7. At the same time, Jalil and the leadership of the NTC remain highly suspicious of
Chinese commercial and diplomatic efforts to establish a relationship with the new NTC
government. Al-Digheily and NTC General Khalifa Haftar continue to believe that China
attempted to take advantage of both sides in the rebellion, discussing economic ties with
the NTC, while providing clandestine aid to the forces of the Qaddafi government. That
said the NTC realizes that China will be an important client for their oil industry. Jalil and
Tarhouni believe that with the help of the sophisticated leadership of the Libyan National
Oil Company (NOC), they can manage this relationship in a manner that benefits Libya.
        8. In a private conversation Jalil also explained that when he speaks of Sharia law,
and its application in international business and banking, the NTC will set in motion a
parallel system similar to that seen in Saudi Arabia, where the Sharia system is
established, while a traditional Western style business and banking structure is available
when needed, discreetly facilitating growth of Libyan interests in the West. Jalil repeated
that the NTC must establish a system of government that recognizes the importance of the
conservative Islamic beliefs of the majority of Libyans, while recognizing the need for
flexibility when dealing with international business and banking interests. In the opinion
of a sensitive source, he believes his advantages in this regard lie in the desire of the
 Libyan people for peace and prosperity after more than forty years of tension and
repression under the Qaddafi regime.
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788340 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788340 Date: 01/07/2016




       9. (Source Comment: In a separate note, an extremely sensitive source noted that
Jalil views al-Digheily as one of his most reliable supporters. This sensitive source
believes that Jalil ordered the death of former NTC military commander General Abdul
Fatah Younis in July 2011, after the latter was found to have a clandestine relationship
with Saif al Islam Qaddafi. Jalil never revealed this information, and in the turmoil that
followed Younis' death al-Digheily came under suspicion and was expelled from the NTC
Executive Committee. In all of this process he never mentioned Jalil's role in Younis'
death, and as a reward for his loyaly was reappointed as the de facto Minister of Defense
by Jalil in early October 2011.)




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788340 Date: 01/07/2016
