UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788987 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL



                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                              February 14, 2011



 For: Hillary
 From: Sid
 Re: Latest intel report and more on events of 2/11


 13 February:

 After taking steps to dissolve the Parliament and suspend the Constitution, Egypt's Minister of
 Defense, Field Marshall Hussein Tantawi stated that the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces
 (SCAF) intended to keep Prime Minister Ahmed Shafik in his position, overseeing the day to day
 activities of the Egyptian Government bureaucracy. Tantawai and the other members of the
 SCAF will concentrate on restoring order and using the resources of the Army to distribute food
 and essential supplies around the country, following the demonstrations in late January and Early
 February that led to the fall of President Hosni Mubarak. The SCAF will also monitor the
 development of new political parties, and their current plans are to call for national elections to
 take place in September 2011.

 The most important factor in this transition to a new government is the drafting of a revised
 constitution, ending the state of emergency that was put into place by Mubarak after the
 assassination of his predecessor, Anwar al-Sadat, in October 1981. Tantawi stated privately that
 he expects that once the members of the pro-democracy movement have organized into political
 parties, they will begin to press for rapid passage of a new constitution and early elections.
 Tantawi emphasized in the strongest terms that there would be no elections before September
 2011, adding that if the drafting of the new constitution turns out to be as complicated as he
 expects, elections could be delayed until September 2012. He added that elections would not be
 delayed beyond that date.

 Tantawi and his colleagues on the SCAF are also considering the future of Mubarak's Vice
 President, Omar Suleiman. At present they are divided on whether or not to allow him to remain
 in the government, with General Sami Annan, the Chief of Staff of the Army, pressing for his
 dismissal. Tantawi on the other hand believes Suleiman's international contacts and his
 knowledge of Egypt's security and Intelligence community make him valuable. They agree that
 until his future is decided Suleiman will keep a low profile.

 (Source Comment: Suleiman presents challenges for the SCAF. The members of the Council
 are concerned that as the head of the intelligence and security services Suleiman has collected
 derogatory information on many senior government and military officials--information that he
 e.nnld lice tn emharracq the new onvernment if he helievec he hag been ill treated 1
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788987 Date: 01/07/2016
