     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781180 Date: 01/07/2016


                                                                                             RELEASE IN FULL




From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MiilsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Thursday, June 16, 2011 3:48 AM
To:
Subject:                         Fw: Pakistan's Chief of Army Fights to Keep His Job (NYT)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Thursday, June 16, 2011 12:48 AM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Pakistan's Chief of Army Fights to Keep His Job (NYT)




ISLAMABAD (New York Times) — Pakistan's army chief, the most powerful man in the country, is fighting
to save his position in the face of seething anger from top generals and junior officers since the American raid
that killed Osama bin Laden, according to Pakistani officials and people who have met the chief in recent
weeks.

Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, who has led the army since 2007, faces such intense discontent over what is seen
as his cozy relationship with the United States that a colonels' coup, while unlikely, was not out of the question,
said a well-informed Pakistani who has seen the general in recent weeks, as well as an American military
official involved with Pakistan for many years.

The Pakistani Army is essentially run by consensus among 11 top commanders, known as the Corps
Commanders, and almost all of them, if not all, were demanding that General Kayani get much tougher with the
Americans, even edging toward a break, Pakistanis who follow the army closely said.

Washington, with its own hard line against Pakistan, had pushed General Kayani into a defensive crouch, along
with his troops, and if the general was pushed out, the United States would face a more uncompromising anti-
American army chief, the Pakistani said.


To repair the reputation of the army, and to ensure his own survival, General Kayani made an extraordinary tour
of more than a dozen garrisons, mess halls and other institutions in the six weeks since the May 2 raid that
killed Bin Laden. His goal was to rally support among his rank-and-file troops, who are almost uniformly anti-
American, according to participants and people briefed.on the sessions.

During a long session in late May at the National Defense University, the premier academy in Islamabad, the
capital, one officer got up after General Kayani's address and challenged his policy of cooperation with the
United States. The officer asked, "If they don't trust us, how can we trust them?" according to Shaukaut Qadri,
a retired army brigadier who was briefed on the session. General Kayani essentially responded, "We can't," Mr.
Qadri said.

In response to pressure from his troops, Pakistani and American officials said, General Kayani had already
become a more obstinate partner, standing ever more firm with each high-level American delegation that has
visited since the raid to try and rescue the shattered American-Pakistani relationship.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781180 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781180 Date: 01/07/2016




In a prominent example of the new Pakistani intransigence, The New York Times reported Tuesday that,
according to American officials, Pakistan's spy agency had arrested five Pakistani informants who helped the
Central Intelligence Agency before the Bin Laden raid. The officials said one of them is a doctor who has
served as a major in the Pakistani Army. In a statement on Wednesday, a Pakistani military spokesman called
the story "false" and said no army officer had been detained. Over all, Pakistani and American officials said, the
relationship was now more competitive and combative than cooperative.

General Kayani told the director of the C.I.A., Leon E. Panetta, during a visit here last weekend that Pakistan
would not accede to his request for independent operations by the agency, Pakistani and American officials
said.

A long statement after the regular monthly meeting of the 11 corps commanders last week illuminated the
mounting hostility toward the United States, even as it remains the army's biggest patron, supplying at least $2
billion a year in aid.

The statement, aimed at rebuilding support within the army and among the public, said that American training
in Pakistan had only ever been minimal, and had now ended. "It needs to be clarified that the army had never
accepted any training assistance from the United States except for training on the newly inducted weapons and
some training assistance for the Frontier Corps only," a reference to paramilitary troops in the northwest tribal
areas, the statement said.

The statement said that the C.I.A.-run drone attacks against militants in the tribal areas "were not acceptable
under any circumstances."

Allowing the drones to continue to operate from Pakistan was "politically unsustainable," said the well-
informed Pakistani who met with General Kayani recently. As part of his survival mechanism, General Kayani
could well order the Americans to stop the drone program completely, the Pakistani said.

The Pakistanis have already blocked the supply of food and water to the base used for the drones, a senior
American official said, adding that they were gradually "strangling the alliance" by making things difficult for
the Americans in Pakistan.

The turmoil within the Pakistani Army has engendered the lowest morale since it lost the war in 1971 against
East Pakistan, now Bangladesh, army observers say. The anger and disillusionment stems from the fact that the
Obama administration decided not to tell Pakistan in advance about the Bin Laden raid — and that Pakistan was
then unable to detect or stop it.

That Bin Laden was living comfortably in Pakistan for years has evinced little outrage here among a population
that has consistently told pollsters it is more sympathetic to Al Qaeda than to the United States.

Even a well-known pro-American commander, Lt. Gen. Tariq Khan, who spent more than a year at Central
Command headquarters in Tampa, Fla., after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks had fallen in line with the new
ultranationalist sentiment against the Americans, a former army officer said.

The anger at the Americans was now making it more difficult for General Kayani to motivate the army to fight
against the Pakistani Taliban in what is increasingly seen as a fight on behalf of the United States, former
Pakistani soldiers said.

"The feeling that they are fighting America's war against their own people has a negative impact on the fighting
efficiency," said Javed Hussain, a former special forces officer in the Pakistani military.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781180 Date: 01/07/2016
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781180 Date: 01/07/2016




Discipline has become a worry, as has an open rebellion in the middle ranks of officers, particularly as rumors
circulate that some enlisted men have questioned whether General Kayani and his partner, Lt. Gen. Ahmed
Shuj a Pasha, the head of the chief spy agency, the Directorate for the Inter-Services Intelligence, should remain
in their jobs.

A special three-year extension General Kayani won in his position last year did not sit well among the rank and
file who perceived it as having been pushed by the United States to keep its man in the top job.

"Keeping discipline in the lower ranks is a challenge," said Mr. Qadri, the retired army brigadier.

General Kayani's problems have been magnified by a groundswell of unprecedented criticism from the public,
questioning both the army's competence and the lavish rewards for its top brass, something that also
increasingly rankles modestly paid enlisted men.

"Adding to this frustration and public pique is the lifestyle that the top brass of all the services has maintained,"
Talat Hussain, a prominent journalist who generally writes favorably about the military, wrote in Monday's
edition of the English-language newspaper Dawn. "This is not a guns versus butter argument, but a contrast
between the reality of the life led by the military elite at state expense and the general situation for ordinary
citizens."

Despite the resources the army soaks up — about 23 percent of Pakistan's annual expenditures — it has
appeared impotent since the May 2 raid. The infiltration three weeks later of the nation's largest naval base by
Qaeda commandos that left at least 10 security officers dead added to the sense of disarray.

According to the notes of a participant in the session at the National Defense University, General Kayani
acknowledged that Pakistan had mortgaged itself to the United States. The participant declined to be identified
because people at the session agreed that they would not divulge what was said.

In making the analogy to Pakistan as a mortgaged house, General Kayani said that if a person gave his house
against a loan and was unable to pay back the loan, the mortgage holder would intervene, the participant said.
"We are helpless," General Kayani said, according to the person's notes. "Can we fight America?"

NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781180 Date: 01/07/2016
