      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785860 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                                                RELEASE IN
                                                                                                                PART B6



From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                               Monday, May 2, 2011 11:08 AM
To:                                 'JilotyLC@state.gov'
Subject                             Fw: H: UBL, AQ & Libya. Sid
Attachments:                        hrc memo bin laden, aq & libya.docx



PIs print.


From: sbwhoeop           [mailto:sbwhoeop
Sent: Monday, May 02, 2011 09:12 AM
To: H
Subject: H: UBL, AQ & Libya. Sid




                                           CONFIDENTIAL



                                                    May 2, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Bin Laden, AQ & Libya


Latest report:


During the early morning of May 2, 2011 sources with access to the leadership of the Libyan rebellion's ruling Transitional
National Council (TNC) stated in confidence that they are concerned that the death of at Qa'ida leader Osama Bin Laden
will inspire at Qa'ida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) to use weapons they have obtained, which were originally intended
for the rebels in Libya, to retaliate against the United States and its allies for this attack in Pakistan. These individuals fear
that the use of the weapons in this manner will complicate the TNC's relationship with NATO and the United States,
whose support is vital to them in their struggle with the forces of Muammar al Qaddafi. In this regard they are concerned
that U.S. officials will believe reports, often created by the Tripoli Government, regarding the degree of influence exercised
by AQIM on the TNC.

These individuals note that the TNC officials are reacting to reports received during the week of April 25 from their own
sources of information, the French General Directorate for External Security (DGSE), and British external intelligence
service (MI-6), stating that AQIM has acquired about 10 SAM 7- Grail/Streela man-portable air-defense systems
(MANPADS or MPADS) from illegal weapons markets in Western Niger and Northern Mali. These weapons were
originally intended for sale to the rebel forces in Libya, but AQIM operatives were able to meet secretly with these arms
dealers and purchase the equipment. The acquisition of these sophisticated weapons creates a serious threat to air traffic
in Southern Morocco, Algeria, Northern Mali, Western Niger, and Eastern Mauritania.

(Source Comment: According to very sensitive sources, the Libyan rebels are concerned that AQIM may also obtain
SPIGOTT wire-guided anti-tank missiles and an unspecified number of Russian anti-tank mines made of plastic and
undetectable by anti-mine equipment. This equipment again was coming through Niger and Mali, and was intended for the
rebels in Libya. They note that AQIM is very strong in this region of Northwest Africa.)
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785860 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785860 Date: 01/07/2016




In the opinion of these knowledgeable individuals, Libyan rebel commanders are also concerned that the death of Bin
Laden comes at a time when sensitive information indicates that the leaders of AQIM are planning to launch attacks
across North Africa and Europe in an effort to reassert their relevance during the ongoing upheavals in Libya, as well as
the rest of North Africa and the Middle East. They believe the first step in this campaign was the April 30 bombing of a
café in Marrakesh, Morocco that is frequented by Western tourists. These individuals point out that AQIM also maintains
a wide reach in Europe.
The TNC leaders are also concerned that, with the death of Saif al-Arab Qaddafi, the youngest son of Muammar Qaddafi,
the Tripoli Govemment may pursue retaliation against the United States and its Westem allies through surrogate terrorist
groups, particularly Hezbollah. While the deaths of Bin Laden and Saif al-Arab are completely unrelated, two separate
and very dangerous groups will now be looking for revenge against the U.S. and its allies.
(Source Comment: These knowledgeable sources believe that the leaders of the TNC are also worried about the reaction
to the death of Bin Laden among rebel fighters and their supporters in Libya and Egypt, where the al Qa'ida leader was
very popular. These TNC officials do not want the death of Bin Laden to affect their relations with the West or their
support from NATO, the U.S., France, or Great Britain.)




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785860 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785860 Date: 01/07/2016




                                        CONFIDENTIAL



                                                May 2, 2011



 For: Hillary
 From: Sid
 Re: Bin Laden, AQ & Libya


 Latest report:


 During the early morning of May 2, 2011 sources with access to the leadership of the Libyan
 rebellion's ruling Transitional National Council (TNC) stated in confidence that they are
 concerned that the death of al Qa'ida leader Osama Bin Laden will inspire al Qa'ida in the
 Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) to use weapons they have obtained, which were originally intended for
 the rebels in Libya, to retaliate against the United States and its allies for this attack in Pakistan.
 These individuals fear that the use of the weapons in this manner will complicate the TNC's
 relationship with NATO and the United States, whose support is vital to them in their struggle
 with the forces of Muammar al Qaddafi. In this regard they are concerned that U.S. officials will
 believe reports, often created by the Tripoli Government, regarding the degree of influence
 exercised by AQIM on the TNC.

 These individuals note that the TNC officials are reacting to reports received during the week of
 April 25 from their own sources of information, the French General Directorate for External
 Security (DGSE), and British external intelligence service (MI-6), stating that AQIM has
 acquired about 10 SAM 7- Grail/Streela man-portable air-defense systems (MANPADS or
 MPADS) from illegal weapons markets in Western Niger and Northern Mali. These weapons
 were originally intended for sale to the rebel forces in Libya, but AQIM operatives were able to
 meet secretly with these arms dealers and purchase the equipment. The acquisition of these
 sophisticated weapons creates a serious threat to air traffic in Southern Morocco, Algeria,
 Northern Mali, Western Niger, and Eastern Mauritania.

 (Source Comment: According to very sensitive sources, the Libyan rebels are concerned that
 AQIM may also obtain SPIGOTT wire-guided anti-tank missiles and an unspecified number of
 Russian anti-tank mines made of plastic and undetectable by anti-mine equipment. This
 equipment again was coming through Niger and Mali, and was intended for the rebels in Libya.
 They note that AQIM is very strong in this region of Northwest Africa.)




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785860 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785860 Date: 01/07/2016




 In the opinion of these knowledgeable individuals, Libyan rebel commanders are also concerned
 that the death of Bin Laden comes at a time when sensitive information indicates that the leaders
 of AQIM are planning to launch attacks across North Africa and Europe in an effort to reassert
 their relevance during the ongoing upheavals in Libya, as well as the rest of North Africa and the
 Middle East. They believe the first step in this campaign was the April 30 bombing of a café in
 Marrakesh, Morocco that is frequented by Western tourists. These individuals point out that
 AQIM also maintains a wide reach in Europe.
 The TNC leaders are also concerned that, with the death of Saif al-Arab Qaddafi, the youngest
 son of Muammar Qaddafi, the Tripoli Government may pursue retaliation against the United
 States and its Western allies through surrogate terrorist groups, particularly Hezbollah. While
 the deaths of Bin. Laden and Saif al-Arab are completely unrelated, two separate and very
 dangerous groups will now be looking for revenge against the U.S. andits allies.
 (Source Comment: These knowledgeable sources believe that the leaders of the TNC are also
 worried about the reaction to the death of Bin Laden among rebel fighters and their supporters in
 Libya and Egypt, where the al Qa'ida leader was very popular. These TNC officials do not want
 the death of Bin Laden to affect their relations with the West or their support from NATO, the
 U.S., France, or Great Britain.)




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785860 Date: 01/07/2016
