    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794262 Date: 01/07/2016

                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                   B6



From:                            H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                            Saturday, April 14, 2012 12:12 PM
To:                              'monica.hanley
Subject:                         Fw: UAE -- NDI programs
Attachments:                     NDI GULF PROGRAM MING.docx



Pls print.


From: Mills, Cheryl D [mailto:MillsCD@state.gov]
Sent: Monday, April 09, 2012 02:30 PM
To: H
Subject: FW: UAE -- NDI programs




From: Posner, Michael H
Sent: Monday, April 09, 2012 2:25 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: UAE -- NDI programs



Cheryl,

Sorry for the delay in getting this to you. Following up on our call, the government of the UAE has accused
NDI, whose Dubai office opened in 2008, of targeting sectarian divides and violating the sovereignty of the
UAE through: 1) funding the primary Bahrain Shi'a party Wifaq, 2) training Muslim Brotherhood members
from the UAE and the Gulf, and 3) training how to protest and evade security services. According to NDI, the
UAE's allegations in general are "completely false" and NDI has records to prove it. The allegations go back to
2005 and are less focused on recent/ongoing activities. Les Campbell of NDI believes that UAE is more
interested in their activities in the Gulf rather than the Iran-focused activities out of Dubai.

You may have already seen emails from the UAE desk (Patrick Fischer) through Jeff. Both DRL and NEA have
undertaken an informal survey of USG funding provided to NDI, and have reached out to NDI to better
understand their non-USG funded activities in the region.

Les Campbell reports that NDI has no programs or activities in the UAE but the Dubai location, chosen for its
convenience and ease of travel, has been a coordinating office for programs in the Gulf region including:

    •     Training programs, in conjunction with the Saudi Ministry of Municipal Affairs, for Saudi elected and
          appointed municipal councilors. NDI has also organized seminars for Saudi women on leadership skills,
          public speaking and advocacy.

    •     Training programs for municipal councilors, in conjunction with local municipal authorities, in Bahrain,
          Kuwait and Qatar.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794262 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794262 Date: 01/07/2016



    •   Partnerships with Kuwaiti civil society organizations advocating for universal suffrage and subsequent
        training programs for women interested in running for office in Kuwait. NDI has been invited to send
        international observers to the last two Kuwaiti national elections and has provided training to Kuwaiti
        citizen election monitors.

   •    Seminars and training programs for Bahraini political societies, youth groups and women's groups,
        from across the political spectrum, to encourage broader participation in the Bahraini political system.

   •    Seminars, in conjunction with the Bahrain Institute for Political Development and the Bahraini
        parliament, for members of parliament and the shura council.

   •    Training for Qatar's Central Election Commission staff.

Funding for NDI's programs in the Gulf region has been provided by the State Department's Middle East
Partnership Initiative (MEP!), Bureau of Democracy Human Rights and Labor (DRL), USAID and the National
Endowment for Democracy (NED).

As with Egypt, our response to the situation needs to focus on the fact that the work that NDI coordinates out
of Dubai is very much in line with what NDI does in other places, and was all fully transparent. For example,
NDI's programs in Bahrain have provided technical assistance to political society leaders — government
supported politicians — offering consultative assistance as all sides seek a positive way forward:

   •        to review relevant legislation;

   •        discuss the implications of and opportunities in the reform measures introduced by King Hamad;

   •        strengthen the role of youth and providing training and support for women running for public
            office; and,

   •        carry out trainings covering topics such as communication skills, electoral campaign planning,
            strategic planning, voter outreach, advocacy strategy, media election coverage, domestic
            monitoring, candidate training and awareness campaigns.


With regard to internet freedom, and in response to the third accusation:

DRL has a $1.35m grant to ND!, signed in June 2011, in support of digital safety trainings for MENA activists
and bloggers. These workshops take place in Istanbul and Beirut, with participants expected to then lead
digital safety programs within their own countries (under NDI's continued guidance). The workshops do
include training on circumvention and secure communications.

There have been no Emirati participants in trainings and no workshops held in the UAE. Gulf-wide, there were
4 Yemenis and 3 Bahrainis involved in a January training in Istanbul; there was 1 Yemeni involved in a March
training in Beirut. NDI's Dubai office is not involved in administering this program. In fall 2011, NDI
attempted to recruit someone to work on the program out of the Dubai office, but did not find anyone with
the right skills and decided to drop it. In NDI's words, "Since then and beyond that, nothing related to this
program has been run, managed, or even linked to the Dubai office," nor has the office referred any
participants for workshops.
      I
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794262 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794262 Date: 01/07/2016




DRL has also provided an FY09 Internet freedom grant to NDI, signed and started in August 2010, that
originally would have had an Iran component involving the Dubai field staff. We switched that country pilot to
Belarus, so there has never been any Iran or MENA work under this grant, and no involvement by the Dubai
office.


NDI also runs a NEA-USAID Iran Program, launched in September 2011. One staff member, Slobodan Milic, is
based in Dubai but no program activities take place in Dubai, nor would Iranians travel to Dubai for this
program. Their project is an online program which aims to increase awareness of the absence of personal
freedoms for Iranian citizens and draw attention to the issue during the parliamentary election
season. Activities include an online platform that provides a vehicle for uploading, reporting and mapping of
human rights issues occurring around the parliamentary elections. Although the program includes guidance
on the safe and effective use of technology, as do most of USAID-NEA's online programming, this program
does not deal with issues of circumvention or more general internet freedom/electronic communications
objectives.

For further background on USG funding to NDI in the Gulf, I have attached a more detailed paper here.



Let me know if you need more or have any questions.




Mike




SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794262 Date: 01/07/2016
