      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793345 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                 B6


From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                             Wednesday, January 11, 2012 8:52 AM
To:                               'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject                           Fw: JOE NOCERA BP Makes Amends



PIs put Ken on call list.


From: Mills, Cheryl D [mailto:MillsCD©state.gov]
Sent: Tuesday, January 10, 2012 11:07 AM
To: H
Subject: FW: JOE NOCERA BP Makes Amends

fYI


From: Ken Feinberg
Sent: Tuesday, January 10, 2012 8:31 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: FW: JOE NOCERA BP Makes Amends

Cheryl:

I do hope all is well. It has been a very long time between conversations. I congratulate you on the splendid job you are
doing. The highlight of this Administration! Would you please make sure that the Secretary sees the op-ed piece which
appeared in today's New York Times (see below). She has been following my progress and this is a vindication of
sorts. Thanks. I hope our paths will cross again soon.

Ken




Subject: JOE NOCERA BP Makes Amends



BP Makes Amends
By JOE NOCERA

Today, I'm going to say some nice things about BP and some not so nice things about the lawyers who
are suing BP. Please don't spill your coffee.

As horrific as the Deepwater Horizon accident was in April 2010 — killing 11 rig employees,
while pouring millions of gallons of oil into the Gulf of Mexico — BP has performed quite admirably in
its aftermath. It has spared no expense in cleaning up the oil. It has set aside $1 billion to restore the
environment and coastal ecosystem. It underwrote an advertising campaign to lure tourists back to
the Gulf Coast. Today, less than two years after the spill, the beaches are sparkling, most fishermen
are working and many of the hotels are full.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793345 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793345 Date: 01/07/2016




At the urging of President Obama, BP also agreed to set up a $2o billion fund to compensate anyone
who could show that they'd been economically harmed by the accident. Ken Feinberg, the former
administrator of the Sept. 11 victim compensation fund, was put in charge the Gulf Coast Claims
Facility, as it was named. Feinberg has since paid out $6.3 billion to nearly 200,000 claimants. Daniel
Becnel, an attorney who has settled thousands of claims, says that his clients often receive more
money from Feinberg than they would have if they had gone to court. "You couldn't have done a
better job than Feinberg did," says Becnel.

To put it another way, the Gulf Coast Claims Facility has been a remarkably effective alternative to the
cumbersome way damages are usually meted out after a corporate accident: through the tort system.
Compare it, for instance, with the 1989 Exxon Valdez disaster in Alaska, which took nearly two
decades of court battles for the plaintiffs to finally get around $1.3 billion.

Indeed, the whole point of the gulf coast fund is to keep cases out of court; in return for
compensation, the claimants have to agree not to sue for further damages. There is much that is right
with this approach. Victims don't have to wait years — or decades — to get their money. The
uncertainty of litigation is eliminated. The victims get monetary damages, just as they would if they
won a court case, but without the expense of a lawsuit. They also pay less in legal fees. And if they
don't like what is being offered, well, they can still sue. It is, as they say, a win-win.

Except, it turns out, for a certain group of plaintiffs' lawyers who, despite the relative ease of using the
claims facility, is insisting on pursuing litigation against BP. They say they have more than 100,000
cases, though none are for big money, like the injured workers' cases; Feinberg has even settled most
of those. For months, these lawyers have been preparing for a "liability trial," currently set for late
February.

However that trial turns out, it's largely pointless: BP has already conceded liability, which it has
backed with $20 billion. The lawyers' motive can't be to.get more money than that; it's far more than
any court would ever award. Punitive damages can't be the reason either: federal law prevents most of
the claimants from getting punitive damages. No, there is only one reason this litigation is taking
place. The lawyers want the kind of big fees that only come with big lawsuits. Yet Feinbeig's approach
is proving so popular with claimants that many of their cases are evaporating.

So here's what they did. They went to the federal judge handling the BP litigation and asked him to
establish a "reserve" that would be made up of 6 percent of any future claims settled by Feinberg.
(They also want 4 percent from any damages Alabama and Louisiana get.) The judge, Carl Barbier — a
former plaintiffs' lawyer himself — agreed to do so without even holding a hearing. Eventually, some
or all of that reserve would be used to pay the lawyers. That's right: They are trying to grab fees from
clients they've never represented. Amazing. (Judge Barbier recently backed away a bit from his ruling
and is allowing both sides to file briefs that are due on Thursday.)


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793345 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793345 Date: 01/07/2016




When I asked how they could possibly justify this fee grab, I was told that their lawsuit was the main
reason Feinberg was willing to be so generous with BP's money. ButTony Buzbee, another lawyer who
has settled many claims through the fund, blew a gasket when I told him that. "They have not done
one thing so far that has benefitted my clients," he said. "My clients have chosen not to be a part of
their litigation. Why in the world should they have to pay them?"

It's a good question. The Gulf Coast Claims Facility has the potential to serve as a model for handling
future industrial accidents. It has proved that it can compensate victims quickly and fairly without the
ordeal and cost of litigation. But, for that to happen, it's not just companies that have to put aside
their greed. So do the lawyers.

********************************

Amy Weiss
Principal
Point Blank Public Affairs
5309 Cushing Place NW
Washington, DC 20016


www.pointbianKpa.com


This transmission is intended only for the use of the addressee and may contain information that is confidential, privileged and/or exempt from
disclosure. If you are not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution or copying of the
information contained herein is strictly unauthorized and prohibited. If you have received this communication in error, please notify the sender
immediately and delete this message. Thank you.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793345 Date: 01/07/2016
