     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794057 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                    B6


From:                            H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                            Tuesday, February 7, 2012 12:24 PM
To:                              'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject                          Fw: H: Intel, what's going on, NGOs Egypt. Sid
Attachments:                     hrc egypt ngos 020612.docx



Pls print.


From: sbwhoeop
Sent: Monday, February 06, 2012 06:40 PM
To: H
Subject: H: Intel, what's going on, NGOs Egypt. Sid




                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                               February 6, 2012



For: HRC
From: Sid
Re: Egypt NGOs

Below are two reports: first, on the decision-making and politics behind the arrest of the
U.S. and Western NGO officials; and, second, on the soccer riot, a related event. The
message was delivered through sources to high Egyptian officials.

Memo 1.
SOURCE: Sources with access to the highest levels of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt,
The Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, and Western Intelligence and security services.
      1. During the evening of February 5, 2012, an individual with access to the highest
levels of Egypt's Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) stated, on condition of
absolute secrecy, that the recent action by Egyptian security forces and courts against
American and other Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO) operating in Egypt were
taken after secret discussions between the leadership of the SCAF and the Muslim
Brotherhood (MB). In the opinion of this individual the MB, which controls the new
parliament through the Freedom and Justice Party (FJP), shares the SCAF concerns
regarding the threat posed by training being provided the NGOs to opposition political
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794057 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794057 Date: 01/07/2016




groups. The MB officials believe that these efforts will only serve to confuse the political
situation as Egypt moves toward civilian rule.
       2. According to this well informed source, while prosecutors cited violations of
Egyptian laws governing fund raising in ordering actions against the NGOs, the true
reasons lie in concerns over NGO contacts with secular/liberal political parties and
movements. The leaders of both organizations agreed that the deteriorating security
situation in Egypt is now complicated by a variety of foreign interests and that the NGOs
are the most obvious manifestation of these interests. This individual added that, while
the NGOs are popular with the secular/ liberal political parties and movements, they are
viewed as dangerous provocateurs by the rank and file of the military, the leaders of the
MB, the Freedom and Justice Party (FJP), and, most particularly, by the leaders of the
Salafist al-Nour Party.
       3. (Source Comment: According to this individual, the leaders of the SCAF
informed the senior members of the MB that the General Intelligence Directorate (GID)
continues to report that the National Democratic Institute, the International Republican
Institute, Freedom House, the German Konrad Adenauer Stiftung and other, less well
known, NGOs, are working with a variety of opposition political parties. The SCAF and
MB officials are particularly concerned over reports that members of these NGOs are
training their Egyptian contacts in political techniques used by parliamentary minorities
in other countries to press their programs. In the opinion of this individual, the leaders of
the MB also believe that the SCAF will absorb most of the international criticism for
actions taken against the NGOs. This person added that the SCAF is doing the dirty work,
and the MB/FJP/al-Nour coalition will reap the benefits in parliament, where the
secular/liberal opposition will miss the support and guidance of the NGOs.)
       4. When informed that their actions against the NGOs were putting at risk the
financial assistance Egypt, and particularly the Egyptian military, receives from the United
States, a senior General with ties to the leadership of the SCAF stated that "their hands
were tied" by the strong positions on this matter taken by the Islamist parties and the
ongoing anti-government activities of the secular parties. He then explained that SCAF
coinmander Field Marshall Mohammed Hussein Tantawi is well aware of the threat
associated with U.S. aid and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) program that must
also be approved by the U.S., having been given similar warnings by senior contacts in the
United States military. However, Tantawi feels that he must accept the possible loss of
American aid, if that is the price of maintaining control of the security situation in Egypt.
Tantawi apparently was quite upset when he was informed of the possibility of a reduction
in U.S. aid, and complications with the IMF package, pointing out, in the strongest terms,
that the NGO officials had been warned throughout late December 2011 and January 2012
that their actions were unacceptable to the Egyptian Government.
       5. (Source Comment: MB Supreme Guide Mohamed Badie informed a separate
individual that, while the SCAF had taken the action against the NG05, the United States
Government and the IMF must realize that these foreign funded institutions were
encouraging the activities of the secular and liberal groups protesting against both the
SCAF and the schedule for the transition to civilian rule, a schedule that the MB/FJP
supports. The activities of the secular/liberal groups are becoming increasingly violent
and there is a growing reaction among the devout Islamic majority of the Egyptian
population, including the rank and file members of the armed forces.)
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794057 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794057 Date: 01/07/2016




       6. In a separate conversation, a senior official of the SCAF expressed the concern
that many members of the Council do not believe the U.S. and IMF will suspend all
funding for Egypt. In the opinion of this individual, these senior officers in the SCAF, and
the leaders of the MB, have received, and understand all of the warnings on this matter
coming from U.S. officials, however; they will not realize the seriousness of the situation
until it is too late.
       7. (Source Comment: An individual with access to the leadership of the MB added
that once the transition to civilian rule has taken place, the MB will be able to negotiate
with the governments of the United States and the other Western powers and resolve
differences regarding the activities of western NGOs and businesses in the new, Islamic
Egypt. That said, this source repeated the belief that Western NGOs will not be able to
promote Western political tactics and practices among Egypt's opposition parties. This
source repeated a point originally expressed by contacts in the SCAF, that these moves
against the NGOs are supported by both the SCAF and the MB/al-Nour coalition, adding
that any indication that the SCAF was moderating its policies on the NGOs will be met by
strong resistance from the MB/FJP/al-Nour parliamentary coalition.)

Memo 2.
SOURCE: Sources with access to the highest levels of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt,
The Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, and Western Intelligence and security services.

       1. On February 3, 2012 a source with access to the senior levels of Egypt's Muslim
Brotherhood (MB) stated in confidence that Saad Al-Katany of the Freedom and Justice
Party (FJP), and the speaker of the lower house of the Egyptian parliament, is concerned
that the recent rioting inspired by a soccer match in Port Said was engineered by the
Egyptian General Intelligence Directorate (GID) on behalf of the Supreme Council of the
Armed Forces (SCAF). Al-Katany told Supreme Guide Mohamed Badie that military
officers loyal to the MB are reporting that the fighting that led to the riot was initiated by
GID personnel in the crowd. According to this individual, al-Katany is convinced that the
SCAF is setting the stage for a decree from the SCAF supporting extension of the state of
emergency, and delaying the transition to full civilian rule.
       2. (Source Comment: This well placed individual added that Badie does not share
al-Katany's concern, and attempted to discourage him from spreading the story. Badie
added that reliable contacts in the SCAF report that the real issue resides in the concern of
police and military personnel over the possibility that they will be held legally responsible
for any actions they take against the rioters. In Badie's opinion, with this in mind, the real
danger is that protesters in other parts of Egypt will realize that the police are reluctant to
act in these situations, and will take advantage of this situation. While disagreeing on the
background of the violence, Badie did state that he and al-Katany share the concern that
the result of this violence may be the same; the military moving in to restore order.)
       3. In a separate discussion, an individual with access to the senior levels of the
SCAF stated in strict confidence, that police officers and military personnel feel that their
authority has been undermined by the success of the 2011 revolution and the ongoing
demonstrations in Tahrir Square in Cairo. This individual compared these developments
to the situation in the former East Germany, and the states of Eastern Europe at the end of
the cold war. At that time the security forces of these countries were discredited by their
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794057 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794057 Date: 01/07/2016




association with the old regime, and reduced their level of activity accordingly. In all of
these cases the rates of violent crime rose dramatically during the years immediately after
the change of government.
      4. (Source Comment: This same individual noted that police and GID personnel are
warning SCAF leader and interim Head of State, Field Marshall Mohammed Hussein
Tantawi, that they should expect the rate of violent crime of all types to rise throughout
2012 and 2013.)




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794057 Date: 01/07/2016
