     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793507 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                           B6



From:                         Sidney Blumenthal
Sent:                         Friday, December 14, 2012 3:58 PM
To:
Subject:                      H: FYI. Want to make sure you see Jane Mayers piece on this subject. Sid



http://www.newyorker.comionline/blogs/newsdesk/2012/12/torture-in-kathryn-bigelows-zero-
dark-thirty.html

December 14, 2012


Zero Conscience in "Zero Dark Thirty"
Posted by Jane Mayer




At the same time that the European Court of Human Rights has issued a historic ruling condemning
the C.I.A.'s treatment of a terror suspect during the Bush years as "torture," a Hollywood movie about
the agency's hunt for Osama bin Laden, "Zero Dark Thirty"—whose creators say that they didn't want
to "judge" the interrogation program—appears headed for Oscar nominations. Can torture really be
turned into morally neutral entertainment?
"Zero Dark Thirty," which opens across the country next month, is a pulse-quickening film that
spends its first half hour or so depicting a fictionalized version of the Bush Administration's secret
U.S. interrogation program. In reality, the C.I.A.'s program of calibrated cruelty was deemed so
illegal, and so immoral, that the director of the F.B.I. withdrew his personnel rather than have them
collaborate with it, and the top lawyer at the Pentagon laid his career on the line in an effort to stop a
version of the program from spreading to the armed forces. The C.I.A.'s actions convulsed the
national-security community, leading to a crisis of conscience inside the top ranks of the U.S.
government. The debate echoed the moral seriousness of the political dilemma once posed by slavery,
a subject that is brilliantly evoked in Steven Spielberg's new film, "Lincoln"; by contrast, the director
of "Zero Dark Thirty," Kathryn Bigelow, milks the U.S. torture program for drama while sidestepping
the political and ethical debate that it provoked. In her hands, the hunt for bin Laden is essentially a
 police procedural, devoid of moral context. If she were making a film about slavery in antebellum
America, it seems, the story would focus on whether the cotton crops were successful.
After some critics called Bigelow a torture apologist, she defended the fairness and historical accuracy
 of her movie. "The film doesn't have an agenda, and it doesn't judge. I wanted a boots-on-the-ground
 experience," she told my New Yorker colleague Dexter Filkins, who interviewed her for a Talk of the
 Town piece. At a Los Angeles press junket, the film's screenwriter, Mark Boal, complained that critics
 were "mischaracterizing" the torture sequences: "I understand that those scenes are graphic and
 unsparing and unsentimental. But I think that what the film does over the course of two hours is show
 the complexity of the debate." His point was that because the film shows multiple approaches to
 intelligence gathering, of which torture is only one tactic, and because the torture isn't shown as
 always producing correct or instant leads, it offers a nuanced answer to the question of whether
 torture works.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793507 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793507 Date: 01/07/2016




But whether torture "worked" was far from the most important question about its use. I've seen the
film and, as much as I admired Bigelow's Oscar-winning picture "The Hurt Locker," I think that this
time, by ignoring the full weight of the dark history of torture, her work falls disturbingly short. To
begin with, despite Boal's contentions, "Zero Dark Thirty" does not capture the complexity of the
debate about America's brutal detention program. It doesn't include a single scene in which torture is
questioned, even though the Bush years were racked by internal strife over just that issue—again, not
just among human-rights and civil-liberties lawyers, but inside the F.B.I., the military, the Justice
Department, and the C.I.A. itself, which eventually abandoned waterboarding because it feared,
correctly, that the act constituted a war crime. None of this ethical drama seems to interest Bigelow.
To establish a baseline of moral awareness, she shows her heroine—a C.I.A. counterterrorism officer
called Maya, played by Jessica Chastain—delicately wincing as she hands the more muscled
interrogators a pitcher of water with which to waterboard a detainee. Maya is also shown standing
mutely by when the detainee is strung up by ropes, stripped naked, and forced to crawl in a dog collar.
In reality, when the C.I.A. first subjected a detainee to incarceration in a coffin-size "confinement
box," as is shown in the movie, an F.B.I. agent present at the scene threw a fit, warned the C.I.A.
contractor proposing the plan that it was illegal, counterproductive, and reprehensible. The fight went
all the way to the top of the Bush Administration. Bigelow airbrushes out this showdown, as she does
virtually the entire debate during the Bush years about the treatment of detainees.
The lone anti-torture voice shown in the film is a split-second news clip of President Barack Obama,
taken from a "60 Minutes" interview, in which he condemns torture. It flashes on a television screen
that's in the background of a scene set in Pakistan; the movie's terrorist-hunters, who are holding a
meeting, barely look up, letting Obama's pronouncement pass without comment. "By this point in the
film," as the CNN national-security analyst Peter Bergen wrote recently, "the audience has already
seen that the C.I.A. has employed coercive interrogation techniques on an al Qaeda detainee that
produced a key lead in the hunt for bin Laden. In the film, Obama's opposition to torture comes off as
wrongheaded and prissy."
Bigelow has portrayed herself as a reluctant truth-teller. She recently described the film's torture
scenes as "difficult to shoot." She said, "I wish it was not part of our history. But it was."
Yet what is so unsettling about "Zero Dark Thirty" is not that it tells this difficult history but, rather,
that it distorts it. In addition to excising the moral debate that raged over the interrogation program
during the Bush years, the film also seems to accept almost without question that the C.I.A.'s
"enhanced interrogation techniques" played a key role in enabling the agency to identify the courier
who unwittingly led them to bin Laden. But this claim has been debunked, repeatedly, by reliable
sources with access to the facts. As the Washington Post's Greg Sargent first reported, shortly after
bin Laden was killed, Leon Panetta, then the director of the C.I.A., sent a letter to Arizona Senator
John McCain, clearly stating that "we first learned about 'the facilitator / courier's nom de guerre'
from a detainee not in the C.I.A.'s custody." Panetta wrote that "no detainee in C.I.A. custody revealed
the facilitator / courier's full true name or specific whereabouts."
The Senators Dianne Feinstein, a California Democrat and the chairman of the Senate Intelligence
Committee, and Carl Levin, a Michigan Democrat and the chairman of the Senate Armed Services
Committee, have undermined the film's version of events further still. "The original lead information
had no connection to C.I.A. detainees," they wrote in their own letter, revealed by the Post last year.
Feinstein and Levin noted that a third detainee in C.I.A. custody did provide information on the
courier, but, importantly, they stressed that "he did so the day before he was interrogated by the C.I.A.
using their coercive interrogation techniques." In other words, contrary to the plotline of "Zero Dark
Thirty," and contrary to self-serving accounts of C.I.A. officers implicated in the interrogation
 program, senators with access to the record say that torture did not produce the leads that led to
finding and killing bin Laden.
 Top senators on the Senate Intelligence Committee and the Senate Armed Services Committee have
 amplified that position in additional interviews this week. Speaking with the Huffington Post,
 Feinstein said of the movie's narrative, "Based on what I know, I don't believe it is true." Republicans,
 too, criticized the movie's plot. "It's wrong. It's wrong. I know for a fact, not because of this report—
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793507 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793507 Date: 01/07/2016




my own knowledge—that waterboarding, torture, does not lead to reliable information ... in any case—
not this specific case—in any case," said John McCain, the top Republican on the Armed Services
Committee, who was himself tortured during the Vietnam War. The Huffington Post also quoted
South Carolina Senator Lindsey Graham, another Republican member of the Armed Services
Committee, saying, "I would argue that it's not waterboarding that led to bin Laden's demise. It was a
lot of good intelligence-gathering from the Obama and Bush administrations, continuity of effort,
holding people at Gitmo, putting the puzzle together over a long period of time—not torture."
As Scott Shane wrote in the Times on Thursday, so little is publicly known about the C.I.A.'s erstwhile
interrogation program that it is nearly impossible for outsiders to assess the facts with total
confidence. But for the past three years, Democratic staffers at the Senate Intelligence Committee
have been compiling six thousand pages of records related to the secret program, and in doing so they
have found little to celebrate. It is hard to understand, then, why the creators of "Zero Dark Thirty" so
confidently credit the program.
In addition to providing false advertising for waterboarding, "Zero Dark Thirty" endorses torture in
several other subtle ways. At one point, the film's chief C.I.A. interrogator claims, without being
challenged, that "everyone breaks in the end," adding, "it's biology." Maybe that's what they think in
Hollywood, but experts on the history of torture disagree. Indeed, many prisoners have been tortured
to death without ever revealing secrets, while many others—including some of those who were
brutalized during the Bush years—have fabricated disinformation while being tortured. Some of the
disinformation provided under duress during those years, in fact, helped to lead the U.S. into the war
in Iraq under false premises.
At another, point in the film, an elderly detainee explains that he wants to cooperate with the U.S.
because he "doesn't want to be tortured again." The clear implication is that brutalization brings
breakthroughs. Other ways of getting intelligence, such as bribing sources with expensive race cars,
are shown to work, too. But while those scenes last only a few minutes, the torture scenes seem to go
on and on.                                                                                        •
The filmmakers subtly put their thumb on the pro-torture scale, as Emily Bazelon put it, in another
scene, too. A C.I.A. officer complains that there is no way for him to corroborate a lead on bin Laden's
whereabouts now that the detainees in Guantanamo all have lawyers. The suggestion is that if they are
given due process rather than black eyes, there will be no way to get the necessary evidence. This is a
canard, given that virtually all suspects in the American criminal-justice system have lawyers, yet
their cases proceed smoothly and fairly every day.
Bigelow has stressed that she had "no agenda" when she made "Zero Dark Thirty." Unsurprisingly,
though, those who have defended the brutalization of detainees have already begun embracing the
film as evidence that they are right. Joe Scarborough, the conservative host of MSNBC's show
"Morning Joe," said recently that the film's narrative, "whether you find it repugnant or not," shows
that the C.I.A. program was effective and "led to the couriers, that led, eventually, years later, to the
killing of Osama bin Laden." My guess is that this is just the beginning, and that by the time millions
of Americans have seen this movie, they will believe that, as Frank Bruni put it in a recent Times
column, "No waterboarding, no bin Laden."
Perhaps it's unfair to expect the entertainment industry to convey history accurately. Clearly, the
creators of "Zero Dark Thirty" are storytellers who really know how to make a thriller. And it's true
that there are no rules when it comes to fiction. As Boal, the screenwriter, has protested in recent
interviews, "It's a movie, not a documentary." But in the very first minutes of "Zero Dark Thirty,"
before its narrative begins to unspool, the audience is told that the story it is about to see is "based on
first-hand accounts of actual events." If there is an expectation of accuracy, it is set up by the
 filmmakers themselves. It seems they want it both ways: they want the thrill that comes from
 revealing what happened behind the scenes as history was being made and the creative license of
 fiction, which frees them from the responsibility to stick to the truth.
 Knowing the real facts—the ones that led the European Court of Human Rights to condemn America
 for torture this week—I had trouble enjoying the movie. I've interviewed Khaled El-Masri, the German
 citizen whose suit the E.C,H.R. adjudicated. He turned out to be a case of mistaken identity, an
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793507 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793507 Date: 01/07/2016




innocent car salesman whom the C.I.A. kidnapped and held in a black-site prison for four months,
and who was "severely beaten, sodomized, shackled, and hooded." What Masri lived through was so
harrowing that, when I had a cup of coffee with him, a few years ago, he couldn't describe it to me
without crying. Maybe I care too much about all of this to enjoy it with popcorn. But maybe the
creators of "Zero Dark Thirty" should care a little bit more.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793507 Date: 01/07/2016
