UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778939 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                           RELEASE IN FULL


                                      CONFIDENTIAL



                                              February 12, 2011



 For: Hillary
 From: Sid
 Re: Intel report and options: What really happened and what should happen now


     I.     What Really Happened

 Throughout the day on 10 February Army General Hassan al-Roueine, the Commander of the
 Cairo military district, reported to his superiors on the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces
 (SCAF) that his sources watching the demonstrators were reporting that on 11 February the
 student leaders of the demonstrations planned to try and enter the Presidential Palace, the
 Parliament building, the old Royal Palace in Alexandria, and other government buildings. Al-
 Roueine added that his troops would have to use force to protect these buildings, and this would
 lead to violent confrontations that would destroy the relationship between the soldiers and
 people.

 Throughout the day on 10 February, Minister of Defense Field Marshall Hussein Tatawi, and
 Armed Forces Chief of Staff Lt. General Sami Annan and other leaders of the SCAF met with
 Mubarak and Vice President Omar Suleiman in an effort to persuade the President to step down
 as President, placing authority in the hands of the Armed Forces Council. The Army Officers
 also wanted to preclude Suleiman (an Air Force General) from succeeding Mubarak. The
 discussions were heated and revolved around Mubarak's desire to depart with honor, and a
 guarantee that any new government would not seek seize his possessions and personal funds. In
 the end a compromise was reached that would allow Mubarak to move to his home in Sharm el-
 Sheikh, where he could be protected, and maintain the title of President, while Suleiman
 managed the transition to a new government, under the control of the SCAF.

 Following Mubarak's speech during the night of 10 February al-Roueine's sources reported that
 the speech had confused the issue by leaving the demonstrator's that he was maintaining control
 of the country. Again, al-Roueine warned that violent encounters between demonstrators and
 troops on 11 February. Suleiman received similar information from his intelligence sources. Al-
 Roueine repeated warnings from 10 February that the troops, who are conscripts, would not fire
 on the crowds for any extended period of time, and they could be faced with an Iranian style
 uprising if these confrontations began.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778939 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778939 Date: 01/07/2016




  Early in the morning of 11 February Vice President Suleiman, and General Annan warned
  Mubarak of the problems anticipated later that day. Annan also assured Mubarak that King
  Abdullah of Saudi Arabia would guarantee that he would have a significant personal fortune,
  even if foreign banks attempted to freeze his personal accounts. (Note: Switzerland froze
  Mubarak's personal bank accounts shortly after he stepped down.) Annan also told Mubarak
  that the SCAF would protect his honor and reputation. Annan added that he would stay in Sharm
  el-Sheikh with Mubarak until the situation stabilized, and guarantee his security (Note:
  According to one source Annan also wanted to ensure that Mubarak did not change his mind and
  attempt to retain power at the last minute.) With this in mind, Mubarak agreed to allow
  Suleiman to announce his departure.

  According to these sources the military—in particular the Army—has preserved their role as the
  most important institution in the country, with Defense Minister, Field Marshal Mohammed
  Hussein Tantawi as the most powerful individual. Suleiman's status remains unclear but well
  informed sources say that Egypt is returning to the 1952 model of ruling the state via a council of
  army officers. The question now is to what extent the military elite will share power with its
  civilian counterparts.

  Whether the military stays true to its commitment to hold elections on schedule in September
  remains to be seen. If elections are held, however, the military must have a political vehicle in
  place to counter opposition forces, particularly the Muslim Brotherhood.

  The fate of the ruling National Democratic Party (NDP) thus lies in question. Without the NDP,
  the regime will have effectively collapsed and the military could run into greater difficulty in
  managing the country on a daily basis.

  While the SCAF will serve as a provisional government, it will likely want to retain as much of
  the ruling NDP bureaucracy as possible, incorporating elements of the opposition to manage the
  transition. Sustaining its hold over power while crafting a democratic government will be the
  biggest challenge for the military as it tries to avoid regime change while also dealing with a
  potential constitutional crisis.

  The SCAF is also watching the pro-democracy forces to get a clear picture of how many and
  what types of political parties emerge from this process. In the meantime they plan to call on the
  goodwill of the population toward the troops to restore order. The most difficult task will be the
  return of police officers to the street, since they were involved in the most violent confrontations
  with the pro-democracy demonstrators.

  (Source Comment: Some Egyptian political figures – including some senior military officers--
  are referring to this change of leadership as a military coup, while others see it as the regime—
  and the Army-- preserving their positions of leadership under a system put in place by
  Mubarak's mentors, Gamal Abdel Nasser and Anwar al-Sadat, during the 1952 officers revolt
  against King Farouk. Some younger army officers are calling for a "Turkish solution," where
  the Army takes power in a crisis, acting as the guarantor of civilian democracy.)




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778939 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778939 Date: 01/07/2016




  II. Options:

     1. The SCAF as promised must lift the state of emergency as soon as possible.

     2. The best solution is the "Turkey solution," where the army maintains its status and
        position in society, but stays in its barracks under a democratic order. That requires a
        stated agreement that the army is the guarantor of democracy and elections. In the future,
        the fear of direct army intervention in politics can act as a moderating force used by
        moderate politicians to stigmatize radicals of any stripe. The army leadership will be
        satisfied; the generals don't want to run the country, especially after the Mubarak
        experience.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778939 Date: 01/07/2016
