    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779310 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                    B6


From:                            sbwhoeop
Sent:                            Wednesday, February 23, 2011 1:11 PM
To:
Subject:                         H: Latest Libya intel, lots of stuff. Sid
Attachments:                     hrc memo latest libya 022311.docx; hrc memo latest libya 022311.docx




                                                CONFIDENTIAL



                                              February 23, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Latest Libya intel


There's a lot of fresh intelligence here. On the first item (marked unconfirmed), I have heard from an
independent source (a former Qaddafi counselor) that it is accurate.


MOST RECENT REPORTING (UNCONFIRMED, PLEASE HANDLE ACCORDINGLY): European
security officials have received unconfirmed (repeat unconfirmed) reporting that Muammar Qaddafi has order
the commanders of the Libyan Air Force to develop plans to destroy the Libyan oil facilities in the event he is
killed or driven from the country. According to this source the Air Force officers were stunned by what they
describe as Qaddafi wanting to leave nothing behind for his enemies. These officers do not believe they can
find pilots to fly such missions.)


(Source Comment: Senior advisors believe that Muammar Qaddafi may lose control of Tripoli in the next five
(5) days, in which case he will be forced retreat to his fortress in the southern desert, from which he can fight on
for some time, supported by loyal followers and mercenaries. His hope in this case would be that the various
tribal councils now being set up as parts of a potential interim government will begin fighting with each other,
allowing him to stage a return to power in the future. Qaddafi discussed this situation with two of his sons
Montasem and Saif al-Islam Qaddafi (living in London.) It is this possibility that Saif al-Islam is referring to
when he has warned of civil war on several occasions. In this regard, Qaddafi is counting on the support of

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779310 Date: 01/07/2016
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779310 Date: 01/07/2016




Chad's President Idriss Debi, who was able to defeat the forces of his predecessor, Hussein Habri, only with
Qaddafi's aid and support in 1990-91.)


Overview: As of February 23 an official of a Western security services stated privately that as many as 1,500
people have been killed in fighting between Libyan forces—augmented by mercenaries from a variety of
African countries--and anti-government demonstrators. (Source Comment: This official adds that members of
the family of Muammar Qaddafi attempted to fly to Malta on February 23, but were turned back by Maltese
authorities.) At the same time, senior European officials believe that as more members of the security forces go
over to the opposition Qaddafi may lose control of Tripoli, at which point he will be forced to retire to his
fortress in the Southern desert.


A senior official of the Libyan External Security Organization (ESO) stated privately that Qaddafi believes he
has lost control of the majority of troops in the Libyan Army, and he no longer trusts the National Guard, the
Peoples Militia, the Navy, and even his old colleagues in the Air Force. Qaddafi continues to have confidence
in the ESO, and his Presidential Guard.


Over the weekend of February 19 Army Major General Mahmoud Suleiman, commander of the Tobruk
garrison, warned Qaddafi's son Montasem that his troops would not continue to fire on demonstrators and that
many of his men were defecting to the opposition. In turn, with his father's agreement, Montasem made contact
with security officials in Chad, Benin, Nigeria, and a number of other West African countries to recruit
mercenary troops to use in suppressing the demonstrations. With the agreement of the security officials in these
countries Libyan officials recruited 3,000-5,000 private soldiers. (Source Comment: Qaddafi has cultivated
relationships in these West African countries over the last twenty years.) General Suleiman joined the
opposition on the morning 23 February.


These mercenary forces have taken part in fighting across Libya and have been blamed by observers for many
of the casualties inflicted on the demonstrators. At the same time, a number of these foreign troops have fallen
into the hands of demonstrators and been killed, with their bodies set out for public view. There have also been
instances where Africans not involved in the fighting have been attacked and killed by the demonstrators.


Current Developments: During the evening of February 23 a well placed source stated that as the situation
throughout Libya deteriorates Qaddafi is telling senior advisors and family members that he is being betrayed
by the United States, Great Britain, Italy, and many European Union Countries. At the beginning of the current
crisis Qaddafi was convinced that his improved relations with the Western nations would allow him to use harsh


         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779310 Date: 01/07/2016
          UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779310 Date: 01/07/2016




tactics against protestors   while avoiding serious international repercussions. As these tactics fail to end the
demonstration and members of the Army and other Security forces go over to the demonstrators, Qaddafi has
become increasingly isolated and erratic in his behavior. He is now dealing with Montasem and members of his
immediate family and fears that Western Governments may attempt assassinate him in an effort to prevent
further disruption of Libya's oil industry.


The Italian Government is paying close attention to the situation in Libya, and the Italian External Intelligence
Service (SISME) estimates that up to 500,000 Libyans will attempt reach Malta and Southern Europe if the
situation in Libya continues to deteriorate. With this in mind the Italians are reaching out to the leaders of the
al-Sanusi tribe—the old royal family—and encouraging them to form a council of tribal leaders. These groups
will call for a return to the pre-1969 constitution for a short period of time, using this as a stabilizing factor,
while a new constitution is drafted and elections held. (Source Comment: An officer of the current government
stated that it would be interesting to see how the young demonstrators react to the attempts of these tribal
leaders to gain power. This same individual stated that the effort to form a new government will be complicated
by the attempts by Qaddafi loyalists like former protocol chief Nouri Al Masmari and the Ministers of Justice
and the Interior to reinvent themselves as dissidents. Finally, this individual noted that former Minister of
Justice Mustafa Mohamed Abud Al Jeleil has told European contacts that he has evidence establishing a direct
link between Qaddafi and the Lockerbee bombing. He is weighing the possibility that by exposing this
information he may ingratiate himself to the West.




          UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779310 Date: 01/07/2016
