     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785853 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                         B6



From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                             Wednesday, March 9, 2011 7:55 AM
To:                               Huma Abedin
Subject:                          Fw: H: serious trouble for Libyan rebels. Sid
Attachments:                      hrc memo serious problems libyan rebels 030911.docx



Can you print for me w/o any identifiers?


From: sbwhoeop
Sent: Wednesday, March 09, 2011 07:06 AM
To: H
Subject: H: serious trouble for LIbyan rebels. Sid




                                        CONFIDENTIAL




                                                March 9, 2011




For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Serious problems for Libyan rebels

The latest report:



(Source Comment: Private individuals in Europe, with ties to the leadership of the National Libyan Council
(NLC), plan to urge the NLC military committee to consider hiring private troops (mercenaries) to support,
organize, and train the rebel forces in Libya. These individuals believe that NATO and the Western allies will
not make a decision to aid the rebels until they are faced with a humanitarian disaster, and that the revolution is
in danger. At the same time, these individuals believe a small number of private troops could turn the battle
against Qaddafi's forces, particularly if they are equipped with sophisticated anti-aircraft weapons. These
individuals also believe that experienced troops will have little trouble shooting down Libyan aircraft and attack
helicopters. In the opinion of these sources, this would have a devastating psychological affect on Qaddafi's
troops.)


During the afternoon of March 8, individuals with access to Saif al Islam Qaddafi stated in confidence that
Muammar al Qaddafi is increasingly confident that his troops can drive back rebel forces attempting to advance
on Tripoli from Benghazi. According to these individuals, Qaddafi continues to believe that, if he and his
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785853 Date: 01/07/2016
          UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785853 Date: 01/07/2016




supporters can hold on to power for the next two weeks, the morale of the rebel forces will begin to falter, while
the opposition NLC, and the tribal leaders will begin to fight among themselves.

Knowledgeable individuals with access to the European security community state that they believe reports that
Qaddafi may be preparing to flee the country are false. That said, they add that, in their opinion, the NATO
surveillance of Libya will be able to tell if and when Qaddafi does prepare to leave. They add that to date there
appears to be no activity indicating that such a move is about to take place.

(Source Comment: According to knowledgeable individuals, military commanders loyal to Qaddafi, including
his son Khamis, are surprised that NATO and the other Western military organizations have not taken a more
direct hand in the fighting. They continue to be concerned over this possibility, particularly in the wake of the
capture of Dutch Marines west of Tripoli, and reports of British Special Forces troops being detained by rebel
forces near Benghazi, while attempting to contact the NLC. That said, these military commanders still believe
that NATO, and particularly the United States are using satellite imagery and other sophisticated surveillance
devices to monitor the military situation in Libya. They have warned Qaddafi, that although the Western
powers appear to be reluctant to enter the fighting, this surveillance can identify anti-aircraft facilities and other
sensitive targets, and allows NATO commanders to move quickly if they decide to implement a no fly zone
over Libya, or become more directly involved in aiding the rebels. Qaddafi remains confident that NATO and
the Western allies will continue to debate a course of action for the immediate future. He also assured his
commanders that neither the Arab League nor the Organization of African Unity (OAU) would participate in, or
support any attack on Libya. Finally, according to these sources, Qaddafi believes that Russia and China will
not support any action that involves increasing the military role the United States or NATO.)


In Benghazi, individuals with access to the NLC state in confidence that despite the best efforts of the NLC, a
unified governing body has yet to emerge. At present, NLC leader Mustafa Abdel Galil is experiencing limited
success in his efforts attract members of the academic and student movements to the NLC. Galil is from the
town of Albeida, northeast of Benghazi and has family and traditional ties to many academic and civic leaders
in the region. The leaders of the el -Senussi family continues to assert that they should be the basis
for an interim government. Galil and his supporters reject this, and only one member of the el-
Senussi has been allowed to work with the NLC. (Source Comment: This individual was
imprisoned by Qaddafi for many years and is respected by all sides.).


PORTS:

Individuals with access to the military committee of the NLC stated in confidence that as of March 8 the major
Libyan oil ports of Ras Lanuf and Brega in the eastern part of the country are closed. The Libyan army fought
rebels for control of Ras Lanuf on March 7 and a rebel official reported that a captured Libyan Army officer
stated that Qaddafi would attack oil fields if he believes that the rebels were winning the conflict.

On Saturday, March 5 a Turkish owned vessel left Ras Lanuf with over 500,000 barrels of crude oil. Sources
with access to the NLC stated that this was the last cargo vessel to sail from that port. (Source Comment: These
individuals said that on March 7 the NLC received word that the port of Tobruk was operational. Various
sources reported on March 7 that the general cargo ports of Tripoli, Benghazi and Khoms were operational.)

The NLC sources add that many of the oil ports appear to be closed, and too dangerous to use. During the week
of February 28 London's marine insurance market added Libya to a list of areas deemed high risk.

OIL PRODUCTION

          UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785853 Date: 01/07/2016
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785853 Date: 01/07/2016




According to The International Energy Agency, before the uprising Libyan wells pumped around 1.6 million
barrels per day (bpd). As of Friday, 1 million bpd of this oil production was lost, after foreign oil firms
evacuated their workers.




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785853 Date: 01/07/2016
