        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785286 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                                RELEASE IN
                                                                                                FULL


From:                             McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov >
Sent:                             Saturday, May 28, 2011 6:34 AM
To:                               H; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma
Subject:                          FW: PAKISTAN MEDIA ANALYSIS, SPECIAL SATURDAY EDITION, May 28, 2011



fyi

From: Mathews, George D On Behalf Of Islamabad, Information Section
Sent: Saturday, May 28, 2011 6:28 AM
To: Islamabad, Information Section
Subject: PAKISTAN MEDIA ANALYSIS, SPECIAL SATURDAY EDITION, May 28, 2011

                              PAKISTAN MEDIA ANALYSIS
           SPECIAL SATURDAY EDITION: ISLAMABAD VISIT OF SECRETARY CLINTON
                          SBU — For U.S. Government purposes only
                                      May 28, 2011

      • Secretary Clinton's trip to Islamabad dominates Saturday news
      • Headlines largely positive; editorials remain skeptical
      • Key messages: "Relations at a turning point," and "No evidence that senior leaders knew about
        OBL"
      • Storm clouds ahead? Gilani tells Clinton: stop drone strikes

Secretary Clinton's Friday visit to Islamabad was the lead story in all Pakistani media Saturday. Coverage was
largely straightforward on the front pages of the main dailies, although the reaction among TV commentators
and editorial writers ranged from skeptical to critical. The overall tone is that while Pakistan and the U.S. have
by no means kissed and made up, they have at least crawled back from the precipice.

Most Urdu headlines trumpeted the Secretary's exhortation at her Embassy press conference that "Pakistan
must do more on al Qaida," as mass-circulation "Jang" had it. Her comment that there is no evidence that
senior Pakistani leaders knew OBL was in Abbottabad was highlighted in nearly all coverage. English dailies
picked up a wider variety of themes: "Pak-US ties at a turning point," "Pakistan needs to take decisive steps
against terrorists," and "Anti-Americanism, and conspiracy theories will not end problems." The headline in
the leading English paper, "Dawn," claimed, "Split in Pakistan-US ties averted."

Most TV news bulletins and front pages juxtaposed the Secretary's comments with reports that Prime Minister
Gilani "clearly and categorically" told Secretary Clinton that the GOP intends to implement a resolution of
parliament which calls for a review of US-Pak relations if drone strikes continue. Most vernacular press also
reported that Chief of Army Staff General Kayani told JCS Admiral Mullen that the, "ISI will either cooperate
with the CIA on equal grounds, or will not cooperate at all" — a story almost entirely absent from the English
media space.

The Secretary's visit engendered a more critical response on the editorial pages. "Jang" wrote that "Pakistan is
facing a very serious situation due to its all-out support to the U.S. and its allies in the war on terror, and attacks
on its military installations, troops, check-posts and police stations have become a daily practice.... It is
unprecedented that so many American officials have ever visited Pakistan in such a short span of time, and
sought to achieve their objectives by exerting diplomatic pressure." Number-two "Nawa-i-Waqt" opined, "By
advising Pakistan to continue its efforts against terrorism after the NATO troops' withdrawal from Afghanistan,
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785286 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785286 Date: 01/07/2016




the United States has spilt the beans that it will continue to engage Pakistan in the war that is being fought to
safeguard U.S. interests." Another widely-read Urdu paper, "Express," piled on: "Every American official says
the same things whenever he or she comes to Pakistan, or speaks in Washington, DC, hence it will not be wrong
to say that the Secretary of State Clinton has just harped on the 'do more' mantra."

TV talking heads made much of the Secretary's comment that there was no evidence that senior Pakistani
officials knew bin Laden's whereabouts, and the usual professional anti-Americanists used the Secretary's visit
to vent their spleen anew. On Dunya TV, Cricketer-turned-politician Itnran Khan claimed, "Pakistan-U.S.
relations have not been based on the principle of parity and mutual respect. It is a master-slave relationship
cultivated by the Americans to achieve their national goals." Khan added that, "Osama's killing has provided
the U.S. a rare and golden opportunity to leave Afghanistan. They were facing a humiliating defeat there. But
now they can tell their people that the real goal of the war has been achieved." Another well known journalist
said on Aaj TV that "We [Pakistan] have lost nearly 35,000 men, and our national economy suffered a loss
worth $68 billion, while we have received only $19 billion from the Americans over the last decade. On the
other hand, Washington 'rewarded' us by signing a nuclear deal with our archrival, New Delhi, while
expressing baseless doubts on our sincerity in fighting the war against terrorism." On Dunya TV, analyst
Moeed Pirzada said that even "pro-U.S." Pakistanis are exasperated with the U.S. after Abbottabad and are
thinking of severing the alliance, but that the Pakistani government will probably have to compromise since
their bargaining power had been undercut by the discovery of OBL.

Urdu Editorials:

"U.S. Officials' Visits — We must Defend our Stand," an editorial in the leading mass-circulation populist,
often sensational Urdu daily "Jang" (cir. 300,000) (05/28)

"Pakistan is facing a very serious situation because of to its all-out support for the U.S. and its allies in the war
on terror. Attacks on its military installations, troops, check-posts and police stations have become a daily
occurrence. Following the Abbottabad operation and the attack on the Mehran base in Karachi and security
facilities, some quarters are expressing apprehension that terrorists are planning to launch suicide assaults on the
Artillery Center in Attock and the Pakistan Ordinance Factory. With growing terrorist incidents in Pakistan,
U.S. officials including Secretary Clinton, Admiral Mullen, the NATO Commander in Afghanistan, the CIA
Deputy Director, and Senator John Kerry have started their visits to Pakistan. These visits give an impression
that, by meeting with Pakistani officials, the American officials want to increase U.S. pressure on Pakistan, and
that the U.S. does not want to give the Pakistani rulers any more time. It is unprecedented that so many
American officials have ever visited Pakistan in such a short span of time, and sought to achieve their objectives
by exerting diplomatic pressure."


"Hillary and Mullen's Pressure on Pakistan to Do More," an editorial in the second largest Urdu daily
"Nawa-i-Waqt" (circ. 150,000) (05/28)

"It seems that the recent visit of Secretary Hillary Clinton and Admiral Mike Mullen is a strategy to force
Pakistan to remain stuck to its assurances of achieving the U.S. targets in any way. By advising Pakistan to
continue its efforts against terrorism after the NATO troops' withdrawal from Afghanistan, the U.S. has spilled
the beans that it will continue to engage Pakistan in the war that is being fought to safeguard the U.S.
interests. Now, if the U.S. is telling us to resolve our issues by ourselves, then there is no need for us to remain
engaged in the U.S. war and devastate our own country. If the U.S. does not care about our independence,
sovereignty and security, then we also have nothing to do with their (American's) problems."


"Hillary Clinton Visit to Pakistan and Pak-U.S. Ties," an editorial note in the center-right Urdu daily
"Pakistan" (circ. 10,000) (05/28)
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785286 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785286 Date: 01/07/2016




"Secretary Hillary Clinton said nothing new during her visit to Pakistan. She just repeated the same
stereotypes: that the U.S. appreciates Pakistan's role and performance in war on terror, but it should take more
action. Every American official says the same things whenever he or she comes to Pakistan, or speaks in
Washington DC, thus it is not wrong to say that Secretary of State Clinton just harped on the 'do more'
mantra... Whenever a terrorist incident occurs in Pakistan, the Taliban or the TTP immediately take
responsibility, but our government neither takes any action against them, nor hunts the Taliban sympathizers in
different cities and towns of Pakistan. Perhaps that is the reason that every American official who visits
Pakistan criticizes Pakistan. We need to devise a two-pronged policy: a. either we will have to convince
Taliban to renounce violence and rejoin the mainstream of the Pakistani society, or b. if they (Taliban) are not
ready to do so, then we will have to wipe them out by force."

The News — (5/28)




The Nation — 5/28




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785286 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785286 Date: 01/07/2016




Daily Times — (5/28)




Comments in various bulletins on TV networks:

1. Neither Hillary Clinton's visit nor meetings behind closed doors can remove deep-rooted misunderstandings
in Pak-U.S. ties : Opposition Leader in National Assembly: Chaudhry Nisar Ali, PML-N leader — Geo News
TV.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785286 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785286 Date: 01/07/2016




2. With the killing of Osama bin Laden, the first phase of Pak-U.S. partnership came to an end. Now, the
primary concern for the United States is that Afghanistan should not again become a stronghold of terrorism
and religious extremism after the withdrawal of foreign forces from that war-torn country. To achieve this
objective, Islamabad can play a pivotal role and Washington is fully aware of this fact. I think the real agenda of
Secretary Clinton's visit was to convince Pakistan to play this role: —Nazir Naji, columnist on SAMAA TV.

 3. If Pakistan fails to take initiative to improve the security situation in this region, the U.S. will maintain its
presence here. I think it is in our own national interest that we utilize all our resources and energies to eliminate
the menace of terrorism and extremism, because the war on terror has now become our own war: defense
analyst Shehzad Chaudhry on SAMAA TV.

 4. In his meeting with Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, President Asif Zardari demanded that the U.S. respect
the sovereignty of Pakistan and immediately stop drone attacks on our territory. He told her that, in case
Washington does not honor the resolution unanimously approved by the Pakistani parliament, our bilateral ties
will be negatively affected. The Americans know that the political leadership, military and people of Pakistan
have reservations over the drone issue. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has been categorically told that
Pakistan will not compromise on its sovereignty and its national interests. If the U.S. does not respond to our
demands, we will devise future strategy. Federal cabinet and coalition parties also have been taken into
confidence regarding Pakistan's relations with the United States: Information Minister, Firdous Ashiq Awan's
press talk — PTV News.

TV Talk Shows:

Program: "Policy matter" Duniya TV (05/27)

Hosts: Naseem Zuhra

Participants: Khwaja Asif (PML-N); Azam Swati (JUI-F); Moeed Pirzada (analyst); Marvi Memon (PML-Q)

Topic: Hillary, Mullen Visit to Pakistan; What is the Outcome?

Summary: During this show, the participants discussed the recent visit of U.S. Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton and Admiral Mike Mullen to Pakistan. Analyst Moeed Pirzada said that the purpose of the U.S. military
and political leadership was to bridge the gap between the establishments of both countries following the U.S
operation in Abbottabad. He said he thinks that, after the events of May 2, even the pro-U.S. circles in Pakistan
are annoyed with the U.S. and are saying that friendship with the U.S. is a difficult business, and that the
government should explore the possibility of getting rid of America. While talking about the U.S. high officials'
visit, he said it was a tough and difficult visit, however he felt that Pakistan must compromise with the U.S.
since we lost some of our bargaining power following the Abbottabad operation. PML-Q leader Ms. Marvi
Memon condemned Secretary Clinton's statement in which she demanded that the Pakistan military urgently
take more steps. She said that Hillary Clinton insulted the unanimous resolution adopted by our parliament
when she reiterated that the U.S. can again take unilateral action inside Pakistan in case of the presence of a
high-valued target. She also said that is why a First Investigation Report (FIR) should be lodged against Hillary
Clinton. JUI-F leader Azam Swati said that, in the meetings with U.S military and political leadership, our
leaders should have conveyed to them to not talk about our (Pakistan's) domestic issues in public.



Program: "News Watch" Dunya TV (05/27)

Host: Javed Iqbal
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785286 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785286 Date: 01/07/2016




Participants: Sami Yousufzai (Senior Journalist); Imran Khan (PTI)

Topic: Visit of Secretary Hillary Clinton and Admiral Mike Mullen

Excerpts:

Host: In her meetings with Pakistani military and civilian leadership, during today's visit to Islamabad, U.S.
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton made it clear to her hosts that they would have to take decisive measures
against the terrorists present in the country. The visiting U.S. officials acknowledged that top Pakistani
leadership was unaware about Osama's presence in Abbottabad. Secretary Clinton said that her country's
relations with Pakistan are of utmost importance and that these ties will further strengthen in the coming years.
What was the real agenda of this visit by Secretary Hillary Clinton and Admiral Mike Mullen? Did they come
here to explore the ways to remove mutual misunderstandings between the governments of the two countries or
to learn about Pakistan's reservations, and to express those of the United States? Has this visit produced the
desired results?

Imran Khan: I have said repeatedly that the Pakistan-U.S. relations have not been based on the principle of
parity and mutual respect. It is a master-slave relationship cultivated by the Americans to achieve their national
goals. Our partnership with the United States is tactical not strategic. They hire our services in exchange for
dollars. Our leadership has always ignored Pakistan's own long-term interests. Consequently, Washington
dictates our governments to act according to its will, no matter if it's against our own interests. This subservient
attitude of the Pakistani leaders has given rise to strong popular reaction in the country. Today, no part of the
country is immune from bomb blasts and suicide bombings. In fact, these incidents are the direct reaction to our
government's servitude to the American hegemony which has virtually turned Pakistan into client state of the
U.S. By joining the so-called war against terrorism, our leaders have turned this country into hell. Ironically, the
Americans themselves are negotiating with the Afghan Taliban while, at the same time, they are not ready to
use this channel to politically engage our own alienated people. Now, after the terrorist attack on Mehran naval
base, they are spreading rumors that Pakistan's nuclear weapons may end up in the hands of extremist elements.

Host: Is there any evidence that the U.S. is negotiating with the Afghan Taliban?

Sami Yousufzai: I think the Americans have started sincere efforts to engage the Taliban in political dialogue.
After Osama bin Laden's death, the Afghan Taliban have no complications in negotiating with the United
States. Now, I think, they also can show their readiness to compromise on certain issues. On the other hand, the
Americans also think that they have achieved their stated goal -- the killing of Osama bin Laden and
dismantling al-Qaeda to the extent that it will not be able to perpetrate any major terrorist attack. The time has
come for them to get out the Afghanistan quagmire, which is costing them heavily in terms of human and
financial losses. Washington also seems convinced that the Taliban's links with al-Qaeda remnants also have
been considerably weakened. On the hand, there also are indications that the Taliban, too, are ready for some
sort of a power-sharing arrangement in the future ruling setup in their country. Hence, it is quite possible that
both sides may reach some agreement regarding the future of Afghanistan.

Host: There are reports that the Americans are preparing to withdraw their forces from Afghanistan. Have they
devised any face-saving strategy in this regard?

Imran Khan: I think that Osama's killing has provided the U.S. a rare and golden opportunity to leave
Afghanistan. They were facing a humiliating defeat there. But now they can tell their people that the real goal of
the war has been achieved. In fact, Osama's death has provided them an excellent face-saving strategy.
America's further stay in Afghanistan will result in more destabilization of Pakistan. We're already seeing that,
following Osama's killing, the bomb blasts in our cities and on our sensitive installations have become almost a
daily-life routine.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785286 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785286 Date: 01/07/2016




Program: "Pakistan At 7" Aaj TV (05/27)

Host: Nadia Naqi

Participants: Air Vice Marshal (R) Shehzad Chaudhry (Defense Analyst); Mujeeb-ur-Rehman Shami (Senior
Journalist)

Topic: U.S.-Pakistan Relations

Excerpts:

Host: The bilateral relations of the United States and Pakistan are experiencing an unusual strain today.
Analysts believe that the national interests of the two countries are diverging regarding the end-game in
Afghanistan. There also is a mutual trust-deficit between them. The Americans are saying that they have
provided huge military and civilian assistance to Pakistan in exchange for the services it has rendered in the
ongoing war against terrorism. But Islamabad is suspicious about Washington's strategic tilt towards New
Delhi. What will be the future of the U.S.-Pakistan relationship? Do you think that the current tension in their
ties is temporary and both sides will be able to reverse the ongoing deterioration in their relations?

Mujeeb-ur-Rehman Shami: Pakistan has rendered huge sacrifices, both in men and material, in the war
against terrorism, but the United States, instead of appreciating our role in this regard, views us as an unreliable
partner. The U.S. assistance provided to Pakistan is negligible as compared to the losses we have had to suffer
in this war. We have lost nearly 35,000 men, and our national economy suffered a loss worth $68 billion, while
we have received only $19 billion from the Americans over the last decade. On the other hand, Washington
rewarded us by signing a nuclear deal with our arch rival, New Delhi, while expressing baseless doubts on our
sincerity in fighting the war against terrorism. Worse, the U.S. itself is killing our innocent people with drone
attacks, besides regularly violating our national integrity.

Host: Why is the U.S. losing trust in Pakistan?

Shehzad Chaudhry: Undoubtedly, Pakistan has rendered meritorious services in the war against terrorism, but,
unfortunately, some strange developments have led to the widening mistrust between the two countries. For
example, we have failed to provide satisfactory answers raised by the Americans about the presence of Osama
bin Laden on our soil. For more than decade, the Americans have been wondering if they can trust Pakistan.
They suspect that the Pakistani establishment, which receives financial and military aid from the U.S. and
publicly proclaims allegiance, is privately acting against U.S. global interests. Osama bin Laden's six-year-long
presence and his ultimate killing on Pakistani soil further amplified Washington's concerns about Islamabad's
real intentions. The Americans also have suspicions that Pakistan is not doing enough against the extremist
organizations operating from its territory. Ironically, these extremist groups are not a headache for the
Americans only, but they also are involved in terrorist activities in our own country. We need to come out of
this state of denial and go after the elements that have turned Pakistan into an inferno. I repeatedly have said
that now the war against terrorism has become our own war, and in order to win this fight, it has become
imperative to maintain our existence as an independent country. As far as our complaints about the drone
attacks and other such U.S. actions are concerned, I think our government should use diplomatic channels to
convince the U.S. that such policies are counter-productive and they only breed more terrorists.

Information Office
Public Affairs Section
U.S. Embassy Islamabad
Pakistan
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785286 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785286 Date: 01/07/2016




Stay connected with http://islamabad.usembassy.gov/


                    Tube




SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785286 Date: 01/07/2016
