        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779515 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                                 RELEASE IN
                                                                                                 PART B5,B6



From:                           McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sent:                           Sunday, March 6, 2011 6:53 AM
To:                             H; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject:                        FW: Pushing back against the Economist
Attachments:                    ole0.bmp; oletbmp; ole2.bmp; ole3.bmp; ole4.bmp; ole0.bmp; oletbmp; ole2.bmp;
                                ole3.bmp; ole4.bmp




im

From: Davidson, Mark 3
Sent: Sunday, March 06, 2011 5:31 AM
To: Crowley, Philip 3
Cc: Hammer, Michael A; Hensman, Chris D; McHale, Judith A; RCH_Comms; Lenderking, Timothy A; George, Brian 3;
Kaiser, Sandra L; Breeden, Philip X; Rodriguez, Alberto; Beale, Courtney A Kramer
Subject: Pushing back against the Economist

P3,


Our front office thinks we need to reach out to the Economist Magazine about this
article (see below), which is way off base in a number of areas, but most
alarmingly gets the basic facts wrong about Ray Davis' immunity under the VCDR.

There is no Economist correspondent permanently stationed here, and we do not
know who wrotp thic Hnwpv r, deputy editor Emma Duncan
                            was• here last week from London. She asked to meet the
Econ Counselor (which we couldn't schedule) but did not inquire about the Davis
case. Whoever wrote this, he/she clearly talked with the wrong people for this
piece.

We are happy to reach out from here but thought you might prefer to do so from
DC. Please let us know your recommendation.

Best regards,

Mark




Mark J. Davidson


Counselor for Public Affairs


U.S. Embassy Islamabad



        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779515 Date: 01/07/2016
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779515 Date: 01/07/2016




Tel: +92-51-208-2046

cell:

Davidson MJ@state.gov

Stay connected: http://islamabad.usembassy.gov/


            rp•iis
Stuck with You: America and Pakistan

The Economist

March 4, 2011



A clash between spy agencies is boosting the ISI—but is doing Pakistan no favours

Chalk up one point to Pakistan's military-intelligence service, the ISI, and none
to America's. In a test of strength over the fate of an American agent, awaiting
trial for murder, it is clear who is emerging the stronger. The agent is Raymond
Davis, whom America now admits worked in some way for the CIA. He shot and killed
two apparent robbers on a motorbike, in a busy street in Lahore in late January.
An American driver, perhaps working for the CIA, then accidentally killed a third
man while rushing to the scene. A little later the despairing wife of one of the
victims committed suicide.



That miserable run of events has left ordinary Pakistanis furious. Mr Davis is
such a figure of hate as he languishes in a Lahore jail that even his guards are
kept unarmed for fear they might kill him. Anti-Americanism, always high, is
soaring.

Had Pakistan wished, Mr Davis might have been quietly whisked away. The
Americans, from Barack Obama down, say he has diplomatic immunity. That seems
wrong—Mr Davis's name was not put on a diplomatic list until after he had fired
his shots. But Pakistani officials might once have gone along with the fiction.
The civilian government probably wanted to do so. Asif Zardari, the president, had
been hoping to go to Washington this month and craves a visit to Pakistan by Mr
Obama. He needs American and IMF cash to prop up a failing economy.

Yet Mr Zardari was too weak to let Mr Davis go. Political rivals grabbed a
tempting stick with which to bash his derided government. In Punjab an alliance
between his party and the opposition has crumbled, a sign that parties may be
preparing for an early national election.


        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779515 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779515 Date: 01/07/2016




More important, the MI made sure that Mr Davis could not be released. It briefed
journalists on American lies about his immunity, helping stir public anger. The
press made lurid claims that the American had been trying to plant evidence that
terrorists have nuclear-weapons material, as an excuse for outsiders somehow to
seize Pakistan's treasured nuclear arsenal.

For the ISI, the Davis incident is a godsend. It is furious with the way American
agents work independently, tracking al-Qaeda, Taliban and other militants who
have slipped into Lahore and Karachi to flee drone attacks on the mountainous
border with Afghanistan. This may have been the work Mr Davis did—snooping around
madrassas, trying to contact anyone connected to extremists.

The Americans say they act alone because the ISI fails to co-operate. For
example, after the CIA found Abdul Ghani Baradar, an Afghan Taliban leader, in
Karachi in February last year, the Pakistanis put him under house arrest but are
said to have limited American access to him. More intriguing—though stoutly
denied by the ISI—wasa Washington Post claim that the ISI brought Mullah Omar,
the leader of the Afghan Taliban, to Karachi on January 7th for an emergency
heart operation.

As relations soured, Pakistani intelligence, which already feels humiliated by
America's widespread drone attacks against the Afghani Taliban on Pakistan
territory, tried blocking the arrival of American agents by vetoing visa
requests. The Americans (and Mr Zardari) responded, last year, by arranging for
Pakistan's embassy in Washington to hand out visas independently. Dozens of
American contractors reportedly flocked into Pakistan.



Furious, the ISI targeted the CIA, leaking the name of the station chief to the
Pakistani press in December and so forcing him out. American intelligence in turn
briefed friendly journalists that the ISI was responsible for the leak. Most
strikingly, the ISI is now rumoured to be behind efforts to arrest more
Americans. Aaron DeHaven, with connections to the security industry, was detained
in Peshawar in late February for overstaying his visa. Leon Panetta, the CIA
head, calls the fraught ties with Pakistan "very complicated".

Bruce Riedel, author of a new book on America and Pakistan, concludes that "the
stakes are enormous and they are all going to hinge on the fate of one man", Mr
Davis. A few options for reconciliation are open, but none looks appealing to the
Americans. Most obvious, as the ISI sees it, is for America to back down and let
the ISI oversee the snooping on Islamic extremists, in effect ceding a veto on
whomto target.

Strong differences exist, for example in North Waziristan over the militant
Haqqani network, considered a friendly group by the Pakistanis but a terrorist
threat by the Americans. Similarly, attitudes differ towards Lashkar-e-Taiba,
reckoned by Pakistanis to be a useful tool for threatening India, but an
international terrorist group by Americans, especially since an attack on Mumbai
in November 2008.

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779515 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779515 Date: 01/07/2016




Next the ISI wants the American government to discourage a private court case in
New York against past and present chiefs of Pakistani intelligence. The suit,
brought by American victims of the Mumbai attack, claims the ISI directly helped
the terrorists, but perhaps America could say that Pakistani spy leaders enjoy
sovereign immunity

Last, and perhaps least appealing of all to the Americans, Pakistan's spies want
more say on efforts to end the war in Afghanistan. Whether any of these, or
other, concessions will be made for the sake of a difficult relationship is
unclear. But an HI officer this week happily suggested that "sanity is
prevailing".



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779515 Date: 01/07/2016
