     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793658 Date: 01/07/2016


                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                       B6



From:                          Sidney Blumenthal
Sent:                          Friday, December 21, 2012 5:22 PM
To:
Subject:                       H: Egypt army, MB, Morsi. Sid (Also, feel better)




                                     CONFIDENTIAL



                                              December 21, 2012



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Egypt army, MB, Morsi

SOURCE: Sources with access to the highest levels of the Muslim Brotherhood in
Egypt, The leadership of the Armed Forces, and Western intelligence, diplomatic, and
security services.


       1. During the week of December 17, 2012 Egyptian Army commander General Abdel
Fatah al-Sissi privately reassured Egyptian President Mohamad Morsi that the Army continues
to support his administration; even as anti-government demonstrations continue in Cairo and
other parts of the country. Al-Sissi noted that, as Morsi predicted, the new constitution he
supports was supported by between 57 and 60 per cent of voters in the first round of voting,
which was held in urban areas. For his part Morsi cautioned that, while he expects the second
round, set in rural areas, to produce a greater margin of victory for the government. At the same
time he warned that government officials and security forces must be prepared for violent
demonstration from the secular/liberal/Christian opposition groups, many of which are
boycotting the voting in an effort invalidate the process.


           2. According to this individual, Morsi expressed his approval of the restraint shown by
the military during this period of unrest, adding that he continues to believe it best that the
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793658 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793658 Date: 01/07/2016




police and security services lead the effort to control the violence. Morsi stated that he is
willing to give the protestors a degree of latitude to express their concerns rather than take steps
that might create new martyrs. That said, he and al-Sissi agreed that the Military Intelligence
Service (MI -Mukhabarat el-Khabeya) would continue to build files on the leaders of the
opposition, against the day when the anti-government protests become a greater threat to the
regime.


      3. (Source Comment: In the opinion of this source the MI is also continuing to monitor,
and in some cases disrupt the activities of the Salafist groups, particularly the al Nur party. All
though these groups generally support Morsi's Islamist reforms, they distrust him and are
concerned that he may become a dictator. Al-Sissi assured Morsi that the MI and the Army in
general are continuing to watch the Salafists, arresting any who pose a violent threat to the
government. He added that, interestingly, some of the most radical Salafists have chosen to
leave Egypt for the present, traveling to support allied groups active in the Syrian revolution
and in Libya.)


       4. According to a particularly sensitive source, Morsi is maintaining his position of
strength within the Muslim Brotherhood (MB), as well as his control of its associated Freedom
and Justice Party (FJP). Morsi tells close associates that his greatest tool in this regard is the
fact that Supreme Guide Mohammad Badie and the MB leadership now accept the idea that his
presidency is the key to their future control of Egypt. Morsi's advisors add that the MB/FJP
infrastructure has been crucial in turning out support for the constitution. Their polling efforts
have been particularly important in allowing Morsi to time his various moves during this crucial
period. Morsi also believes that the opposition has no effective leaders, adding that Mohamed
el Baradei and the opposition National Salvation Front (NSF) are too weak to have any real
influence on the current situation.


       5. (Source Comment: Morsi and al-Sissi agreed that one of their greatest concerns relates
to the threat by some of Egypt's Supreme Court Judges to boycott their traditional role,
monitoring/validating the second round of voting. According to this source, Morsi sees this as
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793658 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793658 Date: 01/07/2016




an effort by old enemies to take advantage of the secular/liberal effort to invalidate the vote. He
believes that because many of these judges are holdovers from the regime of former President
Hosni Mubarak, they see Morsi's Islamic agenda as a direct threat to their position in Egyptian
society. At the same time, the secular/liberal opposition groups called for new protests in
Tahrir Square on December 18. Morsi is confident that he can find enough officials to certify
the election results, despite these concerns.)


      6. In commenting on the situation with the judges, FJP parliamentary leader Saad al-
Katany stated in private that the judges are concerned with their personal interests, and, in his
opinion do not belong to either the government or the opposition camps. He speculated that if
the secular/liberal faction were in power the judges would probably act in a similar manner. Al-
Katany continued, saying that in his opinion, these judges have reason to be concerned given
their old ties to the Mubarak regime. That said, he added that he, Badie, and Morsi believe that
the judges situations are tenuous at best and as the country is transformed the new political
system must stand above the judiciary, since the judges are part of the old regime. The
parliamentary leader added that, as the situation has developed, a number of judges seem to be
courting both sides in the debate, and have privately expressed their support for Morsi.


       7. (Source Comment: According to a source with access to the leadership of the Army,
al-Sissi believes the MB/FJP and secular/liberal/Christian political factions are growing further
apart. The Army commander is also concerned that much of the population is staying out of the
debate over the constitution, noting that only 33 percent of the eligible voters turned out for the
constitutional referendum. Al-Sissi is also focused on reports from private friends in the MB
that al-Katany may urge Morsi to use the Army to watch polling stations for signs of corruption,
if there are not enough judges to fill this traditional role. The general does not want the Army
drawn into this debate in such a direct manner.)


       8. An individual with access to the leadership of the MB added that Badie, speaking in
private, noted that he and many other members of the leadership continue to be surprised by
Morsi's resilience and stamina during this constitutional crisis. Badie had never considered
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793658 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793658 Date: 01/07/2016




Morsi one of the leading lights of the movement, however, he now sees Morsi as a sophisticated
politician, whose presidency provides the MB with its best chance to develop long term control
of Egypt, and through that, support their fellow brothers throughout the region.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793658 Date: 01/07/2016
