UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779637 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                             RELEASE IN FULL

                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                              February 24, 2011



  For: Hillary
  From: Sid
  Re: Libya WMD

  Key: Sources report on Qaddafi and disposition of his WMD. He has not thoroughly dismantled
  his chemical weapons facility and has tons of material that could potentially be weaponized. So
  far this has not occurred and supposedly the material is "secure." But Qaddafi and Mousa Kousa
  are talking "in private" about using WMD against rebel forces.

  Remember, Tyler Drumheller was the one who exposed Curveball's fraud before Colin Powell's
  UN speech and personally briefed CIA Deputy Director McLaughlin on Curveball, the sole
  source on Iraqi WMD, a week before Powell spoke. Tyler is very careful on the subject of
  WMD.

  The latest report:

  During the afternoon of February 24, 2011 a former official of the Libyan Government
  stated in confidence that, according to advisors to Muammar Qaddafi, the Libyan leader
  remains furious at the United States and the countries of Western Europe, whom he
  feels should be assisting him during the current crisis. Qaddafi believes that following
  his 2003-2004 agreements with the West regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction,
  these countries are obligated to support his regime. These individuals state that if
  Qaddafi is threatened with defeat, he will not hesitate to destroy as much of Libya's oil
  industry infrastructure as his troops can reach. Former government officials are also
  concerned that Qaddafi will use all of the weapons available to him.

  While the bulk of Libya's Weapons of Mass Destruction were removed under the 2003-
  2004 agreement with the United States and Great Britain, the cleanup of the chemical
  weapons facility at Rapta was never completed and several tons of precursor material
  remains in Libyan hands. These individuals believe that these materials are not
  weaponized and that they are still secure. That said, Qaddafi, and Mousa Kousa have
  both stated in private conversations during the last two days, that a limited amount of
  weaponized material was held back after 2003-2004, and that special Army units could
  use these weapons against rebel forces if they gain control of significant portions of
  Tripoli.

  (Source Comment: These sources emphasized in the strongest terms that they had no
  evidence of the presence of weaponized chemical material, other than Qaddafi's
  statements. They believe that it is possible Qaddafi may have been trying to impress
  and reassure those security officials remaining loyal to him. They add that this threat to
  use chemical weapons may also be an effort to intimidate the Western countries.
  These officials are, however, concerned over these threats, which they believe, if true,
  would mean disaster for Libya.)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779637 Date: 01/07/2016
