     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781237 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                              Friday, July 8, 2011 8:32 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: U.S. Admiral Ties Pakistan to Killing of Journalist (NYT)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Friday, July 08, 2011 08:26 AM
To: NEWS-Mahogany; NEWS-Pakistan
Cc: SES-0
Subject: U.S. Admiral Ties Pakistan to Killing of Journalist (NYT)


WASHINGTON — Adm. Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said Thursday that he believed
that the government of Pakistan had "sanctioned" the killing of a Pakistani journalist who had written scathing
reports about the infiltration of Islamic militants into the country's security services.

Admiral Mullen, who is due to retire at the end of September, is the first American official to publicly accuse
Pakistan, an American ally, of the kidnapping, torture and death of the journalist, Saleem Shahzad, 40. His
comments about a case that has intensified criticism of the government in Islamabad are certain to further
aggravate the poisoned relationship between the United States and Pakistan, where Osama bin Laden was killed
in an American raid in May.

Admiral Mullen said he could not specifically tie Mr. Shahzad's death to Pakistan's powerful spy agency, the
Directorate for Inter-Services Intelligence, known as the ISI, although Obama administration officials believe
that the ISI ordered the killing. But Admiral Mullen made clear that he thought Pakistani officials were
complicit in Mr. Shahzad's death.

"It was sanctioned by the government," Admiral Mullen told journalists during a Pentagon briefing. "I have not
seen anything to disabuse the report that the government knew about this."

A military official later declined to say whether Admiral Mullen believed that the knowledge of the planned
killing extended to President Asif Ali Zardari of Pakistan or to Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, the chief of the
Pakistani Army. But the official said that Admiral Mullen was "appalled" at learning of the circumstances
behind the death of Mr. Shahzad, who, according to one of the doctors who conducted the post-mortem,
sustained 17 lacerated wounds delivered by a blunt instrument, a ruptured liver and two broken ribs. Mr.
Shahzad's waterlogged body was retrieved May 30 from a canal 60 miles from Islamabad, the Pakistani capital.

The ISI has denied any involvement in the killing.

Husain Haqqani, Pakistan's ambassador to the United States, said in reaction to Admiral Mullen's remarks that
Pakistan had already appointed a commission to inquire into the death. "Any evidence that our American
friends have should be shared with that commission," Mr. Haqqani said in a telephone interview. "We are as
interested in getting to the bottom of this matter as anyone else in the world, given our concern about human
rights."

The Obama administration has long expressed alarm about reports of human rights abuses in Pakistan,
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781237 Date: 01/07/2016
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781237 Date: 01/07/2016




particularly a steady stream of accounts from human rights groups that thousands of political separatists and
captured Taliban insurgents have disappeared into the hands of Pakistan's police and security forces.

Admiral Mullen's remarks were significant because he is one of the closest American officials to the Pakistani
leadership, most notably General Kayani. The admiral has traveled to Pakistan more often than any other senior
Obama administration official and has had dozens of meetings over the last four years with General Kayani.
Although Admiral Mullen regularly says that Pakistan needs to work harder to flush out insurgents on its
eastern border, who attack American forces in Afghanistan, he also frequently defends its military.

But in this case Admiral Mullen said that he had a "huge concern" about Mr. Shahzad's death and indicated that
it had further damaged Pakistan's relationship with the United States. "It's not a way to move ahead," he said.
"It's a way to, quite frankly, spiral in the wrong direction."

The White House had no reaction to Admiral Mullen's remarks, which were not in sync with the Obama
administration's previous public comments on the killing. While several senior administration officials had in
recent days privately acknowledged what the admiral said, his remarks brought into the open what had been a
highly classified intelligence assessment.

Mr. Shahzad, who wrote predominantly about security and terrorism issues for the Hong Kong-based Asia
Times Online and the Italian news agency Adnkronos International, disappeared on May 29 in Islamabad, two
days after writing an article suggesting that a militant attack on the Pakistani Navy's main base in Karachi on
May 22 was in retaliation for a naval crackdown on Al Qaeda infiltrators in its ranks.

Pakistan's armed forces were humiliated by the 16-hour battle at the Navy base, which shocked the country.
The armed forces were even more humiliated by the raid on Bin Laden's compound in the garrison town of
Abbottabad, which the United States carried out without Pakistan's prior knowledge. Mr. Shahzad had been
receiving threats from the ISI for about three years because of his reporting, which often relied on sources
inside the intelligence agencies and inside the Taliban and other militant groups.

NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781237 Date: 01/07/2016
