UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797661 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                      RELEASE IN
                                          CONFIDENTIAL                                FULL




                                            May 30, 2012




  For: Hillary

  From: Sid

  Re: Germany and the European economic crisis

  Below are two memos that may contain some new information on German policy on the
  Eurozone crisis. This information is based on conversations with German Finance Minister
  Wolfgang Schauble and those close to him.



  SOURCE: Sources with excellent access to the highest levels of the European political and
  security communities.

  THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION COMES FROM AN EXTREMELY SENSITIVE
  SOURCE AND SHOULD BE HANDLED WITH CARE. THIS INFORMATION MUST NOT
  BE SHARED WITH ANYONE ASSOCIATED WITH THE GERMAN GOVERNMENT.

   MEMO #1

         1. During late May, 2012, following meetings with political and economic leaders in
  Europe and the United States, senior officials of the German Government began a series of
  discreet internal meetings in an effort to develop comprehensive policy solutions regarding the
  issues addressed during their mid-May 2012 sessions in Europe and the United States. In the
  opinion of a particularly well placed individual, the officers of the German Chancellery, Ministry
  of Finance, and the Foreign Ministry are struggling with this effort; concerned that their initial
  plans to delay any serious policy decisions on the Euro-zone/sovereign debt crisis until late June
  are unrealistic. According to this source, German Minister of Finance Wolfgang Schauble stated
  in confidence to Chancellor Angela Merkel that between twelve (12) and fifteen (15) of the
  member states of the European Union (EU) are moving irresistibly into recession and world




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797661 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797661 Date: 01/07/2016




  financial markets will not wait for the results of the June Greek, French, and German election
  cycles before demanding serious policy decisions regarding the future of the currency union.

         2. (Source Comment: This particular individual noted that Schauble repeatedly warned
  Merkel that this "European pace" of crisis management would lead to frustration among
  investors and place the EU leaders in a position where they face a crisis of international
  confidence, and are forced to make policy decisions that have not been fully considered.
  Schauble's senior staff officers came away from meetings with U.S. officials with the idea that,
  while the U.S. Government is concerned over instability in the EU they do not intend to become
  deeply involved in the crisis, preferring to act as a sounding board and advisor for the various EU
  leaders. They also believe that the U.S. position on Greece is ambiguous, stating that the
  Americans realize Greece must stay in the Euro-zone, while also stating that it can only remain if
  it meets its obligations. Accordingly, Schauble and other financial officials in Berlin, London,
  and Brussels are beginning to see the upcoming Greek national elections as a plebiscite on
  whether or not Greece wants to remain in the Euro-zone. Schauble stated privately that despite
  their professed commitment to the Euro, if the Greek people vote for a government led by the
  anti-austerity Syriza party, they must bear the consequences of their actions.)

         3. According to a sensitive source, Schauble is looking for a way to deal with the
  potential fallout from a problematic result in the Greek elections. He sees two paths available,
  neither of which is pleasant for Germany and the other states of the EU. Realizing that a Greek
  withdrawal from the currency union may set the stage for Portugal, Spain, and Ireland to follow,
  Schauble is moderating his opposition to a larger shared solution within the EU. First, while he
  remains, in the opinion of a sensitive source, strongly opposed to the issuance of Eurobonds,
  Schauble has asked his staff to rev
                                    . isit a proposal put forward by the German economic experts,
  "the Five Wise Men," regarding a European Redemption pact. This idea was developed
  throughout 2011, but was initially opposed by Schauble because of his concern for its internal
  political ramifications in Germany while failing to address the problem of sovereign debt in real
  terms. The second course of action is even more problematic for Schauble, as it involves
  planning for a two tiered EU, with a much smaller currency union. This plan will be difficult
  and dangerous for the Merkel Government, especially following the election of Socialist
  Francois Hollande as President of France. (Source Note: Hollande and Merkel continue to hold



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797661 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797661 Date: 01/07/2016




  divergent views on the roles of growth and austerity in resolving the crisis.) In any event,
  Schauble continues to believe that a complete collapse of the currency union is unacceptable for
  Germany, as the newly reconstituted Deutsche Mark would be considerably more valuable than
  the Euro; seriously damaging Germany's export driven economy.

         4. In the opinion of this individual, Schauble's staff is drawing up contingency plans for
  addressing the possible outcomes of the crisis: an enhanced EU wide redemption project, a two
  tiered Euro-zone, and the possible collapse of the union. At the same time, the Minister of
  Finance is concerned by the Chancellor's desire to draw the matter out until late June or early
  July. Schauble stated in private that Merkel, and Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle of the
  coalition partner Free Democratic Party (FDP) were badly shaken by the recent electoral defeats
  suffered at the hands of the opposition Social Democratic Party (SPD)/Green Party alliance. In
  the opinion of this individual Schauble is finding it difficult to persuade Merkel to consider
  serious policy moves, with the chancellor preferring to wait to take action. The Minister of
  Finance believes the Chancellor must continue to engage other national leaders, including the
  SPD/Green representatives and at least appear to be looking for new ideas. To this end he has
  asked her to consider the European Redemption Plan proposed by the five wise men, which is
  also popular with the SPD/Green leadership. Again, the source noted that while this plan is not
  what Schauble considers the best option in this matter, it is preferable to both the concept of
  Eurobonds, and the collapse of the currency union.

          5. (Source Comment: In the opinion of a well placed individual, Merkel will continue to
  study the European Redemption Plan and other policy options, but Schauble fears that she will
  delay any decisive actions. He noted that Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti, who is close to
  Merkel, is also raising an alarm regarding the need for activity as the EU slides into recession.
  Monti has a great deal of credibility with Merkel as he has implemented serious austerity
  measures in Italy, and he is favorably disposed toward the redemption plan. Schauble repeated
  in private conversation that the Chancellor, Hollande, and other EU leaders continue maintain
  the hope that the U.S. economy will increase its rate of growth, which will have a similar affect
  on the EU economies. Schauble believes that U.S. growth will continue at a measured pace and
  noted that U.S. officials attempted to make this clear during the recent meetings in the United
  States.)



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797661 Date: 01/07/2016
