      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789547 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN
                                                                                                     PART B6


From:                               Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov >
Sent:                               Wednesday, February 22, 2012 12:15 AM
To:
Subject:                            Re: Fwd: H: Libya, intel, internal conflict over militias. Sid



Will do.



From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Tuesday, February 21, 2012 11:14 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Fwd: H: Libya, intel, internal conflict over militias. Sid

Pis review and forward as appropriate.

Sent from my iPad

Begin forwarded message:

           From: "sbwhoeop               <sbwhoeop
           Date: February 21, 2012 10:04:57 PM ES!
           To: H <HDR22@c1intonemai1.com>
           Subject: H: Libya, intel, internal conflict over militias. Sid




                                                   CONFIDENTIAL



                                                            February 21, 2012



           For: Hillary
           From: Sid
           Re: Libya politics to control militias

           SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as
           well as the highest levels of European Governments, and Western Intelligence and
           security services.

                 1. On February 19, 2012, Libyan President Mustafa Abdul Jalil and Prime
           Minister Abdurrahim el-Keib instructed Minister of the Interior Minister Fawzi Abd Ali
           and Minister of Defense Osama al Juwali to move as forcefully as possible to deal with
           armed conflict between the various militias which carried the bulk of fighting during the
           2mirevolution against former dictator Muammar al Qaddafi. According to an
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789547 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789547 Date: 01/07/2016




 extremely sensitive source speaking in secret, el-Keib, acting in his role as the head of
 government, told the two ministers that, if they could not stop the fighting and disarm
 the militias he Would be forced to find ministers who can carry out his orders. Ali and
 Juwali each stated privately that, while they would follow orders, they have little hope of
 succeeding in this matter until el-Keib and Jalil gain credibility as the rulers of the
 country. Ali added that, in his opinion, this situation will persist until a new
 government is chosen during the national elections planned for later in 2012.
         2. In the opinion of this individual, the Prime Minister is particularly concerned
 by the situation in the Southern portion of the country, where the area defined by the
 towns of Ghat, Sabha, and al Kufra, where fighting between rival tribal and regional
 militias has been exacerbated by the activities of Qaddafi loyalists, and their allies,
 Taureg tribal fighters. This individual added that el-Keib and Jalil agree that the
 uncertain security situation in this area represents a threat to Libya's future stability.
 They agreed that, at present, if faced with a concerted effort by either disaffected
 militiamen or pro-Qaddafi forces government security forces and the new national army
 would be unable to protect either Libyan citizens or Western businessmen and oil
 industry workers in the region.
         3. (Source Comment: In the opinion of this individual, el-Keib believes that any
 attack against oil field workers will frighten large Western firms and seriously damage
 Libya's efforts to recover from the revolution. This individual added that al Juwali is
 particularly upset with his deputy Minister and Chief of Staff of the Army, General
 Yousef Mangoush, who he believes has been unable to work with national army ground
 force commander General Khalifa Belqasim Haftar. A very sensitive source added that
 the Benghazi based units of the army, under Haftar's direct command, are currently
 deploying to the area southeast of al-Kufra, along the Sudanese border.)
         4. In the opinion of a sensitive source, Haftar and al Juwali believe that the
 Sudanese military is providing arms and supplies to the pro-Qaddafi forces, under direct
 orders from Sudanese President Omar al Bashir. El-Keib complained to al-Juwali that
 Haftar's forces passed through al-Kufra region during early and mid-February on their
 way to the Sudanese border, however; they did nothing to disarm the local revolutionary
 militias, or stop the fighting between competing tribal groups. In the opinion of this
 individual, Hafter felt that the threat from the pro-Qaddafi forces was greater than that
 posed by the regional and tribal fighting.
         5. At the same time, a source with excellent access to the leadership of the
 National Transitional Council (NTC) stated in secret that fighting continues between
 regional, tribal, and religious rivals throughout the Northern/Mediterranean portions of
 the country. This same source added that the ongoing struggle between the Misrata and
 Zintan militias for control of the area west of Tripoli is particularly, violent and
 disruptive for the rest of the country. In the capital itself, fighting continues between
 regional groups, the national army, Islamist militias, and criminal street gangs, all of
 whom are very well armed. This individual reports that during mid-February 2012 el-
 Keib and Jalil agreed to address the problem of disaffected former militiamen and their
 families by providing payments of 2,000 Dinars (approximately $1,500) per month to
 the families of fighters who were wounded or killed in the revolution.
         6. In addition the President and Prime Minister instructed Minister of Finance
 Hassan Ziglam to develop an efficient system to provide assistance funds to unemployed
 former fighters. For his part, Ziglam privately expressed concern that previous efforts in
 this regard have met with a high level of fraud. According to the government's best
 estimates, the revolutionary army included approximately 25,000 combat troops, but it
 is difficult to identify those with legitimate claims, as no accurate service records were
 maintained. That said, he stated in private that the government must be seen to take
 some form of direct action, even if money is paid to fraudulent claimants. The fact is,

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789547 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789547 Date: 01/07/2016



  according to Ziglam, the NTC is losing control of the country and must give something
  to the veterans of the revolution to slow this process.
          7. (Source Comment: Speaking in strictest confidence, a knowledgeable
  individual stated that al-Juwali is concerned by the possibility that the country may
  deteriorate into a multi-sided civil war involving the regional militias, Islamist forces
  and the national army. At the same time, he acknowledges that the new army has lost
  control of large portions of the southern part of the country, with tribal fighting spilling
  over into Mali and Chad. According to this source, al-Juwali is also frustrated by the
  slow pace of military and police training promised to the various Libyan national
  security forces by the governments of France and Turkey. He added that, while Turkey
  has received some of the most seriously wound troops for treatment, the lack of
  adequate medical care for veterans inside of Libya remains a major source of conflict
  between the former rebel troops and the NTC government.)




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789547 Date: 01/07/2016
