     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794398 Date: 01/07/2016


                                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Monday, April 23, 2012 4:58 PM
To:                                'sullivartjj@state.gov'
Subject                            Fw: H: Libya intel: President v. Prime Minister. Sid
Attachments:                       hrc libya pres v pm 041712.docx


More...


From: sbwhoeop                                                                                                                    B6
Sent: Wednesday, April 18, 2012 07:21 PM
To: H
Subject: H: Libya Intel: President v. Prime Minister. Sid




                                          CONFIDENTIAL



                                                  April 18, 2012



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Libya: President v. Prime Minister


SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as the highest levels of
European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.


         1. On April 17, 2012 Libyan National Transitional Council (NTC) President Mustafa Abdel Jalil stated to a close
advisor that he is considering when, or even if, to hold a vote of no confidence in the NTC regarding support for the
government of Prime Minister Abdel Rahman al-Keib. According to a source with access to the NTC leadership, Jalil
realizes that a majority of the Council members no longer support el-Keib and his cabinet of Western educated technical
experts. Jalil continues to believe that, for the moment, the most important issue facing the NTC is the federalist
movement toward a semi-autonomous state in the Eastern region of Cyrenaica (Barqa in Arabic). This situation continues
to complicate the NTC efforts to stabilize the country. With this in mind, Jalil expressed concern that a dramatic vote of no
confidence for el-Keib will weaken the entire NTC by association. Instead, according to this source, Jalil is considering
delaying a decision, possibly putting it off until an elected legislature is in place in the late summer or early fall of 2012.

         2. (Source Comment: In the opinion of this individual, the NTC has been able to reach a temporary
understanding with the eastern federalists, allowing the separatists to administer their local regions, while deferring to the
NTC for national and international issues. The complicating factor at this point lies in reaching a determination regarding
who has authority over new contracts with oil companies and other international firms. As of the week of April 16, 2012,
no decision has been reached on this point. The bulk of the NTC leadership is drawn from Barqa, and Jalil now believes
they can control the situation if they can establish an organized central government. In particular, Jalil, according to a
sensitive source, is increasingly confident that the eastern roots of the NTC will allow him to balance the federalist
movement against the need for a sense of national unity. In the opinion of this source, el-Keib's future depends on Jalil's
opinion of his capacity to deal with this complex situation.)

        3. Minister of Defense Ousama al Juwali is viewed by Jalil as the most important western Libyan in el-Keib's
cabinet, and the President and the leaders of the NTC had hoped that he would be able to deal with the confused security
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794398 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794398 Date: 01/07/2016




situation in Tripoli. However, while he did receive assurances from General Abdel Hakim Alamin Belhaj regarding
possible assistance from his' Islamist troops if fighting broke out between the National Army and the militia's loyal to the
eastern federalists. Unfortunately, from Jalil's point of view, this effort seems to have emboldened Belhaj and heightened
tension between the eastern and western portions of the country. According to this source, after reviewing the federalist
problem, Dr Abd al-Nasser Shamata, the head of the Crisis Management for the NTC, believes that el-Keib, al Juwali, Oil
Minister Abdulrahman Ben Yezza, and the bulk of the cabinet should be replaced by people drawn from within the NTC,
individuals who are in touch with the concerns of the Libyan people of all tribes and political groups. In the opinion of this
source Jalil is factoring this position into his decision on el-Keib.

          4. Regarding the existing relationships with international oil firms, Shamata told Jalil that for the most part the
existing fields are continuing to produce and the owners have worked out security arrangements with local political and
tribal leaders. However, since el-Keib and Ben Yezza have been unable to bring order to the national administration, it is
difficult for firms to initiate new projects, since it is not clear who has the authority or the desire to sign such agreements.
Shamata stated forcefully that the Prime Minister, whoever he is, must establish an orderly administration before full
advantage can be gained from the oil fields. In the meantime, Shamata warns that his office has found evidence of
corruption between local officials and international firms. In this regard, he stated that local representatives of the Italian
national oil firm (ENI) have made problematic arrangements with local officials in the western part of the country, where
their oil fields are located. He added that most of these ENI employees are Libyans, but he believes ENI management in
Italy is aware of this situation. Shamata pointed out, without additional comment, that Ben Yezza is a long time senior
official of ENI.

         5. In the opinion this source, Shamata and Jalil are not planning to publicize these charges regarding ENI, at
least until they decide how best to move forward on el-Keib, whether to allow the Prime Minister more time to address his
problems, proceed with the vote of no confidence or quietly ask him to step down on his own.

         6. (Source Comment: According to this source, el-Keib is under fire primarily as a result of his failure to bring
order to the National Army, disarm independent militias, and establish security throughout the country. The leading
opposition to el-Keib is based in the Political Issues committee of the NTC, and as many as 42 of the 73 active NTC
members will vote against el-Keib if Jalil brings this matter to a vote. The source warns that these numbers are provided
by members of this Political committee, who may have their own agenda. A two thirds majority is required for the no
confidence vote, however; several senior members of the NTC are reluctant to take such a step until a constituent
assembly has been elected. They do not want this to look like the decision of a small group of people.)




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794398 Date: 01/07/2016
