UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789852 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL



                                        CONFIDENTIAL



                                               December 16, 2011



  For: HRC
  From: Sid
  Re: Egyptian Politics and Security/Army & Muslim Brotherhood


  SOURCE: Sources with access to the highest levels of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, The
  Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, and Western Intelligence and security services.

          1. On December 15, 2011, an individual with access to the highest levels of the Muslim
  Brotherhood (MB) stated in strict confidence that Supreme Guide Mohamed Badie and his
  closest advisors are developing plans for managing Egyptian security matters following the
  adoption of a new constitution, and election of a civilian government in 2012. According to
  these sources, Badie is convinced that the new Egypt will be an Islamic state, loosely based on
  the Turkish Model, with the government and military establishing a working relationship under
  Islamic principles. Advisors to Badie and Mohamed Mursi, leader of the MB's Freedom and
  Justice Party (FJP), are confident that they can establish a business environment that will
  promote cooperation with Western firms. That said, these individuals say that these Western
  firms must adapt to the fact that Egypt will not return to the days of former President Hosni
  Mubarak, when, they believe, Western companies.and governments dictated policy to the
  government in Cairo.

         2. In the opinion of these individuals, the FJP and the Salafist al Nour party will reach an
  understanding that allows them to establish an Islamic regime. Badie realizes that he must
  proceed at a reasonable pace, and avoid alarming the senior ranks of the military under the
  Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF), or the Western governments in question.
  However, these MB leaders are now confident that while Field Marshall Mohammed Hussein
  Tantawi and the senior levels of the SCAF will feel threatened by the establishment of an Islamic
  government, the rank and file of the army, including members of the officer corps at the rank of
  major and below will support the new Islamic regime.

          3. According to these sources, the MB quietly monitors the opinions of the rank and file
  members of the Egyptian military, and they believe up to 90 percent of these troops will support
  the establishment of a government that follows strict Islamic principles. This is particularly true
  in terms of the relationship between Egypt and Israel. Badie strongly believes that these soldiers




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789852 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789852 Date: 01/07/2016




  and junior officers wish to follow a policy that does not support close relations with their Israeli
  counterparts, particularly regarding operations against Palestinian forces under Hamas. At the
  same time, Badie and his closest advisors agree that the security services in Egypt must work to
  avoid radical or terrorist groups using the country as a base for operations against the West and
  Western interests in the Middle East.

           4. (Source Comment: Speaking in confidence, Mursi states that, despite Badie's best
  intentions, it will be difficult for this new, Islamic government to control the rise of al Qa'ida and
  other radical/terrorist groups. According to these individuals, discreet MB surveys of the officer
  corps have found that many of the young Army and Air Force officers who have either traveled
  to the United States for instruction, or trained with American military forces, have returned to
  Egypt with a deep hostility toward Western society in general, and the culture in the United
  States in particular. In the opinion of these individuals, while these young officers find the level
  of democracy in America fascinating, they are hostile to the activities of Christian and Jewish
  religious organizations, which they believe are the enemies of Islamic thought. These sources
  believe that Tantawi, his generals and senior colonels are, for the most part, well disposed toward
  the people and government of the United States. However, they also believe that after the new
  government takes power in Egypt these senior officers will be in no position to control their
  troops and will, in short, order be replaced by the current group of captains and majors. These
  individuals point out that the moderate Islamic government of Turkey has followed a version of
  this strategy: replacing established, secular generals with younger officers, who support the new
  regime.)

          5. In the opinion of these very sensitive sources, the developments associated with the
  establishment of even a moderate Islamic government in Egypt will complicate the efforts of
  Western firms and banks to carry on business in that country. These institutions must follow the
  development of the new government with care, and plan accordingly.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789852 Date: 01/07/2016
