      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777693 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                             RELEASE IN
                                                                                             FULL


From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Thursday, February 17, 2011 6:44 AM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Harper's Bazaar: "Hillary Clinton: Myth and Reality"




From: White, Pamela A
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Thu Feb 17 03:17:09 2011
Subject: FW: Harper's Bazaar: "Hillary Clinton: Myth and Reality"

Makes my heart sing. I would take a bullet for her any day. She is simply amazing.

From: Reines, Philippe I
Sent: Wednesday, February 16, 2011 8:36 PM
Cc: Adler, Caroline E
Subject: Harper's Bazaar: "Hillary Clinton: Myth and Reality"




It's been a long journey for Hillary Clinton. But after years of political and personal challenges, the
secretary of state is exactly where she belongs.

Hillary Clinton: Myth and Reality
By Laura Brown
Harper's Bazaar
February 14, 2011
http://www.harpersbazaar.com/magazinegeature-articles/hillary-clinton-interview

On the evening of December 13, Hillary Clinton was on stage in the Benjamin Franklin Room of the State
Department, introducing Broadway composer Marvin Hamlisch at a holiday reception for the diplomatic
corps. That morning, she had risen at 5:00 to fly to Quebec for the North American Foreign Ministers
Meeting, which was like taking tea on the tundra. It was minus 4 degrees with the wind chill, and after the
meeting, Clinton made small talk about skiing and did a photo call outside without a coat. She flew back
to Washington, D.C., got changed, and headed to the reception, where she and President Obama
addressed the family of Special Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan Richard Holbrooke, who had
suffered an aortic tear in Clinton's offices three days earlier and was clinging to life in a nearby hospital.
Holbrooke died that night, and his close friend Clinton, as much a den mother as a diplomat, took his
shaken staff to a bar.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777693 Date: 01/07/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777693 Date: 01/07/2016




"That day looked to be pretty predictable when it started," Clinton recalls in January in an anteroom near
her office. "Richard's critical illness was much on my mind, and that made it even more important to me
that we stay on schedule, we get back." After her speech, Clinton was heading to a dinner at the White
House when she got word that Holbrooke was failing. "We immediately went to the hospital. It was a very
long night of anguish and tears, but then we got together and started trading stories," she says. At the
bar at the Ritz-Carlton, Clinton presided over an improvised Irish wake. Derek Chollet, principal deputy
director of Clinton's policy-planning staff, who was very close to Holbrooke, says, "Everyone in the room
that night would take a bullet for her."

The first question for Hillary Rodham Clinton, 67th secretary of state, a woman who has lived in the
spotlight--and has been a crucible for public opinion--for more than three decades, is exactly how she
does it. At 63, when she could be raking in money from speaking engagements or lying on the beach, she
is more invigorated than ever. Theories abound among her close friends and staff: "She has a 'for country'
gene," observes her counselor and chief of staff, Cheryl Mills. "A fifth gear," says longtime adviser Philippe
Reines. "I really don't know," others say.

A different gene? "Hmm, it could be," Clinton ponders. She looks trim, her hair longer of late ("You like it
this way? Thanks!" she responds girlishly to a compliment), and she's wearing a tailored gray pantsuit and
two strings of South Sea pearls. She seems vibrant, engaged. "Well, I love what I do, and I love the
people I do it with. I've had the most lucky life because I've gotten to do all these amazing things over the
last 25 years. I've had extraordinary good luck with my health, other than a broken elbow," she says,
referring to her injury in June 2009, which sidelined her early in her new role. "There's no day that is the
same as the day before. So you have to be energized; you have to be focused."

There must be days, though, when Clinton doesn't want to get out of bed. "Oh, God, yes," she says. "The
mornings are okay, but by the end of the day, I'm sometimes so tired that I just go home, put my feet up,
read magazines, watch TV, try to take my mind out of where I've been all day."

Thankfully, Clinton is a diligent organizer of her own time. She has a personal trainer who "comes and
tortures me" at her Washington residence at 6:00 A.M. up to three times a week. "Not that it shows," she
chuckles, "but it does energize me." She is also a champion napper. Reines notes that in her cabin on her
Special Air Mission plane, Clinton can sleep through both takeoff and landing. "I often sleep through both,
yeah," she says. How? "Because I'm so tired! I think I'm chronically exhausted." Unsurprisingly, she's big
on caffeine. "When I'm in meetings, fending off jet lag, and people come with the trays of coffee and tea,
I think, Oh, my gosh, I'll stay awake for another hour."

The consensus is that more than two years into her position as secretary of state, Clinton has found her
groove. Although she occupies the world's most prominent and challenging diplomatic post, she seems
almost ... relieved. "This is a nonpolitical job," she explains. "I'm not in the fray the way that I was, and
that gives you a certain sort of safe haven, even though much of what I do is by nature difficult and in
some quarters controversial, because how you deal with China, how you deal with Russia ..." Do you smile
at Hugo Chavez or not? She nods. "Do you smile at Chavez or not."

So often vilified during her time as first lady of the United States, Clinton is now often cited as the
country's most admired woman. This is gratifying to her staff, who collectively feel something like
vindication that the American public is finally getting what they knew all along. "The caricature of her was
that she was frosty, calculating, unfeeling," says Reines. "But what was so surprising to me was not how
wrong it was but how quickly you see that it's wrong." "I could never understand it," says Capricia Penavic
Marshall, U.S. chief of protocol. "People had preconceived notions about her. But I think she is now seen
for more of the person that she is." Adds Mills, "You are grateful when people you believe in get positive
recognition for who they are."

Clinton herself must have noticed this sea change. "You know, I don't think about it because I've always
been the same person, but I've been in different situations," she says. "And the way I've either been
judged or criticized has as much to do with what I was doing. Like, for example, as we've seen recently
with President Obama, when you take on health care, you are going to be heavily criticized. I took it on as
first lady," she says, recalling the 1993 Clinton health-care plan, which died in Congress. "It was a very
difficult experience, but it was the right thing to do. It laid the groundwork for what I hope will be a
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777693 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777693 Date: 01/07/2016




lasting, major accomplishment of this administration. But it had so much less to do with me than the fact
that I was willing to take on a hard issue."

She seems resigned to gender being an issue in politics. "Being a serious candidate for president as a
woman brought out all the stuff that still exists about that," she says. "Some of it was personal, some of it
was gender based, and you kind of accept it. I think that if you live long enough, you realize that so much
of what happens in life is out of your control, but how you respond to it is in your control. That's what I try
to remember."

Indeed. While Clinton has taken to her role like a duck to water, 2010 had its challenges. The release of a
cache of U.S. embassy cables by WikiLeaks, in which confidential and sometimes critical observations of
foreign officials and policy were made public, was an embarrassment to the American government. Clinton
approached the issue the way she approaches everything: pragmatically. Over many "long days," she
made call lists and methodically worked her way through them. "I told somebody, 'You know how rock
groups go on these global tours? I should have a jacket that says THE APOLOGY TOUR because
everywhere I go, I'm apologizing for any embarrassment," she says wryly.

Clinton says WikiLeaks "just added multiple additional layers of responsibility and outreach. The diplomats
were doing their jobs. You get unvarnished opinions, but they are just opinions. They are not policy, and
they should not be in any way confused with policy. But some of the judgments made, the opinions that
were offered, were embarrassing to people."

She continues, "Then there were people who said, 'How can I ever have a candid conversation with you
again if these things are going to be reported?' Which were never meant to be exposed until maybe 50
years from now. So we've had to really work hard to maintain that candor that is critical to diplomacy."

The real danger of WikiLeaks, Clinton argues, is "a third category where, because of what was exposed,
people are physically at risk. They are sources for us, they are human-rights advocates, they are whistle-
blowers around the world. So that's been the most long-lasting damage, and it's serious damage."

The stresses of Clinton's position are hard to imagine ("Sometimes I get very upset and angry if I think
that people are doing things that are stupid, or put other people at risk, or are breaking agreements"), but
she deals with it in her own way. She loves to swim "in pools, in oceans, in lakes." When she heads home
to Chappaqua, in upstate New York, on the weekends, she does yoga with a teacher. She's also fond of
putting her house in order: "Clean out a closet, a kitchen drawer, anything that has a beginning, a middle,
and an end, because much of what I do goes on and on and on."

She and President Clinton. clear their heads with long walks. "We go off with the dogs and have a good
walk through the woods, then usually a movie, out to dinner," she says. Thanks to their friends in the
entertainment industry, the Clintons have a pile of Oscar screeners at home: "The King's Speech, that's on
the top of my list. I want to see True Grit, The Kids Are All Right ..."

On television, Clinton tries not to miss Grey's Anatomy. "I am fascinated by the incidents they
manufacture. It's just amazing to me. The guy has a bomb in his belly. Oh, okay. ..." Also, thanks to her
91-year-old mother, Dorothy Rodham, she is regularly briefed on Dancing with the Stars. "My mother was
pulling for [last season's winner] Jennifer Grey. I mean, she was so empathetic with the cancer and the
screws and the plates and the back, the whole deal." And what of Bristol Palin? "I'm speaking for my
mother here; my mother thought it was very nice that she competed but that she was not up to Jennifer
by any means."

Clinton's knowledge of popular culture is on a higher level than that of most in the governmental set.
Senior adviser Lona Valmoro remembers briefing her on a meeting with Angelina Jolie in 2005. "She was
like, 'Oh, Tomb Raider."

On fashion, Clinton is self-deprecating and often hilarious. She's known for her pantsuits, but her staffers
say nothing makes her happier than a good handbag. "I do love a good handbag," she agrees. Can
accessories be the great uniter of women? "I think they could be either a great divider or uniter," she
replies. "I'm on the uniter side. I think no one should make fun of anyone else's handbag choices." She
warms to the topic. "I think we should be united in our support of one another. Because this is like a deep
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777693 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777693 Date: 01/07/2016




psychological need. It's a desire to kind of organize and contain that which is important to you in your
daily life. I have a philosophical view about this, and I have this Ferragamo hot-pink bag that I adore. My
view was that I would carry it around only in spring, but it makes me so happy, I'm even now lugging it
around in January. I mean, how can you be unhappy if you pick up a big pink bag?"

In her 2003 memoir, Living History, Clinton was equally amusing on the topic of her "lifelong hair
struggles." She is bemused by the press she received last September during the UN General Assembly in
New York, a fateful day when she put her hair up with a butterfly clip. "It was a Sunday," she says, "a day
of rest! I had actually lost track of time, to be honest, and I'd gone swimming, and then I realized I had to
get moving, and I didn't have time to do anything else, so I really just did the best I could." She starts to
laugh. "I didn't think it looked that bad, but ... what do I know?"

Clinton is often surprised when people tell her she is so much prettier in the flesh. "It's nice, but on the
other hand, you think, Oh, my God, most people never see me in person; what do they think I look like? I
do not take pictures well, I know that." Ironically, on meeting Chavez in Brazil in January, Clinton looked
radiant, like she couldn't wait to have a beer with him. "Really?" She asks one of her staff to pull up the
picture. "Huh. Well, that's the only way to deal with him, I think."

Bill Clinton once said of his wife that she was "going to live to be 110. She might have three husbands
after me." Clinton laughs and says, "Well, I doubt that very much. I'm not going to do this forever. I want
to teach. I want to speak. I want to travel." She also wants to spend more time with her family, with her
newly married daughter, Chelsea, who is clearly the delight of her life. Ask Clinton if she looks forward to
being a grandmother one day and she replies, "Well, no pressure, because I don't want to be one of those
kinds of mothers. But obviously, someday, I'd love it." What kind of grandmother would she be? "Probably
an unbearable one, the kind who is saying, 'Oh, my gosh, I'll take the child, I'll do whatever you need to
get done."

She says that Chelsea has not expressed an interest in politics, but should she change her mind, "I have
such confidence in her, she'll do what she thinks is right for her. I'm really only wanting her to follow
whatever course makes her happy."

As for Clinton's own postsecretary course, she says, "I'd probably teach international relations, current
events, something involving women's roles and rights around the world. I have no idea what I'm going to
do, but I have a lot of interests that I hope to fulfill. And then an occasional beach, an occasional time-
out."

And what of 2016, the next date Clinton could conceivably run for president? "I have no thoughts for
2016," she says with a benevolent smile. "Beaches ... speeches."



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777693 Date: 01/07/2016
