UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796852 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                           RELEASE IN FULL




                                        CONFIDENTIAL



                                                January 4, 2013



  For: Hillary
  From: Sid
  Re: Comprehensive Intel Report on Libya


  SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Government, as well as the
  highest levels of European governments and Western intelligence and security services.


  1. In reviewing the events of the past year, as well as their plans for 2013, Libyan President
  Mohamed Magariaf and Prime Minister Ali Zidan discussed their frustration over the pace of
  efforts to define the relationship between the legislature and the interim government, establish
  the authority of this national government throughout the country, and deal with security issues
  that have lingered since the fall of former dictator Muammar al Qaddafi in late 2011. Speaking
  on condition of absolute secrecy, a source with access to the Office of the President stated that
  during late December 2012 Magariaf and Zidan agreed that they must move quickly to deal with
  these problematic issues before they can address their long term strategy of developing
  productive diplomatic and business relationships with their neighboring states in North Africa,
  Western Europe and the United States.

  2. (Source Comment: According to this source, while Zidan and Magariaf often disagree on
  the mechanics involved in establishing the authority of the government, they are making a
  concerted effort to avoid allowing their political differences to complicate their efforts to govern
  the country. This individual notes that the two men opposed each other in the August 2012
  presidential election and they have not yet addressed the issue of how best to work together in
  the next national election, scheduled for mid-2013. However; they realize the fragile nature of
  the current Libyan government and are determined, for the present, to work together on the large
  national issues, leaving the day to day political infighting to the members of the General National
  Council--GNC. This individual believes these structural problems cannot be addressed in a
  serious manner until the President and Prime Minister are able to define their specific roles.)

  3. For his part Zidan believes that the government and the National Oil Company (NOC) can
  eventually establish new relationships with Western oil firms, allowing Libyans to be trained to
  fill jobs at all levels of that industry, including positions previously reserved for foreign experts




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796852 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796852 Date: 01/07/2016




  during the Qaddafi regime. The Prime Minister stated that this program will cement his
  popularity with the Libyan people and allow him to consolidate the role of the government
  across the country. Zidan realizes that he does not have enough time to make significant
  progress on this matter before the next round of national elections, however; he believes that
  positive steps in this direction will be popular, and allow him to gain enough support to establish
  a basis for a more effective administration.

  4. In the opinion of this individual Magariaf supports Zidan in this matter and is particularly
  interested in resolving the ongoing issues regarding the federalist movement in the Eastern
  Cyrenaica region (Barqa in Arabic). The President is convinced that finding a reasonable
  solution to the demands of the Eastern political and tribal groups will allow the current
  government to move to complete its program of disarming the independent militia units left over
  from the 2011 revolution. At the same time this will allow the National Libyan Army (NLA) and
  police forces to deal with militia units that have established contacts with opposition Salafist
  groups, as well as Al Qai'da in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM). Magariaf continues to cite the
  development of Ansar al Sharia as an example of how a militia or group of militias can establish
  a relationship with AQIIVI and other radical organizations, eventually turning to attack Western
  interests in the Benghazi region. Magariaf bases his concerns on the best information available
  and while he believes that the NLA has made progress against Ansar al Sharia and similar groups
  the Army is still limited by the relative weakness of the government.

  5. (Source Comment: Also in December Zidan, Oil Minister Abdulbari al-Arusi and Italian oil
  firm ENT's CEO Paolo Scaroni met at the Prime Minister's office to discuss ENI plans for
  developing new operations in Libya. According to an extremely sensitive source, these talks
  went very well. After the meeting Zidan noted that Scaroni was obviously extremely anxious to
  develop a new, special relationship with the post-revolutionary Libyan government and intended
  to gain an advantage on other Western firms looking to do business in the country. This source
  added that, according to Zidan's staff, Scaroni proposed a plan calling for an $8.5 billion
  investment in both ongoing production and new exploration spread over 10 years. Later, in
  discussing the meeting, Zidan and his aides agreed that Scaroni had the full backing of the Italian
  government in this matter. Zidan added that his contacts in Rome report that the Italian
  administration believes this investment in Libya will help them deal with the long term economic
  problems they are facing during the current European debt crisis.)

  6. According to this sensitive source, the Libyans and Scaroni worked out a rough draft of an
  initial Memorandum of Understanding, covering an initial investment of approximately $420
  million, which will be finalized before Zidan's planned visit to Rome in late January 2013.
  Before the Tripoli meeting ended the Prime Minister requested that Scaroni consider committing
  ENI to work on additional operations in the downstream sector under a new office of the Libyan
  National Oil Corporation, which the Oil Ministry plans to establish in Benghazi. Zidan noted
  that EM began working in Libya in 1958, and, in his opinion remains the most important
  international oil company operating in the country. When Zidan briefed Magariaf on the
  meeting with Scaroni, the President agreed that the EM proposal is an important matter for the
  new Libyan government, however; he cautioned that the recent resignation of Italian Prime
  Minister Mario Monti might complicate the affair. Zidan stated that his contacts in Rome assure
  him that the importance of the new ENI proposal for Libya transcends the ongoing political




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796852 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796852 Date: 01/07/2016




  infighting in Rome. Both the Prime Minister and President agreed that with the prospect of new
  EM operations and personnel in Libya, the Army and police forces must be able to improve
  security conditions for Western interests throughout the country.

  7. (Source Comment: In the opinion of this sensitive source, while Magriaf and Zidan have
  established a relationship that allows them to work together for the present, they will be unable
  to build an effective government administration until they define clearly the roles of the
  President and Prime Minister in the post — Qaddafi era.)

  8. During late December 2012 Libyan Prime Minister Ali Zidan complained in private to
  President Mohamed Magariaf that the General National Council (GNC) had placed the interim
  government in an awkward position by enacting legislation demanding that National Libyan
  Army (NLA) Chief of Staff General Youssef al Mangoush move to close the country's borders
  by deploying his troops, along with loyal Tripoli based militia units, to patrol the borders, in an
  effort to prevent external groups from supporting anti-government forces, including the
  remaining supporters of former dictator Muammar al Qaddafi. According to a source, speaking
  in strict confidence, Magariaf assured Zidan that he had no hand in this decision, and that the
  GNC had acted on its own initiative based on internal political considerations. The President
  added that he continues to support Zidan's recent efforts to establish security relationships with
  neighboring states, and acknowledged that the GNC action would complicate this process.

  9. (Source Comment: According to this individual, Zidan believes that the factional/regional
  parties in the GNC took this step in an effort to gain a greater voice in foreign affairs. The
  legislation complicates the implementation of diplomatic agreements regarding border security
  arranged by Zidan during a recent trip to Chad, Niger, Algeria and Sudan. These agreements
  were established in coordination with Magariaf s earlier security initiative involving the new
  revolutionary governments of Tunisia and Egypt. According to this source, the neighboring
  states agreed to increase border patrols and to monitor their shared borders with Mali. Speaking
  privately, Zidan told his closest advisors that the GNC plan to seal Libya's southern borders
  would complicate this process and confuse the North African states regarding who in the Libyan
  government is responsible for foreign affairs and security issues.)

   10. In the opinion of this sensitive source Magariaf remains committed to the regional security
   agreements he reached with the governments of Tunisia and Egypt, and is working with Zidan to
   manage the effect of the GNC on their efforts to prevent foreign assistance from reaching
   dissident militia groups inside of Libya. As it now stands, the GNC action requires the NLA to
   act unilaterally and seal the entire southern border, create a military district along that border,
   and assign a military governor with authority under martial law to arrest or detain wanted
   criminals and dissidents. In private discussions with Zidan, General Mangoush acknowledged
   that the southern region continues to be used by groups smuggling drugs and arms, as well as
   human traffickers, adding that his best troops began operating in the region long before the GNC
   action. The general pointed out that this area is also used by groups still loyal to the Qaddafi
   family. At present many of the NLA's best mechanized units are deployed along the border with
   South Sudan in an effort to block the shipment of weapons and supplies to these groups.
   Mangoush also added in confidence that, in his opinion, this GNC decision was driven by
   political calculation rather than concern over security threats, and signals a potential crisis where




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796852 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796852 Date: 01/07/2016




  GNC deputies attempt to take advantage of institutional weaknesses in the government
  administration to assert a degree of authority over security and foreign policy.

  11. (Source Comment: According to this source, Zidan shared his frustration with Mangoush,
  assuring him that neither he nor his aides had any role in the GNC action. The general was
  particularly angered by the fact that assembly's plan was created without consultation with him
  or his staff, and did not include any realistic consideration of the NLA's ability to carry out this
  expanded mission. Mangoush also noted that a number of GNC deputies criticized the decision
  as rushed and without proper internal discussion. In a separate conversation, Mangoush told a
  senior associate that he believes Zidan may still suspect that Magariaf had a hand in the GNC
  action, in an effort to gain a dominant position in the government. In the opinion of this source,
  the fact that the GNC action came shortly after Zidan's visits to the neighboring states to discuss
  security issues indicates to Mangoush that Magariaf may be moving to ensure that the GNC,
  rather than Zidan and his cabinet control the vital issue of southern security. Mangoush added
  that, in his opinion, despite Magariaf s reassurance, the GNC plan, if left as it stands, effectively .
  removes Zidan as the leading policy-maker on security matters.

  12. According to this individual, Zidan is taking a low key approach in reacting to the GNC
  action, choosing not to take any step that might indicate infighting between himself and
  Magariaf. At the same time the prime minister continues to focus on preserving the validity of
  the agreements recently negotiated with Libya's neighboring states. Speaking in private Zidan
  noted that foreign and security policy are his responsibility, rather than that of the GNC. This
  includes the authority to appoint a commander to oversee the southern military operations. Zidan
  did note that his choice for military governor of the South would have to be approved by
  Magariaf.

  13.According to a very sensitive source, the serious nature of the security situation in Libya was
  highlighted in early December 2012, when Mangoush received reporting from the French
  external intelligence service (Direction Generale de la Securite Exterieure — DGSE) that in early
  May 2012 in Northern Mali a mutual cooperation agreement was concluded between terrorist
  groups operating in North Africa. The meeting was led by al Qai'da in the Islamic Maghreb
  (AQIM), Boko Haram of Nigeria, and al Qai'da in East Africa (primarily al Shabaab of
  Somalia), and was designed to launch the final phase of a project intended to establish a
  "caliphate" along an extended strip stretching from South Sudan, through Libya to Mauritania.
  These French officials also warn that subsequent reporting indicates that this effort to
  concentrate Islamist forces in the region is meeting with a degree of success. They also warn
  that these forces are dedicated to "religious cleansing" aimed at the governments in that area.
  The DGSE officials noted that they believe the central figure in this effort is a Somali associated
  with al Shabaab; Sheik NUR BARUD.

  14. In the opinion of this sensitive source the DGSE report highlights the increasingly complex
  nature of the security situation in Libya, particularly as regional security continues to deteriorate.
  Mangoush is urging both Magariaf and Zidan to present a united front on the issue of national
  security, and avoid being caught up in the political infighting in the GNC.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796852 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796852 Date: 01/07/2016




  15. (Source Comment: At the same time, this sensitive source states that the debate over the
  GNC security legislation is an excellent example of the difficulty Zidan is facing in establishing
  a working government administration and effective cabinet. According to this source, Zidan has
  done a good job disguising this problem from foreign diplomats and businessmen, but it will be
  difficult for him to properly organize the government until these political issues have been
  addressed. In addition, Zidan's efforts are complicated by the ongoing legal problems of former
  National Transitional Council (NTC) leader Mustafa Abdul-Jalil, who will be questioned by both
  military and civilian prosecutors regarding his role in the July 2011 assassination of General
  Abdel-Fattah Younis, Gadhafi's former interior minister and one of the first major defectors
  from the old regime. Jalil and 10 other NTC officials have been charged with Younis' death,
  though none have been arrested. This individual notes that a significant number of the advisors
  and cabinet officials working with Zidan are also former associates of Jalil under the NTC. This
  individual believes that this matter further complicates the prime minister's efforts to establish an
  efficient, respected administration before the mid-2013 national elections.)

  16. (Source Comment: At the height of the 2011 revolution against the Qaddafi regime,
  extremely sensitive reporting indicated that in July and August 2011 NTC security officers
  discovered evidence that Younis was in secret contact with Saif al Islam Qaddafi. In response to
  this report a sensitive source stated that Jalil ordered NTC security officers to assassinate Younis
  while en route to a meeting at NTC headquarters. Jalil then reported that Younis had been killed
  by Islamist dissidents among his troops.)




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796852 Date: 01/07/2016
