      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798133 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART B5


From:                           Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                           Monday, October 29, 2012 12:14 PM
To:
Cc:                             Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject:                        FW: Possible Changes in USAID Global Footprint



FYI


From: Goldberg, Robert H
Sent: Monday, October 29, 2012 11:31 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Nides, Thomas R
Cc: Ballou-Aares, Daniella; Sullivan, Steph - D(N)
Subject: Possible Changes in USAID Global Footprint

This email is a heads up more than anything. I was briefed last week on USAID's plans to become
more selective and focused in where it deploys its development resources. This will manifest in
several ways that will require engagement with bureaus in the Department.

      •   In the near term, USAID plans to downsize or eliminate existing missions in several regions. Raj
          may want to publicly announce these plans early next year.
      •   Over a longer term - linked to the annual budget formulation process -- USAID will propose to
          reduce or eliminate its work in various sectors and countries based on specific criteria.

In and of themselves, these actions are consistent with the PPD on Development and the
QDDR. However, we need to make sure that the Department of State is fully engaged in these
discussions as regional bureaus and Chiefs of Mission have strong policy equities in USAID's presence
and its programs. I made the point to USAID that involvement with State is critical and I suggested
that Raj raise his plans with you soon. Raj may raise this with the Secretary at his next available
opportunity.

USAID is proposing to change the nature of its presence in several countries - moving from a full-
blown mission to a smaller "office" indicating a smaller bilateral program to having just one Senior
Development Advisor where the focus will be on multilateral development and to interact with the
regional mission for any program work that will be conducted.

In Africa:
    • Namibia                 and Benin will change from a full mission to an "office" to reflect
        development progress (Namibia and Benin)

In Asia:
    • Mongolia will change from a presence to a non-presence
    • Sri Lanka will change from a full mission to an office

In Europe/Eurasia
    • Albania and Macedonia will change from a full mission to an office

In Latin America
    • Paraguay and Jamaica will change from a full mission to an office (Paraguay may be revisited
        depending on the political situation there)

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798133 Date: 01/07/2016
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798133 Date: 01/07/2016




   •    Brazil will convert from a mission to a Senior Development Advisor
   •    Guyana and Venezuela will be non-presence countries.

Those countries where USAID's presence will downgrade will be supported from regional missions
(eg., South Africa, Ghana, Bangkok, India,). At the same time USAID is downsizing its presence in
these places, USAID will establish a footprint in several new places. USAID will establish Senior
Development Advisors in countries that do not now have a USAID presence: Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Cote D'Iviore, Niger. USAID recently established a new mission in Burma and will set up
new offices in Libya and Tunisia. The changes in USAID's footprint is not likely to yield much in the way
of budget savings, but USAID is looking at this now.

USAID acknowledges that their interactions with State regional bureaus have been spotty and
inconsistent - better with WHA, not so much with EUR/ACE. I do think that USAID is doing the right
thing and assessing its footprint overseas and looking at ways to provide regional support to countries
with small bilateral programs. But I do not believe that USAID is an independent actor here. While
the distinctions between a "mission" and an "office" may be lost on many not steeped in the USAID
bureaucracy, Chiefs of mission and other State Department officials need to be a part of these
decisions given the growing linkages between development and diplomacy and the potential optics
of changing USAID's presence and the potential reduction in our programs.

ON the program side, USAID is looking at ways to better focus its development funding and is
reviewing criteria to govern such decisions - such as the size of a program, setting limits on the
number of sectors in a given country/region we work in, etc. Changes in USAID's program and
funding will manifest in next budget cycle.

If Raj raises this with you or the Secretary, I think the best approach is to develop a process where
State regional Assistant Secretaries and affected Chiefs of Mission can be brought into the discussion
so we have a comprehensive approach to USAID's presence and its work overseas.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798133 Date: 01/07/2016
