UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784490 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL




                                      CONFIDENTIAL



                                              November 23, 2011



 For: HRC
 From: Sid
 Re: Secret offer to el Baradei/Muslim Brotherhood-Army alliance


 SOURCE: Sources with access to the highest levels of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, as
 well as Western Intelligence and security services.



         1. During a series of meetings over November 21 and November 22, 2011, senior
 officers of the Egypt's ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) met discreetly with
 Mohammed el Baradei , the former director of the United Nations International Atomic Energy
 Agency (IEA) and candidate for the Presidency of Egypt. These discussions centered on the
 possibility of el Baradei stepping in as interim Prime Minister in an effort to address the
 frustration of pro-democracy demonstrators currently clashing with Egyptian Army and Security
 forces in Cairo's Tahrir Square. The SCAF officers believe that el Baradei's record of political
 independence from the SCAF will allow him to address the concerns of the demonstrators
 regarding extended military rule. In these discussions el Baradei demanded assurances that he
 would not be a puppet of the SCAF, with the freedom to name his own cabinet. The SCAF
 Officers indicated that they would have to consider this, but noted that under any circumstances,
 the SCAF would remain the ultimate authority in Egypt, pending the conclusion in 2012 of a
 series of national elections beginning on November 28, 2011.



          2. (Source Comment: The leaders of the SCAF believe that el Baradei can not only calm
  the situation Tahrir Square, but due to his long experience at the UN he will reassure foreign
  businesses regarding political and security stability in Egypt. These officers also believe they
  can control el Baradei if he accepts the position. One sensitive source noted that el Baradei must
  certainly know that his position would be managed by the SCAF, but hope his ambition may lead
  him to accept the offer. Despite the resignation of the incumbent Prime Minister, Essam Sharaf,



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784490 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784490 Date: 01/07/2016




continue, even inthe face of deadly force. For his part Tantawi has informed the MB leadership
that the Army and security forces will use increasingly aggressive measures to counter the
demonstrators, and he asks that they step up their efforts to reduce the level of violence among
the pro-democracy demonstrators.)

         6. According to knowledgeable individuals, Badie and the other leaders of the MB are
 also extremely concerned over the growing violence in Cairo. They note that during recent
 attacks against the Coptic Christian community in Egypt, the MB and the SCAF worked
 discreetly to ensure that the military and security forces did not intervene forcefully to protect the
 Copts as they were besieged by Islamist groups. At that time the MB warned that any serious
 intervention would set off violent demonstrations among the many small and often radical
 political groups that formed during the uprising against former President Hosni Mubarak. In this
 discussion Subhi Saleh, a lawyer and former Member of Parliament, who served as the MB
 delegate to the March 2011 constitutional commission, pointed out that discussions between the
 MB and the SCAF regarding the Copts had been relatively simple, because both sides were not
 concerned about the fate of the Coptic Christian community. In the case of the Tahrir Square
 demonstrations, the MB and SCAF cannot ignore the scope of the movement. According a
 knowledgeable source, Subhi advised Badie to remember that Tantawi is first and foremost a
 military man who will be tempted to react with a steady escalation of force if the demonstrators
 do not begin to disperse. This source belieVes that Badie agrees with this analysis but added that
 the MB's ability to influence the young demonstrators is increasingly limited.

         7. (Source Comment: One particularly sensitive individual added that Subhi, speaking
 on behalf of Badie, warned SCAF officers that the MB believes an increasing number of
 Egyptian Army conscripts are sympathetic to the Tahrir Square demonstrators. At the same
 time, Subhi stated in confidence that MB sympathizers associated with the SCAF have advised
 that the GID is continuing well established, discreet liaison discussions with the Israeli Mossad,
 providing Tantawi with a vehicle to address potential areas of conflict with Israel. The Brothers
 fear that through this relationship Israel can influence and manipulate the SCAF, particularly
 regarding support for Hamas and other Palestinian groups, as well as border security.)

         8. In the opinion of these knowledgeable sources, the MB and the SCAF will continue to
 work together secretly in an effort to establish a stable government in Egypt. At that point they
 can be expected to begin competing aggressively with each other for final control of the country.
 Both bodies are particularly interested in creating a secure environment throughout the country,
 looking to reassure foreign investors and tourists. These individuals believe, however, that
 Egypt will see repeated episodes of often intense violence as the members of the pro-democracy
 movement become increasingly frustrated by the domination of the political process by the
 established leaders of the military and the MB.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784490 Date: 01/07/2016
