    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779632 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                             B6



From:                           sbwhoeop
Sent:                           Thursday, February 24, 2011 11:25 PM
To:
Subject:                        H: URGENT INTEL. Libya WMD. Sid
Attachments:                    hrc memo libya wmd 022411.docx; hrc memo libya wmd 022411.docx




                                     CONFIDENTIAL



                                             February 24, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Libya WMD

Key: Sources report on Qaddafi and disposition of his WMD. He has not thoroughly dismantled his chemical
weapons facility and has tons of material that could potentially be weaponized. So far this has not occurred and
supposedly the material is "secure." But Qaddafi and Mousa Kousa are talking "in private" about using WMD
against rebel forces.

Remember, Tyler Drumheller was the one who exposed Curveball's fraud before Colin Powell's UN speech
and personally briefed CIA Deputy Director McLaughlin on Curveball, the sole source on Iraqi WMD, a week
before Powell spoke. Tyler is very careful on the subject of WMD.

The latest report:

During the afternoon of February 24, 2011 a former official of the Libyan Government stated in
confidence that, according to advisors to Muammar Qaddafi, the Libyan leader remains furious at the
United States and the countries of Western Europe, whom he feels should be assisting him during
the current crisis: Qaddafi believes that following his 2003-2004 agreements with the West regarding
Weapons of Mass Destruction, these countries are obligated to support his regime. These individuals
state that if Qaddafi is threatened with defeat, he will not hesitate to destroy as much of Libya's oil
industry infrastructure as his troops can reach. Former government officials are also concerned that
Qaddafi will use all of the weapons available to him.

While the bulk of Libya's Weapons of Mass Destruction were removed under the 2003-2004
agreement with the United States and Great Britain, the cleanup of the chemical weapons facility at
Rapta was never completed and several tons of precursor material remains in Libyan hands. These
individuals believe that these materials are not weaponized and that they are still secure. That said,
Qaddafi, and Mousa Kousa have both stated in private conversations during the last two days, that a
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779632 Date: 01/07/2016
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779632 Date: 01/07/2016




limited amount of weaponized material was held back after 2003-2004, and that special Army units
could use these weapons against rebel forces if they gain control of significant portions of Tripoli.

(Source Comment: These sources emphasized in the strongest terms that they had no evidence of
the presence of weaponized chemical material, other than Qaddafi's statements. They believe that it
is possible Qaddafi may have been trying to impress and reassure those security officials remaining
loyal to him. They add that this threat to use chemical weapons may also be an effort to intimidate
the Western countries. These officials are, however, concerned over these threats, which they
believe, if true, would mean disaster for Libya.)

Qaddafi remains convinced that if he can hold on to power long enough the forces opposing him will
begin to argue among themselves, and eventually he will be able to reassert authority over the
country. Qaddafi's sons Saif al-Islam and Montasem are encouraging him to carry on the fight, and
they are supported in this position by Foreign Minister Mousa Kousa. Qaddafi continues to enjoy the
support of the Presidential Guard, elements of the National Guard, and Army Special Forces units
supported by mercenary troops from Chad, and other Central African Countries. Qaddafi has ordered
these troops to use extreme force in putting down demonstrations and when fighting rebellious
troops. Qaddafi is also supported by the External Security Organization (ESO) and other parts of his
intelligence network.

(Source Comment: According individuals with direct knowledge of the situation, Mousa Kousa will
remain with Qaddafi as long as they have a claim to power. Mousa Kousa was the leader of the
Libyan intelligence community for 30 years, during which time he was involved with early Libyan
support for a variety of terrorist groups, including the IRA, ETA, and The Baader-Meinhoff gang, as
well as Black September and other groups focused on the Arab-Israeli conflict. With this in mind,
Mousa Kousa fears that the fall of Qaddafi will lead to the release of documents that will expose his
role in terrorist attacks associated with these groups in Europe and the Middle East during the 1970s
and 80s.)

At present, African mercenaries wearing yellow hats are engaged in house by house search of the
areas of Tripoli still controlled by the Qaddafi regime. They are looking for opposition supporters,
foreign journalists, and deserters from the Army. At the same time, Special Forces snipers are firing
on groups of protesters gathering around the city.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779632 Date: 01/07/2016
