UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785855 Date: 01/07/2016

                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL


                                        CONFIDENTIAL



                                               March 9, 2011



  For: Hillary
  From: Sid
  Re: Serious problems for Libyan rebels

  The latest report:



  (Source Comment: Private individuals in Europe, with ties to the leadership of the National
  Libyan Council (NLC), plan to urge the NLC military committee to consider hiring private
  troops (mercenaries) to support, organize, and train the rebel forces in Libya. These individuals
  believe that NATO and the Western allies will not make a decision to aid the rebels until they are
  faced with a humanitarian disaster, and that the revolution is in danger. At the same time, these
  individuals believe a small number of private troops could turn the battle against Qaddafi's
  forces, particularly if they are equipped with sophisticated anti-aircraft weapons. These
  individuals also believe that experienced troops will have little trouble shooting down Libyan
  aircraft and attack helicopters. In the opinion of these sources, this would have a devastating
  psychological affect on Qaddafi's troops.)


  During the afternoon of March 8, individuals with access to Saif al Islam Qaddafi stated in
  confidence that Muammar al Qaddafi is increasingly confident that his troops can drive back
  rebel forces attempting to advance on Tripoli from Benghazi. According to these individuals,
  Qaddafi continues to believe that, if he and his supporters can hold on to power for the next two
  weeks, the morale of the rebel forces will begin to falter, while the opposition NLC, and the
  tribal leaders will begin to fight among themselves.

  Knowledgeable individuals with access to the European security community state that they
  believe reports that Qaddafi may be preparing to flee the country are false. That said, they add
  that, in their opinion, the NATO surveillance of Libya will be able to tell if and when Qaddafi
  does prepare to leave. They add that to date there appears to be no activity indicating that such a
  move is about to take place.

  (Source Comment: According to knowledgeable individuals, military commanders loyal to
  Qaddafi, including his son Khamis, are surprised that NATO and the other Western military
  organizations have not taken a more direct hand in the fighting. They continue to be concerned
  over this possibility, particularly in the wake of the capture of Dutch Marines west of Tripoli,
  and reports of British Special Forces troops being detained by rebel forces near Benghazi, while
  attempting to contact the NLC. That said, these military commanders still believe that NATO,
  and particularly the United States are using satellite imagery and other sophisticated surveillance
  devices to monitor the military situation in Libya. They have warned Qaddafi, that although the
  Western powers appear to be reluctant to enter the fighting, this surveillance can identify anti-
  aircraft facilities and other sensitive targets, and allows NATO commanders to move quickly if
  they decide to implement a no fly zone over Libya, or become more directly involved in aiding
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785855 Date: 01/07/2016
