    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797015 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                   B6



From:                        H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                        Thursday, December 20, 2012 1:52 PM
To:                          'sullivanjj@state.goV
Subject                      Fw: H: Libya, latest Benghazi intel. Sid
Attachments:                 hrc memo libya, benghazi, oil 121012.docx



More info.


From: Sidney Blumenthal [mailto:sbwhoeop
Sent: Monday, December 10, 2012 02:56 Pv tcmern tandard Time
To: H
Subject: H: Libya, latest Benghazi intel. Sid




                                   CONFIDENTIAL



                                           December 10, 2012



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Libya, Benghazi, Oil


SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Government, as well as the highest levels
of European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.


       1. During early December 2012 Libyan Prime Minister Ali Zidan and President Mohamed
Magariaf concluded a series of discreet meetings with selected tribal leaders from Eastern Cyrenaica
region (Barqa in Arabic), after which they agreed that the problem of the growing Barqa federalist
movement is gaining strength and will again become a major issue in early 2013. At the same time
National Libyan Army (NLA) Chief of Staff General Youssef al Mangoush warned Zidan that the
Eastern tribes have rearmed and reequipped in the past three months and are preparing to reassert
their desire for a degree of autonomy in early 2013. Mangoush also advised that the situation in the
region between Benghazi and the Egyptian border may become increasingly complicated as Salafist
fighters from Egypt continue to arrive in Benghazi. Mangoush reported that his staff officers have
been advised in secret by aids to Egyptian Army Chief of Staff, General Mohammed al-Sissi, that,
acting under instructions from Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi, military and security forces are
taking steps to detain or neutralize extreme Salafist para-military groups and that a number of these
fighters are fleeing to Libya. According to the Libyan commander, these Salafist fighters are
comfortable in Benghazi, where many of them served with Libyan revolutionary forces during the
rebellion against former dictator Muammar al Qaddafi.

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797015 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797015 Date: 01/07/2016




       2. In the opinion of this individual, Zidan and Magariaf, after consulting with Minister of Oil
Abdulbari al-Arusi, decided to move forward with a plan dating back to the administration of former
Oil Minister Abdulrahman Ben Yezza dividing the National Oil Corporation"s (NOC) production and
exploration divisions into two separate firms. With this in mind, al-Arusi began discussing the matter
with concerned parties in late November and early December. Included in these discussions were
meetings with members of the local federalist council in Benghazi and tribal officials from Barqa. In
these sessions Al-Arusi described a new structure managing all existing oil-related firms, while
building new operations and raising funds from investors outside of the country. This firm will be
divided into two branches, one in Benghazi and one in Tripoli. Al-Arusi added that the cost of this
project will range between fifty (50) and sixty (60) billion dinars.
       3. (Source Comment: According to a separate sensitive source, this concept came as a surprise
to most of the local officials in Tripoli and Benghazi. This individual added that while the Western
officials continue to have some questions about the matter, the Benghazi/Barqa leaders were, in al-
Arusi's opinion, positive, if not enthusiastic about the new initiative. According to al-Arusi, doubts on
either side relate to the mistrust that remains between the two regions, but he is determined to move
ahead in this matter and is supported by Zidan and Magariaf. According to this source, the president
and prime minister are convinced that they must deal with this internal East-West issue before they
can bring a stable security environment to the country, and disarm the remaining independent
militias in each part of the country. This individual added that in private discussions al-Arusi stated
that the tentative name for this new oil entity will be the National Corporation for Oil Refining and
Petrochemicals Industry, with its headquarters in Tripoli, and substantive offices in Benghazi. Like
the NOC, the new firm will fall under the Ministry of Oil and Gas.)
        4. In addition, this sensitive source noted that Al-Arusi is also discussing the creation of a
company specializing in mechanical construction related to the oil and gas industry. This firm would
be based in Benghazi. The minister stated in private that he believes such a company can be
developed to compete with international firms in this very complex field. He also believes that such a
firm must be managed by experienced, scientifically-qualified Libyans, with reputations for honesty.
He noted that until as such a cadre is developed it may be desirable to use experts from Egypt to fill
the immediate needs of the firm. Al-Arusi believes this firm should have offices in all of the oil fields
and loading facilities. The minister also plans to establish an office in Benghazi, similar to Tripoli's oil
institute, a facility that will train students looking to pursue oil-related studies. In addition, al-Arusi is
making plans to reopen the Higher Petroleum Institute in Tobruk, which was closed by Qaddafi at the
beginning of the revolution. He told a sensitive source that he expects the Tobruk institute to produce
thousands of skilled engineers to provide Libyan managers for the future operation of the oil sector.
 Once the final details are set the Zidan regime will submit the entire package for parliamentary
 approval and financing

       6. (Source Comment: Advisors to Magariaf state in confidence that, in their opinion this
comprehensive plan for the oil industry will face opposition from individuals with links to foreign oil
firms, primarily foreign trained engineers who hope to see greater privatization in the oil an oil
services industries in the wake of the revolution. According to a particularly sensitive source, Zidan is
particularly concerned about this possibility, noting that these individuals see this issue in strictly
business terms, not considering the political issues, and the East — West situation, that are all part of
the overall picture in Libya. At present al-Arusi believes that foreign oil firms remain concerned
about the unsettled security situation throughout Libya, however; he is convinced that this new plan
will help address this situation. At present, he noted that the large Italian oil firm ENI is stepping up
its operations throughout Libya, and, with the support of the Italian Government, will continue to
increase its investment in Libya in an effort to get ahead of the other foreign firms concerned in
Libya.)




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797015 Date: 01/07/2016
