      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785157 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                            RELEASE IN PART B5,B3 CIA
                                                                            PERS/ORG,B6


From:                          Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                          Friday, September 30, 2011 5:46 PM
To:
Subject:                        FW: POTUS on Pakistan



FYI




From: Lucas, Laura D
Sent: Friday, September 30, 2011 5:25 PM
To: Nuland, Victoria I; Toner, Mark C
Cc: Fulton, Heide Bronke
Subject: POTUS on Pakistan

                                  I wanted to be sure you saw it. POTUS remarks on Pakistan from a radio interview
he did today.

Q    Mr. President, how many hostile acts must Pakistan commit before we
end all funding? And do you accept Admiral Mullen's assessment that the
al Haqqani network acts as a veritable arm of the ISI?

     THE PRESIDENT:. There is no doubt that you have extremists in
Pakistan in the border region that are crossing the border into
Afghanistan and attacking our guys. And we have pushed Pakistan very hard
on this.

     Now, keep in mind that Pakistan has also provided us outstanding
cooperation in going after al Qaeda. But they still have in their'
territory people who are carrying out actions, particularly in
Afghanistan, that are endangering our troops. So we've been very firm
with them about needing to go after safe havens inside of Pakistan, but
we've tried to also preserve the intelligence cooperation that we've
obtained that's allowed us to go after al Qaeda in a very effective way.

     There's no doubt that the relationship is not where it needs to
be. And we are going to keep on pressing them to recognize that it is in
their interest, not just ours, to make sure that extremists are not
operating within their borders.

           Q    Did Admiral Mullen get it right about al-Haqqani?

THE  PRESIDENT: Well, I think Mike' s testimony expressed frustration over
the fact that safe havens exist, including the Haqqani network' s safe
haven inside of Pakistan. I think that the intelligence is not as clear
as we might like in terms of what exactly that relationship is. But my
attitude is, whether there is active engagement with Haqqani on the part
of the Pakistanis, or rather just passively allowing them to operate with
impunity in some of these border regions, they' ve got to take care of this
problem.
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785157 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785157 Date: 01/07/2016




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.


                                                                                     B6
                                                                                     B3 CIA PERS/ORG-
From: Hayden, Caitlin [maitto,
Sent: Friday, September 30, 2011 5:14 PM
To: Lucas, Laura D; Islamabad, Press;                                                  II;
                                                         #AFPAK; Kabul Press
Subject: FW: Interview of the President by Michael Smerconish via Telephone




From: Suntum, Peggy (Contractor)
Sent: Friday, September 30, 2011 5:09 PM
Subject: Interview of the President by Michael Smerconish via Telephone

                                              THE WHITE HOUSE

                                   Office of the Press Secretary

Internal Transcript                                                            September 30, 2011


                                      INTERVIEW OF THE PRESIDENT
                                        BY MICHAEL SMERCONISH

                                                Via Telephone


1:42 P.M. EDT


        Q      Mr. President, welcome back the Michael Smerconish program.

        THE PRESIDENT: Michael, it's great to talk to you again.

     Q    Thank you, sir. I'm hoping I'll be able to quickly run through
about a dozen questions for you.

        THE PRESIDENT: I will try to keep my answers short and sweet.

     Q   Well, that was my nice way of saying it. Did you like
that? (Laughter.)

     THE PRESIDENT: It wasn't that subtle, man. I'm going to try to keep
pace.

     Q    Mr. President, five times in the past I asked you about the hunt
for bin Laden, including whether you were prepared to take action in


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785157 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785157 Date: 01/07/2016




Pakistan. I want to begin by thanking you for doing exactly that which
you promised on this program.

     THE PRESIDENT: Well, Michael, you remember, even before I was
President, during the campaign, I said that if we got a bead on that guy,
we were going to go after him wherever he was. And that caused some
controversy at the time.

     Q     I remember.

     THE PRESIDENT: But as you well know, justice demanded it. The
safety of the American people demanded it. And when I was up at the
ceremony for the 10th anniversary of 9/11, seeing all those families and
them knowing that justice was done, I think it was a great testament to
the wonderful work by our intelligence teams, and, of course, our Navy
SEALs, who carried out an incredible operation.

     Q     I have a lingering question, I hope you won't mind.

     THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead.

     Q    There you sat the night before,               at the White House
Correspondence dinner. Seth Meyers tells                a joke about bin Laden -- you
laughed. And now we know, in retrospect,                you sat there already having
given the order. As you smiled, what was                running through your mind?

     THE PRESIDENT: Well, I will tell you that that whole night, what was
running through my mind is the safety of those folks who were going out
there. Because this was an incredibly dangerous mission. All kinds of
things could have gone wrong. As everybody I think knows subsequently,
the helicopter had some problems as it was landing in the compound. And
so throughout the month leading up to this event, as we were looking at
how this operation would unfold, the incredible discipline and precision
with which these guys operated, we also knew that it carried a great deal
of risk. And my main concern was just making sure that we got our guys
back safe.

     Q    Now comes the news that we've taken out Anwar al-Awlaki. Did
you give that order?

     THE PRESIDENT: I can't talk about the operational details,
Michael. This is something that we had been working with the Yemeni
government on for quite some time. There has been significant cooperation
at the intelligence levels with a lot of countries in the region. We are
very pleased that Mr. Awlaki is no longer going to be in a position to
directly threaten the United States homeland, as well as our allies around
the world.

     This is the guy who was at the forefront of ordering the Christmas
Day bomber to carry out his plans. They had put bombs in cartridges,
printer cartridges that were set to go off in U.S. cargo planes. And had


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785157 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785157 Date: 01/07/2016



it not been for outstanding intelligence work and cooperation with some of
our partners, that could have been a catastrophe.

     So this was a guy who was operationally involved in trying to kill
Americans. And the fact that he is no longer around to initiate the kind
of propaganda that also was recruiting people all around the world to that
murderous cause I think is something that's very good for American
security.

     Q    Mr. President, how many hostile acts must Pakistan commit before
we end all funding? And do you accept Admiral Mullen's assessment that
the al Haqqani network acts as a veritable arm of the ISI?

     THE PRESIDENT: There is no doubt that you have extremists in
Pakistan in the border region that are crossing the border into
Afghanistan and attacking our guys. And we have pushed, Pakistan very hard
on this.

     Now, keep in mind that Pakistan has also provided us outstanding
cooperation in going after al Qaeda. But they still have in their
territory people who are carrying out actions, particularly in
Afghanistan, that are endangering our troops. So we've been very firm
with them about needing to go after safe havens inside of Pakistan, but
we've tried to also preserve the intelligence cooperation that we've
obtained that's allowed us to go after al Qaeda in a very effective way.

     There's no doubt that the relationship is not where it needs to
be. And we are going to keep on pressing them to recognize that it is in
their interest, not just ours, to make sure that extremists are not
operating within their borders.

     Q      Did Admiral Mullen get it right about al-Haqqani?

     THE PRESIDENT: Well, I think Mike's testimony expressed frustration
over the fact that safe havens exist, including the Haqqani network's safe
haven inside of Pakistan. I think that the intelligence is not as clear
as we might like in terms of what. exactly that relationship is. But my
attitude is, whether there is active engagement with Haqqani on the part
of the Pakistanis, or rather just passively allowing them to operate with
impunity in some of these border regions, they've got to take care of this
problem.

     Q    Mr. President, let's talk about the debt. Do you think that any
plan to address the budget deficit should include only tax increases, only
spending cuts, or as I suspect you will say, a combination of both? And
if it is the latter, in what proportion?

     THE PRESIDENT: Well, you heard during the debt ceiling debate me out
there repeatedly saying we need a balanced approach. I've already signed
into law a trillion dollars worth of spending cuts on programs that we
either don't need -- some of which are actually very valuable programs,
but nevertheless all of us have to make some sacrifices.

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785157 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785157 Date: 01/07/2016




     I've put forward a plan that has an additional half a trillion
dollars in spending cuts and makes some very difficult choices around
things like agricultural subsidies and how folks in the civil service are
financing their retirements. But when you do all those cuts, you're still
not going to be closing the entire deficit.

     And if we want to fully stabilize our debt and our deficits, then you
also have got to combine it with some revenue. And what I've said is
something that the vast majority not just of Democrats, but actually a
sizable number of Republicans agree with as well, which is, is that
there's got to be a revenue component. There are wealthy Americans who I
think are patriots and are willing to do their part, as long as they are
knowing that their money is going to closing the deficit or for programs
that are going to help make us more competitive_

      And if we make modest adjustments -- closing loopholes, making sure
that the wealthy are paying their fair share, making sure that a guy like
Warren Buffett is paying the same tax rate as his secretary -- then we can
actually stabilize our debt and deficits for at least a decade, if not
more.

     And that's the plan that I've put forward. I'm hoping that Congress
will act on it.

     Q    My wife and mother are both realtors. And my wife, in
particular, every night at dinner talks about the soft market. Here's
what she reports, Mr. President. She says that an increasing number of
deals are short sales, where people are upside down on their
mortgages. She finds that the banks are ill-prepared to do these deals
and wonders what can you do to spur the housing market as well as bring
relief to people whose homes are worth less than their mortgages?

     THE PRESIDENT: Well, one of the things we're trying to do is to work
with the banks to accelerate a short sale process. And for your listeners
who aren't in real estate, a short sale is an option that prevents
foreclosure, but it means that the bank is actually going to do better,
net, than if they actually foreclosed on the mortgage.

     So our attitude has been this is a smart thing to do for families who
are trying to sell their homes, rather than have them foreclosed upon and
all the consequences of that, let's see if we can move that short sale
forward.

     Part of the problem that we have these days is that a lot of
mortgages are not held by banks. They got sliced and diced, packaged into
these mortgage securities, so they've got service companies, and
untangling all the legal issues involved there have been difficult.

     The big thing that we're talking about doing right now that could
have an impact on millions of American homeowners is helping them take
advantage of historically low rates. We have not seen as many

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785157 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785157 Date: 01/07/2016



refinancings of mortgages as we would have expected, given how low rates
are, partly because there are a whole bunch of up-front fees.

     Q    What you would hear from her is that there's a funk out there,
that the product is good, that it's inexpensively priced, comparatively
speaking -- the interest rates are at historic lows -- but there's this
mental malaise that has set in where people are all looking for a sign
before they jump in the water.

     THE PRESIDENT: Well, part of it is psychology. But, look, part of
it, to be honest, is just you still got this shadow inventory of all these
homes that are still on the market. We went on this building binge over
the course of a decade. And as a consequence, you just have a whole bunch
of homes -- particularly in some states like Nevada and Florida and
California, Arizona -- where the supply greatly exceeds demand.

     Now, what we're seeing I think is that the housing market is
beginning to bottom out. Mortgages -- mortgage interest rates are at a
historic low. And if we can just start getting people who are ready to
buy, have good credit, ready to go, them going ahead and dipping their toe
in the water and making those purchases, then hopefully we can get a
virtuous cycle and housing prices can start stabilizing.

     Keeping mind, though, the one thing, Michael, that's important -- and
I think your wife would agree with this -- is people's expectations of
this enormous appreciation in their home values every single year, those
days are not going to come back anytime soon. And I think that purchasers
have to have a understanding that they've got to look at all the
information, make sure that they understand their mortgagees, don't get in
over their heads. But obviously homeownership is still going to be a
central part of the American Dream, and we want to encourage that.

     Q    Yesterday, a woman name Susan called the radio program. I
thought she asked a tremendous question. She said, would you please ask
the President what can we do -- what should we be doing? Should we, the
citizenry, be spending? Should we be saving? Should we be planting a
garden? Should we be hiring college kids? Give us the marching orders so
that we're not entirely reliant on Washington to get us out of
this. What's the answer?

     THE PRESIDENT: Well, obviously, it depends on circumstances. But if
you've got a job right now that's stable and steady, then we want you to
just be out there with confidence, knowing that the American economy is
still the most dynamic in the world. If you need a new washer-dryer, go
out and by the washer-dryer. If you need a new car, go out and buy that
new car. The economy is going to be chugging along. It's not moving as
fast as we would like.

     If you're unemployed, then we want to make sure that you're being
helped. And that's why we put forward this American Jobs Act. Congress
can make a difference right now . to increase growth by 2 percent and put up
to 1.9 million people back to work -- teachers in the classroom,

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785157 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785157 Date: 01/07/2016




 construction workers rebuilding our roads and bridges, giving tax credits
 to small businesses for hiring our veterans who are coming back from Iraq
 and Afghanistan. That will make a big difference. But in the meantime,
 one of the things that a lot of people can do, particularly if they've
 just been laid off and their industry may be contracting, this is a great
 time to get retraining.

      And we've put -- we've made college loans more accessible,than
 they've ever been, Pell grants more accessible than they've ever
 been. Sharpening your skills and retraining for the jobs of the future is
 something that can make a huge difference.

      And if you are a small-businessperson or a large-.businessperson, go
 out there and hire. Take a bet on America. Because the fact of the matter
 is, is that we've got incredible workers out here; they're more productive
 than they've ever been. All they're looking for is a chance, and there is
 a market out there to be had as long as people start getting a little more •
 confidence.

      Q    You mentioned small business. A small businessman is a sponsor
 of mine, good guy named Michael Smythe (phonetic). And he said, when we
 extend the unemployment benefits, he's concerned about the message that it
 sends long term. In other words, he's wondering why not provide small
 businesses with tax incentives to expand payrolls? Because he tells me,
 Mr. President, that when he runs a want ad he's getting the same number of
 people showing up as when the unemployment rate was only 6 percent. What
 do you say to him?

      THE PRESIDENT: Well, you should tell your buddy that, first of all,
 part of the jobs act includes a tax break for small businesses who are
 increasing payroll or, for that matter, increasing wages for their
 existing payroll. So he'll have a huge incentive to hire additionally.

       With respect to unemployment insurance, one of the things that we've
  said is, look, it's important for the economy as a whole as well as these
  families who are down on their luck to make sure that they still have some
  money in their pockets to buy groceries and to be able to keep the lights
  on. But what we've also said is let's start reforming the system. Let's
  adopt some good ideas that have been tried in Georgia and North Carolina
  where rather than just send you an unemployment check, what it does is it
  says, you know what, we'll take part of this unemployment insurance and we
  will apply it to the wages to help subsidize your wages if you're working
. in a temporary job.

      And that's a good, smart way to make sure that people are still in
 the market, getting up, going to work every day -- even if it's not going
 to be their ultimate employment, it keeps their skills sharp, and it fills
 out their resume so as they're looking for permanent employment, they're
 going to be able to have a little more confidence than they would if they
 were just out of the workplace for a long period of time.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785157 Date: 01/07/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785157 Date: 01/07/2016




     Q    I know I'm going to lose you in a minute. Quick question: Are
the goal posts being moved on you in 2012? In my native Pennsylvania,
there's a move afoot that would change the way in which electoral votes
are apportioned. You picked up 21 in '08. You'd only have a net gain of
one if this new rule, this new system were to come into effect. I look at
that and the requirement of photo IDs in some states, and the reduction of
advanced voting, and I wonder what's going on out there on a grand
level. What's your level of concern? And I've only got you for about 30
seconds.

     THE PRESIDENT: Well, look, with respect to Pennsylvania, the people
of Pennsylvania will ultimately decide how they want to allocate their
electoral votes. And I'll leave it up to them.

     I will say that my big priority is making sure that as many people
are participating in our democracy as possible. Some of these moves in
some of the other states that we've seen trying to make it tougher to
vote, restricting ballot access, making it hard on seniors, making it
harder on young people, I think that's a big mistake. And I have made
sure that our Justice Department is taking a look at what's being done
across the country to ensure that people aren't being denied access to the
franchise.

     Q    The First Lady shopped incognito at Target. Where do you most
want to shop undercover?

     THE PRESIDENT: I don't even want to shop. All I want to do is take
a walk. (Laughter.) But as she reminds me, nothing I do is
undercover. , She always jokes about my motorcade. She gets embarrassed
when she goes out with me because there's an ambulance and a caboose and a
dog sled. It trails for about a mile behind me. So I'm glad she can
sneak off, though, because one thing she loves to do is go shopping at
Target.

     Q    Mr. President, thank you so much for coming back on the
program. You know I always respect the dialogue, and I really appreciate
it.

     THE PRESIDENT: Michael, always a pleasure talking to you. Thank you
so much. Bye-bye.

     Q      Thank you, sir.


                                  END                            2:00 P.M. EDT




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785157 Date: 01/07/2016
