     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780770 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART B6


From:                             Mills, Cheryl D. <MillsCD@state.gov >
Sent:                             Sunday, June 12, 2011 5:16 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Today's New York Times




    Original Message
From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Sunday, June 12, 2011 04:04 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J; 'alec.ross                                   ; Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Re: Today's New York Times

We're now working with ABC to give this some more positive play for World News Tonight. This has been a solid team
effort by DRL and Alec's gang, particularly Dan Baer and Ben Scott. Go Team!

     Original Message
From: Sullivan, Jacob
Sent: Sunday, June 12, 2011 09:50 AM
To: 'Alec Ross'                      Hammer, Michael A; Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: RE: Today's New York Times

Good stuff.

    Original Message
From: Alec Ross [mailto:
Sent: Sunday, June 12, 2011 6:46 PM
To: Hammer, Michael A; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Today's New York Times

Big piece. Good for the Department.

New York Times
June 12, 2011
U.S. Underwrites Internet Detour Around Censors By JAMES GLANZ and JOHN MARKOFF

The Obama administration is leading a global effort to deploy "shadow"
Internet and mobile phone systems that dissidents can use to undermine repressive governments that seek to silence
them by censoring or shutting down telecommunications networks.

The effort includes secretive projects to create independent cellphone networks inside foreign countries, as well as one
operation out of a spy novel in a fifth-floor shop on L Street in Washington, where a group of young entrepreneurs who
look as if they could be in a garage band are fitting deceptively innocent-looking hardware into a prototype "Internet in
a suitcase."

Financed with a $2 million State Department grant, the suitcase could be secreted across a border and quickly set up to
allow wireless communication over a wide area with a link to the global Internet.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780770 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780770 Date: 01/07/2016




The American effort, revealed in dozens of interviews, planning documents and classified diplomatic cables obtained by
The New York Times, ranges in scale, cost and sophistication.

Some projects involve technology that the United States is developing; others pull together tools that have already been
created by hackers in a so-called liberation-technology movement sweeping the globe.

The State Department, for example, is financing the creation of stealth wireless networks that would enable activists to
communicate outside the reach of governments in countries like Iran, Syria and Libya, according to participants in the
projects.

In one of the most ambitious efforts, United States officials say, the State Department and Pentagon have spent at least
$50 million to create an independent cellphone network in Afghanistan using towers on protected military bases inside
the country. It is intended to offset the Taliban's ability to shut down the official Afghan services, seemingly at will.

The effort has picked up momentum since the government of President Hosni Mubarak shut down the Egyptian Internet
in the last days of his rule. In recent days, the Syrian government also temporarily disabled much of that country's
Internet, which had helped protesters mobilize.

The Obama administration's initiative is in one sense a new front in a longstanding diplomatic push to defend free
speech and nurture democracy. For decades, the United States has sent radio broadcasts into autocratic countries
through Voice of America and other means.
More recently, Washington has supported the development of software that preserves the anonymity of users in places
like China, and training for citizens who want to pass information along the government-owned Internet without getting
caught.

But the latest initiative depends on creating entirely separate pathways for communication. It has brought together an
improbable alliance of diplomats and military engineers, young programmers and dissidents from at least a dozen
countries, many of whom variously describe the new approach as more audacious and clever and, yes, cooler.

Sometimes the State Department is simply taking advantage of enterprising dissidents who have found ways to get
around government censorship. American diplomats are meeting with operatives who have been burying Chinese
cellphones in the hills near the border with North Korea, where they can be dug up and used to make furtive calls,
according to interviews and the diplomatic cables.

The new initiatives have found a champion in Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, whose department is
spearheading the American effort. "We see more and more people around the globe using the Internet, mobile phones
and other technologies to make their voices heard as they protest against injustice and seek to realize their aspirations,"
Mrs. Clinton said in an e-mail response to a query on the topic. "There is a historic opportunity to effect positive change,
change America supports," she said. "So we're focused on helping them do that, on helping them talk to each other, to
their communities, to their governments and to the world."

Developers caution that independent networks come with downsides:
repressive governments could use surveillance to pinpoint and arrest activists who use the technology or simply catch
them bringing hardware across the border. But others believe that the risks are outweighed by the potential impact.
"We're going to build a separate infrastructure where the technology is nearly impossible to shut down, to control, to
surveil," said Sascha Meinrath, who is leading the "Internet in a suitcase" project as director of the Open Technology
Initiative at the New America Foundation, a nonpartisan research group.

"The implication is that this disempowers central authorities from infringing on people's fundamental human right to
communicate," Mr.
Meinrath added.

The Invisible Web

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780770 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780770 Date: 01/07/2016




In an anonymous office building on L Street in Washington, four unlikely State Department contractors sat around a
table. Josh King, sporting multiple ear piercings and a studded leather wristband, taught himself programming while
working as a barista. Thomas Gideon was an accomplished hacker. Dan Meredith, a bicycle polo enthusiast, helped
companies protect their digital secrets.

Then there was Mr. Meinrath, wearing a tie as the dean of the group at age 37. He has a master's degree in psychology
and helped set up wireless networks in underserved communities in Detroit and Philadelphia.

The group's suitcase project will rely on a version of "mesh network"
technology, which can transform devices like cellphones or personal computers to create an invisible wireless web
without a centralized hub. In other words, a voice, picture or e-mail message could hop directly between the modified
wireless devices — each one acting as a mini cell "tower" and phone — and bypass the official network.

Mr. Meinrath said that the suitcase would include small wireless antennas, which could increase the area of coverage; a
laptop to administer the system; thumb drives and CDs to spread the software to more devices and encrypt the
communications; and other components like Ethernet cables.

The project will also rely on the innovations of independent Internet and telecommunications developers.

"The cool thing in this political context is that you cannot easily control it," said Aaron Kaplan, an Austrian cybersecurity
expert whose work will be used in the suitcase project. Mr. Kaplan has set up a functioning mesh network in Vienna and
says related systems have operated in Venezuela, Indonesia and elsewhere.

Mr. Meinrath said his team was focused on fitting the system into the bland-looking suitcase and making it simple to
implement — by, say, using "pictograms" in the how-to manual.

In addition to the Obama administration's initiatives, there are almost a dozen independent ventures that also aim to
make it possible for unskilled users to employ existing devices like laptops or smartphones to build a wireless network.
One mesh network was created around Jalalabad, Afghanistan, as early as five years ago, using technology developed at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Creating simple lines of communication outside official ones is crucial, said Collin Anderson, a 26-year-old liberation-
technology researcher from North Dakota who specializes in Iran, where the government all but shut down the Internet
during protests in 2009. The slowdown made most "circumvention" technologies — the software legerdemain that helps
dissidents sneak data along the state-controlled networks — nearly useless, he said.

"No matter how much circumvention the protesters use, if the government slows the network down to a crawl, you
can't upload YouTube videos or Facebook postings," Mr. Anderson said. "They need alternative ways of sharing
information or alternative ways of getting it out of the country."

That need is so urgent, citizens are finding their own ways to set up rudimentary networks. Mehdi Yahyanejad, an
Iranian expatriate and technology developer who co-founded a popular Persian-language Web site, estimates that
nearly half the people who visit the site from inside Iran share files using Bluetooth — which is best known in the West
for running wireless headsets and the like. In more closed societies, however, Bluetooth is used to discreetly beam
information — a video, an electronic business card — directly from one cellphone to another.

Mr. Yahyanejad said he and his research colleagues were also slated to receive State Department financing for a project
that would modify Bluetooth so that a file containing, say, a video of a protester being beaten, could automatically jump
from phone to phone within a "trusted network" of citizens. The system would be more limited than the suitcase but
would only require the software modification on ordinary phones.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780770 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780770 Date: 01/07/2016




By the end of 2011, the State Department will have spent some $70 million on circumvention efforts and related
technologies, according to department figures.

Mrs. Clinton has made Internet freedom into a signature cause. But the State Department has carefully framed its
support as promoting free speech and human rights for their own sake, not as a policy aimed at destabilizing autocratic
governments.

That distinction is difficult to maintain, said Clay Shirky, an assistant professor at New York University who studies the
Internet and social media. "You can't say, 'All we want is for people to speak their minds, not bring down autocratic
regimes' — they're the same thing," Mr. Shirky said.

He added that the United States could expose itself to charges of hypocrisy if the State Department maintained its
support, tacit or otherwise, for autocratic governments running countries like Saudi Arabia or Bahrain while deploying
technology that was likely to undermine them.

Shadow Cellphone System

In February 2009, Richard C. Holbrooke and Lt. Gen. John R. Allen were taking a helicopter tour over southern
Afghanistan and getting a panoramic view of the cellphone towers dotting the remote countryside, according to two
officials on the flight. By then, millions of Afghans were using cellphones, compared with a few thousand after the 2001
invasion. Towers built by private companies had sprung up across the country. The United States had promoted the
network as a way to cultivate good will and encourage local businesses in a country that in other ways looked as if it had
not changed much in centuries.

There was just one problem, General Allen told Mr. Holbrooke, who only weeks before had been appointed special
envoy to the region. With a combination of threats to phone company officials and attacks on the towers, the Taliban
was able to shut down the main network in the countryside virtually at will. Local residents report that the networks are
often out from 6 p.m. until 6 a.m., presumably to enable the Taliban to carry out operations without being reported to
security forces.

The Pentagon and State Department were soon collaborating on the project to build a "shadow" cellphone system in a
country where repressive forces exert control over the official network.

Details of the network, which the military named the Palisades project, are scarce, but current and former military and
civilian officials said it relied in part on cell towers placed on protected American bases. A large tower on the Kandahar
air base serves as a base station or data collection point for the network, officials said.

A senior United States official said the towers were close to being up and running in the south and described the effort
as a kind of 911 system that would be available to anyone with a cellphone.

By shutting down cellphone service, the Taliban had found a potent strategic tool in its asymmetric battle with American
and Afghan security forces.

The United States is widely understood to use cellphone networks in Afghanistan, Iraq and other countries for
intelligence gathering. And the ability to silence the network was also a powerful reminder to the local populace that the
Taliban retained control over some of the most vital organs of the nation.

When asked about the system, Lt. Col. John Dorrian, a spokesman for the American-led International Security Assistance
Force, or ISAF, would only confirm the existence of a project to create what he called an "expeditionary cellular
communication service" in Afghanistan. He said the project was being carried out in collaboration with the Afghan
government in order to "restore 24/7 cellular access."

"As of yet the program is not fully operational, so it would be premature to go into details," Colonel Dorrian said.

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780770 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780770 Date: 01/07/2016




Colonel Dorrian declined to release cost figures. Estimates by United States military and civilian officials ranged widely,
from $50 million to $250 million. A senior official said that Afghan officials, who anticipate taking over American bases
when troops pull out, have insisted on an elaborate system. "The Afghans wanted the Cadillac plan, which is pretty
expensive," the official said.

Broad Subversive Effort

In May 2009, a North Korean defector named Kim met with officials at the American Consulate in Shenyang, a Chinese
city about 120 miles from North Korea, according to a diplomatic cable. Officials wanted to know how Mr. Kim, who was
active in smuggling others out of the country, communicated across the border. "Kim would not go into much detail,"
the cable says, but did mention the burying of Chinese cellphones "on hillsides for people to dig up at night." Mr. Kim
said Dandong, China, and the surrounding Jilin Province "were natural gathering points for cross-border cellphone
communication and for meeting sources." The cellphones are able to pick up signals from towers in China, said Libby Liu,
head of Radio Free Asia, the United States-financed broadcaster, who confirmed their existence and said her
organization uses the calls to collect information for broadcasts as well.

The effort, in what is perhaps the world's most closed nation, suggests just how many independent actors are involved
in the subversive efforts. From the activist geeks on L Street in Washington to the military engineers in Afghanistan, the
global appeal of the technology hints at the craving for open communication.

In a chat with a Times reporter via Facebook, Malik Ibrahim Sahad, the son of Libyan dissidents who largely grew up in
suburban Virginia, said he was tapping into the Internet using a commercial satellite connection in Benghazi. "Internet is
in dire need here. The people are cut off in that respect," wrote Mr. Sahad, who had never been to Libya before the
uprising and is now working in support of rebel authorities. Even so, he said, "I don't think this revolution could have
taken place without the existence of the World Wide Web."

Reporting was contributed by Richard A. Oppel Jr. and Andrew W. Lehren from New York, and Alissa J. Rubin and Sangar
Rahimi from Kabul, Afghanistan.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780770 Date: 01/07/2016
