      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786635 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL



From:                            H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                            Friday, May 6, 2011 1:57 AM
To:                              'millscd@state.gov'
Subject                          Re: SOTU



We never discussed:


From: Mills, Cheryl D [mailto:MillsCD©state.gov]
Sent: Saturday, April 30, 2011 03:42 AM
To: H
Subject: Fw: SOTU

Remind me to discuss OPIC w/ you this weekend or mon

Cdm


From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Friday, April 29, 2011 03:18 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: SOTU



 Let me take this one step further. We shouldn't just give our people a government that's more affordable. We
should give them a government that's more competent and more efficient. We can't win the future with a
government of the past. (Applause.)

    We live and do business in the Information Age, but the last major reorganization of the government
happened in the age of black-and-white TV. There are 12 different agencies that deal with exports. There are at
least five different agencies that deal with housing policy. Then there's my favorite example: The Interior
Department is in charge of salmon while they're in fresh water, but the Commerce Department handles them
when they're in saltwater. (Laughter.) I hear it gets even more complicated once they're smoked. (Laughter
and applause.)

    Now, we've made great strides over the last two years in using technology and getting rid of
waste. Veterans can now download their electronic medical records with a click of the mouse. We're selling
acres of federal office space that hasn't been used in years, and we'll cut through red tape to get rid of
more. But we need to think bigger. In the coming months, my administration will develop a proposal to merge,
consolidate, and reorganize the federal government in a way that best serves the goal of a more competitive
America. I will submit that proposal to Congress for a vote — and we will push to get it passed. (Applause.)

    In the coming year, we'll also work to rebuild people's faith in the institution of government. Because you
deserve to know exactly how and where your tax dollars are being spent, you'll be able to go to a website and
get that information for the very first time in history. Because you deserve to know when your elected officials
are meeting with lobbyists, I ask Congress to do what the White House has already done -- put that information
online. And because the American people deserve to know that special interests aren't larding up legislation
with pet projects, both parties in Congress should know this: If a bill comes to my desk with earmarks inside, I
will veto it. I will veto it. (Applause.)

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786635 Date: 01/07/2016
