     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793898 Date: 01/07/2016


                                                                                                            RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                            B6



From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
Sent:                              Saturday, November 17, 2012 6:30 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: Fayyad and Gaza contacts on an emboldened Hamas



Worth a read. Amridror says 24 more hours. Discussions ongoing in Intel channels for comprehensive, simultaneous
cease-fire.



From: Ratney, Michael A
Sent: Saturday, November 17, 2012 05:31 PM
To: Hale, David M; Hegadorn, Chris S; 'ssimon                  <ssimon                  ; Abell, Andy
<Jason_A_Abel                     Ryu, Rexon Y; Schwartz, Jonathan B; Sullivan, Jacob J; Jones, Beth E; Shapiro, Daniel B
(Tel Aviv); Blair, Oni K; Holtsnider, James W; Lasensky, Scott B; Sievers, Marc J; Dibble, Elizabeth L
Cc: Lempert, Yael; Gavito, Jennifer D
Subject: Fayyad and Gaza contacts on an emboldened Hamas

(SBU) I spoke by phone with Salam Fayyad this afternoon. He thought an emboldened Hamas made this conflict
different than previous ones, and he was concerned about the impact this would have on the attitudes of ordinary
Palestinians, including in the West Bank. The current conflict, he thought, would result in greater legitimization of
Hamas, a more formal Egypt-Hamas relationship, and possibly tangible benefits (like the permanent reopening of Rafah
crossing) with credit going to Hamas and no PA involvement. With a few days of belligerence, he said, Hamas would
have achieved more than the PA's years of peaceful cooperation with Israel, potentially pushing Palestinians ordinarily
opposed to violence to question why PA leadership had taken that option off the table. All that said, Fayyad said the
most important thing was to stop the immediate conflict as the only possible step to any longer term solution, and he
urged the U.S. to lean on both Egypt and Israel to bring that about.

(SBU) On the UNGA bid, Fayyad said he thought that in the current climate, with Hamas showing strength, the UNGA bid
might actually be met with ridicule, further weakening Abbas. I asked if he would say that to Abbas; he said he would
when he sees him Sunday night, but that for Abbas, backing down would be seen as weakness even as Hamas is
perceived as growing stronger, emboldened, and — after a period when their credibility was suffering with the
Palestinian public — more credible among the Palestinian public.

(SBU) Fayyad's concerns are echoed out by our Gaza contacts, who say Hamas will emerge from this fight with
significantly greater legitimacy. The de facto authorities today called on all government employees (except the
education ministry) to show up to work tomorrow. Coupled with multiple Gaza City press conferences, high-level
foreign visitors, and police on the street in uniform, Gazans see Hamas as using this conflict to bolster its domestic
legitimacy. Gaza contacts have told us that residents are impressed with Hamas' response to the conflict, and there is a
growing sense that Hamas has learned from Cast Lead, when their leadership largely went underground.

(SBU) Contacts in Gaza say morale is fairly high - with rockets strikes against Tel Aviv and Jerusalem, Hamas feels like it is
winning. Plus, they say, Gazans see "the entire Arab world" now coming to Gaza while Gaza fires rockets at Israel so
"why would Hamas want to stop now?" In Hamas' view, according to this contact, with every passing day, international
opinion is turning in its favor and Bibi is looking more impotent. Hamas has every incentive to continue up to - but not
after - an Israeli ground invasion.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793898 Date: 01/07/2016
