     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766347 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                                RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                B6


From:                           sbwhoeop
Sent:                           Wednesday, September 30, 2009 3:25 PM
To:
Subject:                        H: New memo on new German foreign minister and other German matters. Sid
Attachments:                    HRC memo Guido_Westerwelle 093009.docx




                                    Confidential



                                           September 30, 2009



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: New German Foreign Minister


I have enclosed below a memo for you from John Kornblum on the new German foreign minister,
Guido Westerwelle. Note especially the Genscher connection. It will have implications for US-German-Russian
relations.

In addition to this memo, Kornblum strongly suggests you try to develop your personal relationship with
Merkel as you can. He says she dislikes the atmospherics surrounding the Obama phenomenon, that it's
contrary to her whole idea of politics and how to conduct oneself in general. She would welcome a more
conversational relationship with you. He says Merkel is very interested in women's issues and she and her
government would be a good partner for Melanne. On the new US ambassador, Phil Murphy, Kornblum reports
that Merkel looked askance at his entrance on a Gulfstream private jet. Kornblum says he had a long lunch with
Murphy and explained in detail how to structure his office to best participate in policy making in Washington
and relate to German leadership. He says that Murphy has failed to take his specific suggestions. He reports that
Murphy describes himself publicly and proudly as an investment banker, not understanding the anathema
attached to that position especially in Germany.


Here's Westerwelle memo:

  Westerwelle's Free Democratic Party is classically liberal in the European sense. It is free market, low tax,
Atlantic oriented. On September 27, he led the party to its best result ever, with 14.5 percent of the vote. He
will join Angela Merkel in a coalition which will have a comfortable majority. Westerwelle will become
foreign minister.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766347 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766347 Date: 01/07/2016




   Westerwelle was born in 1961 and was trained as a lawyer. He has worked full time for the FDP since 1980,
rising through the ranks from head of the youth organization to party manager to chairman and parliamentary
leader. He has a youthful, informal appearance which has at times brought irreverant comments from press
and competitors. He is also one of several senior German politicians who have "outed" themselves as
homosexuals. But he has maintained his poise and humor and emerged as the most successful FDP leader
since Hans-Dietrich Genscher.

-- The FDP styles itself as the party of Foreign Ministers. It has held the position for 30 of the sixty years the
FRG has existed. Longest running was Genscher (18 years) but former President Walter Scheel was credited
with conceiving much of Germany's détente policies in the 1970's Despite his lack of experience in foreign
affairs, it was thus natural that Westerwelle should claim the Foreign Ministry for himself.

   Westerwelle is generally easy to talk with, has a good sense of humor and speaks good
English. However, as the leader of a small party, he has often bristled at real or imagined slights. He has not
forgotten the fact that Secretary Rice would not see him during her many visits to Berlin. He cancelled a
planned trip to Washington this fall when he did not obtain enough high level appointments. As he enters
office, he will undoubtedly note carefully how he is treated, especially by the United States.


  Westerwelle has said that his approach will be
essentially that of his predecessor, but "with new accents."

           Westerwelle is pro-Atlantic and friendly to the United States. He welcomed President Obama's
           Prague arms control initiative, but wishes to push the pace. As a first step he would ask the US to
           remove all tactical nuclear weapons from German territory. This is a sensitive issue for the FRG,
           because the presence of these American weapons gives Germany a seat at the nuclear planning table
           in NATO. Merkel will not support this idea.

          He supports FRG presence in Afghanistan, but argues
          Germany should do more to build up local security forces, especially the police. He has not yet
          expressed detailed views on the difficult strategic choices in Afghanistan.

          He is more determined to build a partnership with Russia than is Merkel. He wishes to pursue
          Medvedev' s
          Security Pact ideas within the OSCE. These views come directly from Genscher, whom Westerwelle
          views as a mentor.

           Westerwelle is on record as demanding a clearer, more firm European position vis-à-vis Iran. He and
           his party have pushed actively for pressure on Iran to improve its record on human rights.

           Israel has reacted skeptically to the news that Westerwelle will be foreign minister. It feels that he
           does not exhibit the depth of commitment to Israel seen in most other German politicians. He was
           also slow to distance himself from a controversial FDP politician who expressed sympathy for suicide
           bombers.

           Westerwelle is personally in favor of Turkish membership in the EU, but does not wish to push the
           pace.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766347 Date: 01/07/2016
