UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797111 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL




                                                         January 18, 20174




        .f.iillary
   From: Sid
   Re: Latest French Intelii<tence Reports on Algerian 1-1,o-1ri„,:j:e Crisis




               Accorchp,;::,
   exteir"                  s.. i e(1-.)irection(      I , de la Sc'curite Exteure IDGSE,;
   Mali and Ahzeria durinq the January                   hostai-,-- crisis. stated. in private
   g,overnment of PIesidettt Abdelaziz Bcp.:11:e.ilil was stirprsed, and (..1;soiiented by th.L. at:tack:5.
   According to sources with access to the Aig,eriabDC.:1+SE, the bott.62Clik.a
           secret understanding with Bell:noklitar after the kidnaDpin2; in .A.pril 7'01•7)
   consul in e„Ai0 (Mali). Under this aarcement Eicimokh.tar con.centrated his op ati nz, in
   and occasionally. with the encouragetnenr. of the ilgeri.tri                  attack IVioro4..- ci:In ii:teresl.t; in
   West,,::rn Sahara. \N,ihere the Algerians hac.ie teriitoria! claihtS, rhe                             off.::ials fear
   that january 17 attacks might mark a. resumption the 20 year civii                     arid resolved to dea:
   with the situatit)n with ex.trt,-,rue force. Their gc.iai in i2nh;. a.ccording to tilis source.. is to des?-.roy
       "SiLT.ned in Blood"000 delivering a rriessta:,:e Tx.) Belmokhiar ars...: his allies. Ar-cording to
   these sources, the fate of the hostages is a secondary con.sideratiop, Is tins decision.

               2. Extrennt-*/ sensitive sources add that in this matter Beimokhtar is reacting to a
   request fro in the Mahan rebels, via AQINf.1 Mak:: a statertic.-,nt Frt:tric.h .unillitar . forces attack
   the rebels. AC.Nivi s iewed the well-organized Bei nicdchtar as the fighter hen. placed to strike
   411.1.):1f:Cliatel,,, at 'Western interests. A lperia allowed French pialics to Fly over their tei-ritory
   enroute to Mali, and Beltnokhtar noted ffiat the.re is, real emotional ink between 1iice :and
   .AIL-.!;cria that adds to the impact of the antiCk. -‘,T.-.hese sources note tlia Belmokiitar can draw on a
   cadre of 5,000-10.000 'anti-governrnent fig,hters insicie 'Y 12,-ri a.

            .3. According to these sensitive sources„ the attacks were carried out by "Signed in Blc..aNd"
   Katiba, led by Nloklitar Belmokhtar, which is the latest f2-r01             nzed try the lontt,--time
   Algerian rebel. .aelmoichtar and his followers are, according to the French DGSE. part of the
   Movement for Unity and jihad in West Africa (MUSWA.), formed in May 2012. in Mali.
   Tviiii.P,VA is the result of a mutual c,00peration a.f2;eetrient betvveen tericc,rist ,c_trol'ips operating in




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797111 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797111 Date: 01/07/2016




   North Africa. Al Qa'ida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) organized the agreement, which
   includes Boko Haram of Nigeria, and al Qa'ida in East Africa (primarily al Shabaab of Somalia).
   the Islamist Rebels in Mali, and Belmokhtar. Through this organization AQIM is preaching the
   concept of a "caliphate" along an extended strip stretching from South Sudan, through Libya,
   Algeria, and Mali, to Mauritania. These French officials also warn that subsequent reporting
   indicates that this effort to concentrate Islamist forces in the region and is meeting with a degree
   of success. They also warn that these forces are dedicated to "religious cleansing" aimed at the
   governments in that area. The DGSE officials noted that they believe the central figure in this
   effort is a Somali associated with al Shabaab; Sheik NUR BARUD.

            4. These sources describe Belmokhtar (AKA 'One-eyed') as very shrewd person, who in
   the past bargained with the authorities in Mauritania regarding his reintegration into society. For
   a period Belmokhtar abandoned smuggling (in the area is known by the nickname of Marlboro
   for its trade of cigarettes). After he became leader of the Saharan faction of Al Qaeda of Islamic
   Maghreb (AQIM), he organized the importation of arms for the underground network from Niger
   and Mali, as well as the kidnapping of Western businessmen. Belmokhtar is, according to these
   sources, fascinated by the opportunities for aggressive Islamist forces in the new Libya.

          5. The following is a sensitive history of the Belmokhtar groups:

   BELMOKHTAR is based in the northern part of Mauritania, under the leadership of Mokhtar
   Belmokhtar (also known as: Khaled Abou al-Abbas and Laaouar among other noms de guerres),
   where they are involved with drug smuggling and other criminal activity. Most recently, the
   Mauritania Government, with the encouragement of Morocco, attempted to negotiate a
   settlement with Belmokhtar that would have allowed his followers to reenter normal society.
   These negotiations broke down, however, in the summer of 2010, and the Belmokhtar group has
   continued its operational support of AQIM throughout the region.
                    Abu Zayd Group: The Abu Zayd faction is currently one of the principal
   subgroups of AQIM, from the perspective of the Moroccan Government. The group is deeply
   committed to the jihadist struggle against what it sees as the "secularism" of Tunisia and
   Morocco. The Abu Zayd group is based in southern Algeria and northern Mali, under the
   direction of Abid Hamadu (also known as: Abou Abdellah, Abdelhamid Abu Zied, Youcef
   Abdel, and Abu Abdellah). This Group is one of the most active and important of the AQIM
   member groups, and it has the resources, personnel, and flexibility to support operations into
   Western Sahara and Morocco.
            According to very sensitive sources, Abu Zayd is based in the Hoggar (Ahaggar) Massif,
   in the Tamanrasset region. (Note: This is a rugged mountainous plateau located 1,000 miles
   from the Atlantic Ocean, lying mostly in southern Algeria, on the Tropic of Cancer). On the
   eastern edge of this region, the Abu Zayd Group is active in assisting Islamic fighters traveling to
   the Horn of Africa, Iraq, and even Afghanistan. In the south it has established relationships with
   tribal leaders in central Africa, relationships that allow AQIM to move freely in and out of the
   sub-Saharan region.


   Report 2:




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797111 Date: 01/07/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797111 Date: 01/07/2016




           1. According to sensitive sources with access to the Algerian army, the attack is being
   conducted by the group under longtime anti-Algiers fighter Mokhtar Belmolchtar, who
   established a relationship with al Qa'ida in the Maghreb (AQIM) in 2009. They support each
   other, with AQIM providing funding and weapons to Belmokhtar in the fight against the
   Algerian government, which goes back twenty years. AQIM's goal in this region is to
   destabilize the governments of Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, and Algeria. In this regard they act
   to coordinate these often disparate rebel/terrorist groups. Belmohktar's attack on the BP facility
   appears to be done at the request of AQIM in support of the Mali rebels. This individual
   believes that Belmohktar was chosen because it, was the group that was in position to carry out a
   major attack against a Western facility in the region on short notice arid has little to do with the
   internal Algerian struggle. Belmohktar owes AQIM for their past support and to a degree the
   attack adds to their long-term goal of demonstrating that the Algerian government cannot protect
   foreigners.
           2. This same source notes that the Algerian army's initial assessment agrees with the
   AQIM/Belmoliktar claims regarding the deaths of 35 hostages and 15 of their captors on Jan. 17.
   They will not know the actual death toll until the incident ends, but they noted that Algerian
   special forces troops attacked the rebels as they tried to move from one location to another inside
   the complex.
            3. (Source Comment: In the opinion of this source, Belrnohktar's forces, including the
   Khaled Abu al-Abbas Brigade and the Signed-in-Blood Battalion have existing contingency
   plans to attack Western facilities in Algeria and in Western Sahara. This agreement to support
   AQIM allies in Mali was a complicated matter for .Belmohktar, given the fact that during 2011
   Libyan revolution Belmohktar's followers supported the rebels fighting the forces of former
   dictatorN,Ith.immar al Qaddati, while many of the groups fighting with AQIM in Mali fought .for
   Qaddafi as mercenaries. 7lhis incident highlights the existing threat to Western interests in
   Algeria and throughout the Maghreb, even in cases where the targets have little or no relation to
   events that are inspiring the attack.)




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797111 Date: 01/07/2016
