     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779093 Date: 01/07/2016



                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                            sbwhoeop                                                                        B6
Sent:                            Monday, February 14, 2011 8:49 AM
To:
Subject:                         H: Today's Egypt Intel and more on 2/11. Sid
Attachments:                     hrc memo egypt intel 021411.docx; hrc memo egypt Intel 021411.docx




                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                              February 14, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Latest intel report and more on events of 2/11

13 February:

After taking steps to dissolve the Parliament and suspend the Constitution, Egypt's Minister of Defense, Field
Marshall Hussein Tantawi stated that the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) intended to keep Prime
Minister Ahmed Shafik in his position, overseeing the day to day activities of the Egyptian Government
bureaucracy. Tantawai and the other members of the SCAF will concentrate on restoring order and using the
resources of the Army to distribute food and essential supplies around the country, following the demonstrations
in late January and Early February that led to the fall of President Hosni Mubarak. The SCAF will also monitor
the development of new political parties, and their current plans are to call for national elections to take place in
September 2011.

The most important factor in this transition to a new government is the drafting of a revised constitution, ending
the state of emergency that was put into place by Mubarak after the assassination of his predecessor, Anwar al-
Sadat, in October 1981. Tantawi stated privately that he expects that once the members of the pro-democracy
movement have organized into political parties, they will begin to press for rapid passage of a new constitution
and early elections. Tantawi emphasized in the strongest terms that there would be no elections before
September 2011, adding that if the drafting of the new constitution turns out to be as complicated as he expects,
elections could be delayed until September 2012. He added that elections would not be delayed beyond that
date.

Tantawi and his colleagues on the SCAF are also considering the future of Mubarak's Vice President, Omar
Suleiman. At present they are divided on whether or not to allow him to remain in the government, with
General Sami Annan, the Chief of Staff of the Army, pressing for his dismissal. Tantawi on the other hand
believes Suleiman's international contacts and his knowledge of Egypt's security and Intelligence community
make him valuable. They agree that until his future is decided Suleiman will keep a low profile.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779093 Date: 01/07/2016
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779093 Date: 01/07/2016




(Source Comment: Suleiman presents challenges for the SCAF. The members of the Council are concerned
that as the head of the intelligence and security services Suleiman has collected derogatory information on many
senior government and military officials--information that he could use to embarrass the new government if he
believes he has been ill treated.)

In regards to Mubarak's future, Tantawi and the SCAF will not support any efforts to arrest and try Mubarak for
corruption or misuse of his office. On the other hand, they plan to support pro-democracy efforts to look at
other members of Mubarak's cabinet and prosecute any individuals found to be involved in corrupt
activities. ,

12 February:

Throughout the day on 10 February Army General Hassan al-Roueine, the Commander of the Cairo military
district, reported to his superiors on the SCAF that his sources watching the demonstrators were reporting that
on 11 February the student leaders of the demonstrations planned to try and enter the Presidential Palace, the
Parliament building, the old Royal Palace in Alexandria, and other government buildings. Al-Roueine added
that his troops would have to use force to protect these buildings, and this would lead to violent confrontations
that would destroy the relationship between the soldiers and the Egyptian people.

Minister of Defense Field Marshall Hussein Tantawi, Armed Forces Chief of Staff Lt. General Sarni Annan,
and other leaders of the SCAF met with Mubarak and Vice President Omar Suleiman in an effort to persuade
the President to step down, and place authority in the hands of the Armed Forces Council. The Army Officers
also wanted to preclude Suleiman (an Air Force General) from succeeding Mubarak. The discussions were
heated and revolved around Mubarak's desire to depart with honor, and a guarantee that any new government
would not seize his possessions and personal funds. In the end a compromise was reached that would allow
Mubarak to move to his home in Sharm el-Sheikh, where he could be protected, and maintain the title of
President, while Suleiman managed the transition to a new government, under the control of the SCAF.

Following Mubarak's address to the nation during the night of 10 February, al-Roueine's sources reported that
the speech had confused the issue by leaving the demonstrators with the impression that the President was
maintaining control of the country. Again, al-Roueine warned that violent encounters between demonstrators
and troops could occur on 11 February. Suleiman received similar information from his intelligence
sources. Al-Roueine repeated the warnings from 10 February that the troops, who are conscripts, would not fire
on the crowds for any extended period of time, and they could be faced with an Iranian style uprising if these
confrontations began. He also cautioned that his commanders had informed him that mid- level Army officers
were increasingly sympathetic to the demonstrators.

Early on the morning of 11 February Vice President Suleiman, and General Annan warned Mubarak of the
problems anticipated later that day. Annan also assured Mubarak that King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia would
guarantee that he would have a significant personal fortune, even if foreign banks attempted to freeze his
personal accounts. (Note: Switzerland froze Mubarak's personal bank accounts shortly after he stepped
down.) Annan also told Mubarak that the SCAF would protect his honor and reputation. Annan added that he
would stay in Sharm el-Sheikh with Mubarak until the situation stabilized, and guarantee his security
(Note: According to one source Annan also wanted to ensure that Mubarak did not change his mind and
attempt to retain power at the last minute.) With this in mind, Mubarak agreed to allow Suleiman to announce
his departure.

 According to these sources the military—in particular the Army—has preserved their role as the most important
 institution in the country, with Defense Minister, Field Marshal Mohammed Hussein Tantawi as the most
 powerful individual. Suleiman's status remains unclear but well informed sources say that Egypt is returning to

         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779093 Date: 01/07/2016
          UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779093 Date: 01/07/2016




the 1952 model of ruling the state via a council of army officers. The question now is to what extent the military
elite will share power with its civilian counterparts.

Whether the military stays true to its commitment to hold elections as scheduled in September 2011 remains to
be seen. If elections are held, however, the military must have a political vehicle in place to counter opposition
forces, particularly the Muslim Brotherhood.

The fate of the ruling National Democratic Party (NDP) thus lies in question. Without the NDP, the regime will
have effectively collapsed and the military could run into greater difficulty in managing the country on a daily
basis.

While the SCAF will serve as a provisional government, it will likely want to retain as much of the ruling NDP
bureaucracy as possible, incorporating elements of the opposition to manage the transition. Sustaining its hold
over power while crafting a democratic government will be the biggest challenge for the military as it tries to
avoid a complete regime change while also dealing with a potential constitutional crisis.

The SCAF is also watching the pro-democracy forces to get a clear picture of how many and what types of
political parties emerge from this process. In the meantime, they plan to call on the good will of the population
toward the troops to restore order. The most difficult task will be the return of police officers to the street, since
they were involved in the most violent confrontations with the pro-democracy demonstrators.

(Source Comment: Some Egyptian political figures – including some senior military officers--are referring to
this change of leadership as a military coup, while others see it as the regime—and the Army-- preserving their
positions of leadership under a system put in place by Mubarak's mentors, Gamal Abdel Nasser and Anwar al-
Sadat, during the 1952 officers revolt against King Farouk. Some younger army officers are calling for a
"Turkish solution," where the Army takes power in a crisis, acting as the guarantor of civilian democracy.)




           UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779093 Date: 01/07/2016
