     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789930 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART B6


From:                                 H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                                 Saturday, December 17, 2011 4:30 PM
To:                                   'sbwhoeop
Subject:                              Re: H: Syria intel. also              Sid


Even the, Syria is falling apart, at !east


From: sbwhoeop               [mailto:sbwhoeop
Sent: Wednesday, December 14, 2011 05:26 PM
To: H
Subject: H: Syria intel. also,                           . Sid




                                             CONFIDENTIAL



                                                   December 14, 2011



For: HRC
From: Sid
Re: Syria Intel.


The report below comes to me only from my friend, David Lesch, leading Syria expert in
the U.S. Whether or not the suggestions of the Syrian ambassador to the U.K. can
produce any positive outcomes, they are reflective of a high diplomat of the regime
claiming to speak frankly.


From David Lesch


Returned from my trip to London yesterday. I met with the Syrian ambassador to UK,
Sarni Khiyami, but I was not able to meet with Asma's father.

Sami is a very interesting person. He is secular Sunni, very straightforward and forthright
(for a Syrian official), and not a member of the Beth party. He was pretty frank with me,
and I got the impression he believes he and his government could be on their way out, so
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789930 Date: 01/07/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789930 Date: 01/07/2016




no harm in telling it like it is. He was critical of Bashar al-Asad, although he still supports
him as the best alternative, and he was incredibly critical of, even dismissive, of the
security services, who he essentially said were too stupid to do anything right.

I asked him if he could tell President Obama or Secretary Clinton one thing, what would it
be? His response was interesting. He said that he would vigorously ask the US to stop
supporting groups such as the Syrian National Council bic they have very little legitimacy
or popularity in Syria. He strongly recommended showing outward support for
the serious and respected Syrian opposition elements in Syria itself, people such as Michel
Kilo, Riyad Seif, Louay Hussein, etc. In his view, these are people of substance who have
been both jailed and part of the government apparatus, so they are generally respected in
both circles (govt and populace). They are the only ones who can lead the country through
a transition period toward a more democratic system. Of course, he recognized, as I told
him, the difficulty in getting Syrian govt support for this. Bashar tried half-heartedly in
the summer to do this through a national dialogue, but it did not go anywhere (and as
Sami told me, the govt did not handle it very well). It might be that the govt might be
more amenable to such an approach now b/c of growing difficulties. Sami said that it
would not eliminate all of the opposition, since there are many wedded to the fall of the
regime no matter what, but that it would draw enough support to isolate the radicals, who
would whither away eventually, and create a critical mass to force the regime to follow
through (especially with regional and international pressure holding its feet to the fire)
and transition toward sharing power.

Although it may be a bit self-serving, I happen to agree with him. The SNC and other
opposition groups have very little if any traction inside Syria. Need to get guys like Kilo
and Seif and the Local Coordination Committees in Syria on the same page with some sort
of govt sanction, in combination with an end to violence. I think it is the only way this
doesn't end up in a bloody civil war. Not easy to say the least, first and foremost bic you
have to get Bashar and his cronies to go along with it—tough sell. In addition, Syrian
opposition elements in the country may not go with it. It may be past the point of no
return. He also added one more request: get the Qataris to stop causing so much trouble
in Syria in a way that is leading toward militarization of the crisis.

He said he would make a formal request to Bashar for me to see him within the next
month or so. Yale University Press has asked me to write a very quick 100-120 page book
on Syria and the Arab spring and Bashar al-Asad, with the final draft due in April, so it is
under this pretext that I would be going. Not holding my breath on this, although Bashar
seems more willing to talk to people now.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789930 Date: 01/07/2016
