   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778760 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                   B6



From:                            sbwhoeop
Sent:                            Monday, February 21, 2011 4:16 PM
To:
Subject:                         H: Very latest from inside Libya Intel agency. Sid
Attachments:                     hrc memo latest libya 022111.docx; hrc memo latest libya 022111.docx




                                       CONFIDENTIAL




                                               February 21, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Latest Libya intel


This is the latest as of this afternoon, based on sources inside the Libyan intelligence agency:

Overview: During the early afternoon of 21 February a senior official of the Libyan External Security
Organization (ESO) stated privately that the security situation throughout the country is rapidly moving out of
control, and that Libyan leader Muammar Qaddafi is becoming increasingly desperate in his efforts to put down
the anti-government demonstrations. These individuals noted that late on 20 February Qaddafi ordered the
commander of the Air Force to bomb the barracks of any troops or police who go over to the anti-government
forces. (Source Comment: The commander of the Air Force is a Qaddafi loyalist but he has apparently not yet
implemented this controversial order. Two pilots have flown their aircraft to Malta rather than carrying out this
order.) At the same time, Qaddafi has order the Peoples Militia, the Presidential Guard and the para-military
"revolutionary committees" to use whatever means are necessary to gain control of the situation.

 ESO officials warn that while Qaddafi seems intent on fighting this battle, he is not suicidal and if he judges
there is no hope he will leave the country. They expect he may begin sending family members out of the
country later today. (Malta and Italy are the two most likely destinations. Qaddafi is quite concerned about the
security of his family, telling one senior official that he never recovered from the death of one of his children
during the U.S. bombing of Tripoli in April 1986, in retaliation for an ESO attack on US military personnel at a
nightclub in Berlin.)

At the same time, the two main factions in the regime have polarized, reflecting a serious dispute over policy
between Qaddafi's two oldest sons. The moderates, led by Saif al-Islam Qaddafi favor aggressive police anti-
riot tactics but are opposed the use of deadly force. Saif is also calling for negotiations with tribal leaders in the
east, including members of the former royal family. The more violent faction is headed by Montasem Qaddafi,
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778760 Date: 01/07/2016
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778760 Date: 01/07/2016




the National Security Advisor, and believes that the police and military must use deadly force to end the
rioting. This faction points out that during the recent revolution in Egypt the military and police did not use
their full force against the demonstrators and in the end they were defeated.

Montasem, and his father, according to knowledgeable individuals, appear to view this crisis as an escalation of
the longstanding rivalry between the government in Tripoli and tribal groups in the east, centered around
Benghazi. At the beginning of the demonstrations, on 18 February, Saif al-Islam made contact with tribal
leaders in the Benghazi region in an effort to find a solution for the situation. According to knowledgeable
individuals, his representatives came away from these meetings with the view that only the departure of Qaddafi
and the establishment of a new regime would satisfy the demonstrators.

Qaddafi and his senior advisors are particularly concerned by the growing number officials and diplomats
turning against the government, including, most importantly the Minister of Justice, Mustafa Mohamed Abud
Al Jeleil, and the Ambassador to the Arab League in Cairo, Abdel-Moneim al Houni. At the same time the
Deputy Chief of Mission of the Libyan Mission to the UN, Ibrahim Dabachi, made a statement accusing
Qaddafi of Genocide.

(Source Comment: At present Montasem Qaddafi and his hard line supporters in the Presidential Guard and
ESO have the upper-hand in the government, and are pressing for increased violence, including the use of
snipers against demonstrators. There have been some defections from the Peoples Militia in the Benghazi
region, which led to the loss of control in the city, but the majority of the Militia and all of the Presidential
guard are extremely loyal to Qaddafi. As stated, several senior officials, including senior officers of the ESO
believe that the fighting will go on for the foreseeable future, but they believe that in the end Qaddafi will be
forced to leave. Senior ESO figures point to the persistence of the false rumor that Qaddafi has left the country
to seek asylum with his friend Hugo Chavez in Venezuela, as a sign that support for the regime is beginning to
slip.)

Unrest Intensifies in Tripoli: Violence continues to escalate in Tripoli, with troops firing on demonstrators in
many parts of the city. Anti-government protesters have set aflame a number of public structures, including the
state television headquarters and People's Hall, the seat of parliament. Protesters attacked foreign businesses,
including a South Korean construction site, injuring at least 18 foreigners. Fighting between protesters, security
forces and "revolutionary committees" supporting leader Muammar Gaddafi, particularly in the vicinity of
Green Square; reports indicate that security forces have been issued "shoot to kill" orders and firing on unarmed
protesters. Anti-government protesters continue to riot in cities across Libya, demanding that Qaddafi step
down. Opposition forces, supported by members of the Peoples Militia have gained control in the eastern city of
Benghazi; a massacre by government forces in the city on February 19 emboldened demonstrators, who have
gained control of a number of tanks. Reports indicate that some police and military units have defected in the
city, while most others are remaining off the streets. Protesters have also reportedly gained control of the
eastern city of Bayda, while fighting has taken place in Ajdabiya, Al Marj, Derna, Tobruk, and Zawiya.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778760 Date: 01/07/2016
