     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778940 Date: 01/07/2016




                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                     B6


From:                               Sullivan, JacobJ <Sullivann@state.gov>
Sent:                               Tuesday, February 22, 2011 9:43 AM
To:
Subject:                            FW: CJCS Quick Trip Status--22 Feb part 1



From Mullen's guy -- txpt of Mullen on Al Jazeera. Worth a read.

    Original Message
From:                 Col JCS OCJCS CAG [mailto
Sent: Tuesday, February 22, 2011 5:36 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Re: CJCS Quick Trip Status--22 Feb part 1

Classification: UNCLASSIFIED

Per request, rough AJ transcript below. Final transcript will take a while. If you have Feltman itin, can you push?

Thanks




Very rough notes from your interview. Words are right; spelling clearly not. But thought good to push this out.

Powerful interview, especially on AQ. Iran and future of ME.

Do not know yet when it will air.

Will push this to WH as well.

Vr/John

Reax to recent unrest?

It has taken me back in terms of the speed with which it is occurring. I think what happened in Egypt specially in terms of
the peaceful resoloution while there were swome causlties, each one tragic, is an example for all of us. And all leaders in
the region and working as far west as Tunisia and libya neeed to take that for example.I the deathsw, the villence that is
ongoing in libya rite now is unacceptable and leaders need to elim that as quickly as posile, recogn the ...Igitimiate
concerns that so many ppl have and figture a way to the future that resolves those concerns as edxpressed bvy the ppl
of these contries.
Many are v v close allies of the united states.

Question: obama's concerns about bharain, yemen, Egypt and Tunisia. And now libya.what dz this mean? Concerns,
worries?

Mullen:
The worry initially is that there has been vilolence and certainly my prez has expressed a strong voice to elim that
vilolence as rapidly as pssible and to look for ways to resolve the concerns as raised by the ppl of these various
countries. And I think b is a good example where the crown prince 2 days ago essentially the forces were recalled, he has
taken steps to engage the various groups that have concerns. And that has shown a very positive initial outcome in tems
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778940 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778940 Date: 01/07/2016




of it becoming peaceful very rapidly Each leader in each country, I think, the leadership in the countires have to figu out
a way to addrss these issues. And I think prez ob has been very clear in tems of recogning that.
What happened in Egypt specificall y is an outpouring tied to a repression that had been there. Young ppl looking for a
brihter future. And y see that, from my perspecitive recently in both yeme and tunsiaia. Today in libya where the tragic
violence continues and needs to be elinianted.

The united states for decades has engaged contries and leaders throughout the broader middle east to look for ways to
sustain stability in what has been a v v unstable part of the world. The united s has brot to the attn of these leadees the
need for them to evolve over time, to make changes, to create economices which would present opps for young pplo
once educated to be emp;poyed and to have a better future



So there are m many countires that are good frnds. I am in the region this week to reaffirm the rela, the partnership in
what is aq v diffult and challenging time and to look to a future where o rela will be sustained, where o partnership will
be sustained and where we can look forward to a much more prosperous region based on the changes which clearly are
ocfcuring now and will cont to occur in the future.

Weapns:
In my contry it is my prez that sets the policy no the mil. We have a v strong rela with many many mils, have had an
exceptionaloy strong rela with the Egyptian mil for 30 yrears. And it was, I think, that rel which underpins in many ways
the output in Egypt where the Egyptian mil did the rite thing - did not turn on their own ppl, supported their ppl and
their country in a brilliant way, which is an ex to us all. So I look forward to continuing the military to military rela. Obv
ghe policies will be set by the leades of my country and o countries. But I do exzpect the untied states certainly yto stay
engaged in this region. And focused in the region in a way where it can be more preosperous, where opps are there for
yng ppl tht have not been there in the future. And certainly we do this in a way seeking stability in which those yng ppl
could prosper

We seek peace, stabil and prospertity. And we will certainly not be alone because we will do this w other leaders, other
coutrnires throughout the world, and I think it is a role that seeks to support the indv country goals of impro9evment of
prosperity, of employment. What y see today in libya but also what y certainly saw refcently in egyupt.

And I think we feel that is a noble goal that can be pursued by so many ppl in the region, contries, and that the united
states wd be there side by side and in support of both indivs and countries who seek these kinds of changes.

I think the events in each country have been up to the ppl of that country. That's what you see and certainly y saw that
in Egypt, y saw that in tunisa. We see that today in a ploace like libya as it continues to evolve there.

And from the standpoint of degermining their own future, meeting their needs in the future, that is priencpally up to the
ppl in each country. The united states certainly is in a position to support the peaceful evolution of the kind of change
tht we see..
The united s tates as every contry throughout th4 world would look to how to engage, to see how we can support this
kind of positive change in aw ay that is really meaningful. BUT IT is up to the ppl of each country to makie decisions
about their future

Bahrain:
The untied s navy has been in Bahrain since the 1940s. and we have had an exceptionally strong relationship w b, with
the ppl of b and ovbviously w the leadership. A very imp hub for us in terms of stability, not just now but in the future
with respect to the region. And it is an area on which we depend a great deal in terms of stabilizing and also preventing
the actions of destabilization, often times generated from iran.

The choice of the govt in b, the kingdom of b, the leadership thee, have been ggood friends for a long time. I think the
steps taken a cpl of days ago by the crown prince and kign were positive steps to work to resolve the concerns that have


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778940 Date: 01/07/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778940 Date: 01/07/2016




been raised. I am not going to guess how this is going to come out. We have been friends of b for decades and I wd look
to a future where that fre4idnship and partnership is continued.

Mil strategy re: Iran:
I certainly haven't seen anything in recent events that wd indicate that o focus would lesson. It is a focus ande a concern
expressed bvy all the gulf countries over the course of my career w respect to the pot4ential instability created by iran.
Their continued focus on developing nuc weapons, their support of terrorism regionally and essentially consistent steps
taken to destablilze as much as possible. So I wouldn't expect from a mil standpoint that o streategy wd change at all.

Iran srtrategy:

Prez o from time became prez approached this on two difft tracks. First track is one of engagement and dialog. And very
recently there were renewed talks although they broke down fairly rapidly on the one hand. On the o hand we have also
had a very strong mil both posture and mil options certainly remain available. Y also see a very strong sanctions regime
that was adopted by the un. And those santions have had a signfic impact. And I look to those sanctions continuing to
have an imjpact. So it is a multpronged stragtegy if y will. My part of it is just the mil piece. And from that standpoint, as
I indicated, those options still remain on the table.

The resolution of the Palestinian issue certainly has been a priority for the united statesw. Obv a very difficult issue but
its one prez o and his admin has stepped forward on. Its not an area I personally spend a lot of time in. but I do know,
and it is reemphasized to me how imp resolution of this issue is in the arab world. And in fact I have been counse3led
here for many many yrs about the signficaince of it, and at the same time it is an enormously difficult issue that I know
there are steps that are continuing to try to resolve it\

The united states position has been one that we do not support the continuing development or the continuation of the
settlements. I also think it was made very clear by the prez and the veto is that the dec on that part of the united s is
that the united nations is not the place to resolve this. And that has been a constent policy over the deaces.

Continues to look for solutions... complex isse I wd hop...

I see the united states and other certainly contries still v focused on doing as much as we possibly can to elim al q. and in
fact the sgtrength of their leadership is considerably weakened over the course of the last couple of yrs. We have
focused very specially on the safehavens that exist in the af, pak border. I do have a growing confcern tht various
terrorist orgs work more closely together. And certainly the federation, the al dispersion in yemen, the disp they have in
north Africa is a great concern on the one hand. And we are very focused on that. And they still seek to kill as many
westernes and as many ams as they can. We will go to every end to protect o peoipel.le

On the other hand, I also think recent events in Egypt, in tunisa, in librya, speak to the bankrupt approachy of al q. al q
has been trying to kill its way to victory here. And that is certainly not what the young muslims in those countries who
are asking for change are see3king. Theya re actually seeking a b4etter way of life, a more prosperous futire that tha
offered by al q. so this change, while it is difficult to see exactly how it ends up, I think it is a very storng signal w respect
to the viability of al q's philosophy and approach to the future.

I wd not say anything absolutely w respect to how the future looks. But it is clear to me that in these countries, the ppl
are looking for a better way of life, more opp, an abil to raise their children up to a higher standarde of living. And that is
certainly not anything al q or the terrorist philosophy and strategy respresents. So I think the change tht is occurring
certainly has great potential for signficiantly impacting al q and likeminded virews of the future which don't go to
prosperity, which o go to violence and literally have no positive future.

Certainly very near to here we see ourselves continuing to draw down in iraq. And based on the agree3ment that we
have w the Iraqi govt, we are due to have all o troops o out iraq by the end of yr. we will actually start to draw down
some level of troops in afgh this summer with an expectation tht by the end of 2014 we will have transitioned the sec
lead in afgh.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778940 Date: 01/07/2016
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778940 Date: 01/07/2016




So while it is diffult to predict the future, based on what I understand rite now, based on what I kinow, we see certainly
the combat env that American troops are involved in with respect to where we are rite now is being signfciantloy being
reduced.
That said, the future is pretty difficult time. Very complex. And it is hard to know exactly what is going to happen or
where it is going to happen, not just in this region but other regions in the world. I look to a future where our military's
peaceful engagtement, the peaceful training, the relationship building, actually becomes preventative so conflicts don't
break out.

    Original Message
From: Sullivan, Jacob I <Sullivanil@state.gov>
To:                Col JCS OCJCS CAG
Sent: Tue Feb 22 04:58:45 2011
Subject: Re: CJCS Quick Trip Status--22 Feb part 1

Thanks - look forward to reading Al txpt,



     Original Message
From:                 Col JCS OCJCS CAG <                                     >

To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Sent: Tue Feb 22 04:13:50 2011
Subject: Fw: CJCS Quick Trip Status--22 Feb part 1

Classification: UNCLASSIFIED

Good morning Jake. Can't imagine you're sleeping much.

Don't over react to pirates.

     Original Message
From:                    Col JCS OCJCS CAG
To: Gortney, William VADM JCS DJS
Cc: SeIva, Paul J Lt Gen JCS ACJCS; Golden, Walter M BG JCS DJ1; Rogers, Michael S RADM JCS 12; Neller, Robert B LtGen
JCS J3 FO; Gainey, Kathleen M LTG JCS J4; Jacoby, Charles LTG JCS DJ5; Via, Dennis L LTG JCS J6; Spencer, Larry 0 Lt Gen
JCS J8; Hodges, Ben MG JCS DOM PACC;                              ol JCS DOM DJS; Kirby, John F Capt JCS SJS OCJCS PA;
                    P01 JCS SJS OCJCSPA;                  JCS OCJCS;                   CIV JCS DOM;
MAJ JCS DOM;                    Maj JCS OCJCS;                  Lt Col JCS J2S;                 CAPT JCS 13 Front Office;
                   Col JCS DOM PACC                         COL JCS J5 FO;                    CAPT JCS J8;
CIV DOM CJCSi                     Lt Col JCS DEP EA DJ5; Charlton, John W BG JCS J5 DDPMA-ME;                              ol
JCS J5 ME AP;                       COL  JCS 15  DDME  IRAN LEV D;                      Col JCS OCJCS;                 CIV JCS
DOM OCJCS SJS;                   DR JCS OCJCS                    Lt Col JCS OCJCS; Tidd, Kurt W RADM JCS VDJ-3; CAG;
                     Lt Col JCS15 AO;                 LCDR JCS J5 EA DDME; Milley, Mark A BG JCS.13/NMCC; Angelella,
Sam Maj Gen JCS VDJ5;                        Lt Col JCS DOM VCJCS
Sent: Tue Feb 22 04:03:19 2011
Subject: CJCS Quick Trip Status--22 Feb part 1

Classification: UNCLASSIFIED

Sir:

- CJCS tracking recent events in the Gulf, incl CENTCOM, DoD and NSS status and rxns. PAO engaged.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778940 Date: 01/07/2016
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778940 Date: 01/07/2016




- Yesterday, CJCS had a late night, well-attended feast with Qatari military leadership (J2, J3, Chiefs of Staff of Services)
and senior gov't officials (M of Interior and M of Commerce, etc). All good. DJ5 has the pulse.

- This morning, CJCs met with the AMB and country team. A good session that ranged from near term "tactical" concerns
to the long term implications of hosting of the World Cup in 2022.

- CJCS then conducted a long and wide ranging interview with the much viewed and much maligned al Jazeera.

 -- Headline: Events in the past three weeks show that AQ strategy of change through violence is "bankrupt"

 -- other quick reads: US wants leaders to help resolve their people's grievances--better opportunities and more
prosperous future is key // Self-determination of people's to choose their governments will be supported by the US--
support for process not outcome // Praise for Egypt and initial steps in Bahrain wrt violence // Iran strategy ("all options
on the table"), level of concern unchanged.

(Note-- this transcript worth reading in entirety, I think. Really good stuff)

- CJCS concluded on a high point in Qatar with a session with Crown Prince Tahim, heir apparent. A comfortable,
engaging, and like minded session. DJ5 has read out.

- CJCS now wheels up to next stop, Suspect will clear overnight SIPR traffic. enroute, and focus attention on Quest.

Vr




    Original Message
From:                    Col JCS OCJCS CAG
To: Gortney, William VADM JCS DJS
Cc: Selva, Paul J It Gen JCS ACJCS; Golden, Walter M BG JCS DJ1; Rogers, Michael S RADM JCS 12; Neller, Robert B LtGen
JCS 13 FO; Gainey, Kathleen M LTG JCS J4; Jacoby, Charles LTG JCS DJ5; Via, Dennis L LTG JCS J6; Spencer, Larry 0 Lt Gen
JCS J8; Hodges, Ben MG JCS DOM PACC;                           Col JCS DOM DJS; Kirby, John F Capt JCS SJS OCJCS PA;
                     P01 JCS SJS OCJCSPA;                JCS OCJCS;                  CIViCS DOM;
MAJ JCS DOM                     Maj JCS OCJCS;                  Lt Col JCSJ2S;                CAPT JCS 13 Front Office;
                    Col JCS DOM PACC;                      COL JCS J5 FO;                   CAPT JCS J8;
CIV DOM CJCS                      Lt Col JCS DEP EA DJ5; Charlton, John W BG JCS 15 DDPMA-ME;                           Col
JCS J5 ME AP;                        COL JCS J5 DDME IRAN LEV D                       Col JCS OCJCS;                 CIV JCS
DOM OCJCS SJS;                   CDR JCS OCJCS;                 Lt Col JCS OCJCS; Tidd, Kurt W RADM JCS VDJ-3; CAG;
                     Lt Col JCS J5 AO;                LCDR JCS 15 EA DDME; Milley, Mark A BG JCS J3/NMCC; Angelella,
Sam Maj Gen JCS VD15;                        Lt Col JCS DOM VCJCS
Sent: Mon Feb 21 06:56:14 2011
Subject: CJCS Quick Trip Status--21 Feb

Classification: UNCLASSIFIED

Sir:

CJCS completed his visit to Saudi Arabia with mildly downgraded visits with defense officials today:

- LTG Qubail, Deputy Chief of Staff, MODA
- Sheik Mohsen, A/CDR of Saudi National Guard
- Prince Khalid, Assistant Minister of Defense and Aviation


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778940 Date: 01/07/2016
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778940 Date: 01/07/2016




The meetings were all collegial. CJCS conveyed he was here to listen as 'he does not live here'. Counterparts conveyed
they sought his advice. This mutual quest for counsel allowed for good, warm and open exchange about regional shifts,
and Iran.

There was also good attention to Sudan. All interlocutors talked about Abdullah's reforms to date, particularly in
education (e.g. the message was: not only are they for reform, they've been doing it for some time)

GCS throughout emphasized was that developments in the region ultimately undermine and discredit Iran's regime and
AQ's message in the long run. And we are committed to KSA and its security.

Prince Khalid expressed very directly concern over the state of U.S. military support programs, complaining of changing
expectations, insufficient performance, and incomplete equipment. He was pretty insistent. CJCS somewhat surprised,
and not happy. Expect some RFIs and follow-up, I would think.

- Wheels up to next location. CJCS will be able to scan SIPR for next hour

- Tracking a NSS-requested call to Mr Donilon

Vr




    Original Message
From:                   Col JCS OCJCS CAG
To: Gortney, William VADM JCS DJS
Cc: SeIva, Paul J Lt Gen JCS AOCS; Golden, Walter M BG JCS DJ1; Rogers, Michael S RADM- JCS J2; Neller, Robert B LtGen
JCS 13 FO; Gainey, Kathleen M LTG JCS J4; Jacoby, Charles LTG JCS DJ5; Via, Dennis L LTG JCS J6; Spencer, Larry 0 It Gen
JCS J8; Hodges, Ben MG JCS DOM PACC;                           Col JCS DOM DJS; Kirby, John F Capt JCS SJS OCJCS PA;
                    P01 JCS SJS OCJCSPA;                 JCS OCJCS,                  CIV JCS DOM;
MAJ JCS DOM;                   Maj JCS OCJCS;                  It Col JCS J2S;                CAPT JCS J3 Front Office;
                   Col JCS DOM PACC;                       COL JCS.15 FO;                   CAPT JCS J8;
CIV DOM CJCS;                    Lt Col JCS DEP EA DJ5; Charlton, John W BG JCS J5 DDPMA-ME;                            Col
JCS.15 ME AP;                       COL JCS .15 DDME IRAN LEV D;                      Col JCS OCJCS;                 CIV JCS
DOM OCJCS SJS;                  CDR JCS OCJCS;                  Lt Col JCS OCJCS; Tidd, Kurt W RADM JCS VDJ-3; CAG;
                    It Col JCS 15 AO;                 LCDR JCS J5 EA DDME; Milley, Mark A BG JCS J3/NMCC; Angelella,
Sam Maj Gen JCS VDJ5;                       It Col JCS DOM VCJCS
Sent: Sun Feb 20 11:09:39 2011
Subject: GCS Quick Trip Status--19-20 Feb

Classification: UNCLASSIFIED

Sir--

- CJCS departed Andrews late the evening of the 19th due to high winds, and did paperwork/ email through the 15 hour
transit. No phone calls.

- CJCS tracking next 12-36 hours:
  -- high OPSEC force deployments (J3)
  -- probable emerging Iran, Morocco protests and rxn
  -- ongoing Bahrain, Yemen, Libya protests and rxn
  -- opening of Egypt banks and public announcement of progress on constitutional reforms and rxn
  -- possible travel in the region by senior State reps (when and where? soon?)


        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778940 Date: 01/07/2016
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778940 Date: 01/07/2016




- CJCS is first high level USG visitor to KSA since Mubarak fell

 -- On arrival in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, CJCS received an in brief with Ambassador Smith and a country team brief.
Although press pushing our focus on Bahrain, Yemen as much or more of a concern to KSA.

  -- Chairman stressed not only that he was here to work on relationships, reassure our friends in region, but also to hear
from them what their issues and concerns are:

 -- commonality of interests re Iran, despite bumpiness over Mubarak

 -- Still see rationale differently for unrest past each other on reasons for unrest: disappointed youth who can't get
ahead vs sectarian splits inspired directly or indirectly by Iran.

 -- Warm glows on F15SAs--modernizing BMD and the Navy comes next. Model mil-mil relationship

     AMB pushing DHS to bin Nayif counterpart visit in the US...much potential here

- CJCS had a late evening engagement w/ bin Nayif, but was canx'd, while bin Nayif attends to floods in Jedda.

- CJCS has SIPR for next 4 hours, then sleep

Vr




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778940 Date: 01/07/2016
