UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777255 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL



  My ideas — on my own, without any-one's authority / based on my own instincts after listening to
  many viewpoints

   All together — not one at a time — structure:

   I.      Understanding and accepting historical facts on Jewish and Palestinian roots to the land
   of Israel and Palestine:

   A. Israel states: We understand and recognize the historical fact that the Palestinian People
   have roots in the land known as Palestine prior to 1947 for thousands of years. They are the
   descendents of people who have lived on this land throughout history. The state of Palestine
   shall be established in realization of the Palestinian people's right of self-determination.

   B. Palestinian Authority states: We understand and recognize the historical fact that the Jewish
   people have roots and ancestors from the land that is now the state of Israel going back
   thousands of years and that therefore Israel is and shall remain a state of the Jewish people and
   thus a safe harbor and homeland for the Jewish people everywhere. The State of Israel was
   established in realization of the Jewish people's right of self-determination.

   C. Rights of Citizenship/Equal Protection of the Law. Both non-Jewish citizens of the State of
   Israel and non-Palestinian citizens of the State of Palestine, including those Israeli "settlers"
   who choose to continue to live in the State of Palestine and who apply and qualify for
   Palestinian citizenship, shall have equal status as citizens and minorities with full protection
   under the Rule of Law.

   D. Each side will recognize the other as a legitimate, internationally recognized sovereign
   state.


           International Refugee Compensation and Development Fund and Refugee Rights

   A. Definition of "Original Palestinian Residents." This term shall be used to define those who
      (1) were residents of the land known as Palestine under the British Mandate as of 1948
      (hereinafter, "Mandatory Palestine"); and (2) have been listed by UNWRA as a Palestinian
      refugee (hereafter defined as "Palestinian Refugee.")

   B. Right of Return/Citizenship Rights. All Original Palestinian Residents, and only Original
      Palestinian Residents, shall be entitled to return to the state of Israel and to become Israeli
      citizens.

   C. Compensation and other rights.

           a. All Original Palestinian Residents and their descendents shall have the right of
               Palestinian citizenship and all privileges attendant thereto, including an
               internationally recognized passport.



                                                     1

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777255 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777255 Date: 09/30/2015




           b. International Commission / Rights to Live in Other Nations. An international
              commission composed of several countries, including representatives of Israel and
              Palestine ("the Commission"), will negotiate with other nations the ability of agreed-
              upon numbers of Palestinian Refugees to be residents of the respective countries if
              Original Palestinian Residents do not wish to reside to Israel or if Original
              Palestinian Residents and their descendents do not wish to reside in Palestine.

           c. Compensation. The international community shall fund the Commission with at
              least $xx billion to be paid to any Original Palestinian Refugee and their
              descendents, as property owners and, if such the case, non-property-owner residents
              of Mandatory Palestine as well.

           d. A "Special Education Fund" shall be established by the Commission to to finance
              special and higher education for Original Palestinian Residents and their
              descendents.

              Borders

           A. Borders between Israel and Palestine shall be based on those recognized as of 1967,
              with adjustments as agreed to by Israel and the Palestinian authority and all other
              areas on the West Bank and in Gaza shall be part of the State of Palestine. A land
              swap is understood to be necessary to reach a final agreement.


     IV.      Security

           A. Israel, the Palestinian State Authority shall cooperatively patrol both sides of their
               mutual border and such other borders as both agree shall be necessary to ensure their
               respective national security, together with military forces NATO, with neither party
               having the right to exclude the other from such presence to provide border security
               without that respective party's express consent.

     IV. Jerusalem

           A. The States of Israel and Palestine shall have their capitals in the area of Jerusalem
              under their respective sovereignty.

           B. Israel shall have sovereignty over West Jerusalem and the new state of Palestine
              shall have sovereignty over East Jerusalem, with exceptions that are mutually agreed
              upon map (for possible basis of such map, see President Clinton's Camp David
              Map).

           C. Israel shall have sovereignty over and control of the Western Wall and the state of
              Palestine shall have sovereignty over and control of the Muslim holy places on the
              Temple mount, specifically the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock. Other
              holy places on the Temple Mount will be under the control of a multi-national

                                                    2

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777255 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777255 Date: 09/30/2015




             committee (for example, as discussed during Olmert-Abu Mazen talks), and the the
             right of access and visitation to all of Jerusalem for all religions and peoples shall be
             guaranteed.




                                                    3

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777255 Date: 09/30/2015
