     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782645 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Friday, September 16, 2011 11:32 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Snapshot of early coverage of Secretary's APEC/WES speech




From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Friday, September 16, 2011 07:37 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Reines, Philippe I; Sullivan, Jacob 3
Subject: Snapshot of early coverage of Secretary's APEC/WES speech

Approximately three dozen outlets were in attendance for the Secretary's remarks, including local, national and foreign
outlets and major TV stations such as NBC and CNBC, and most of the Bay Area TV affiliates.

-- Initial reporting has been mainly domestic, but we are watching for international coverage over the weekend.

  AFP, AP and Bloomberg filed reports (below), which were picked up by CBS News, the Atlanta Journal Constitution,
and the Seattle Post Intelligencer, among others; the Daily Beast, Huffington Post, and San Francisco Examiner have all
covered the speech.

--Thus far, the headline has been the Secretary's statement that women are the key to economic growth, and coverage
has focused on her call to end discriminatory barriers that prevent women's economic productivity in what she called
the "Participation Age." AFP and The Daily Beast compared her remarks to her 1995 Beijing speech.

  U/S Hormats did his conference call with International press.

-- We have a few amplifying events next week on margins of UNGA.

-- Wal-Mart issued a statement thanking the Secretary and Ambassador Verveer for their leadership and support for the
company's women-owned business programs:


Walmart Statement Regarding Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton's
Remarks at Today's Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Women and the
Economy Summit
Press Release Source: Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. On Friday September 16, 2011, 3:40 pm

SAN FRANCISCO, Sept. 16, 2011 /PRNewswire/ -- "There is perhaps no single issue more essential to the
progress of our world than the progress of women. Secretary Clinton has been a leader in creating that progress,
so we appreciate the Secretary's support of our efforts to open market access for women-owned businesses. Our
plan to spend $20 billion with these businesses, as well as the work we'll do in factories and on farms to
empower women, will help bring about a global marketplace where women's contributions are truly valued.

"The challenge of empowering women is a complex one, and we want to thank Secretary Clinton and
Ambassador Verveer for their leadership on this issue. No one can solve this issue alone, but with the continued
leadership of the Secretary and others, we will continue to make progress on the critical issue of providing
women and girls the tools they need to succeed in life, at home and at work."


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782645 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782645 Date: 09/30/2015



--- Leslie Dach, Executive Vice President, Corporate Affairs, Walmart




AFP: Clinton declares 'Participation Age' for women
By Shaun Tandon

US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Friday urged/greater effort to break barriers for working women,
saying the world has entered a "Participation Age" where inclusion means economic growth.

Clinton, who has made women's rights a top priority throughout her career, made an impassioned call as she led
a special meeting of the 21-member APEC Asia-Pacific bloc dedicated to women's role in the economy.

Pointing to the anemic growth and debt woes afflicting many major economies, Clinton said that women had a
crucial role to play as they tend to be better savers and can provide new markets when they are empowered.

"The transformational nature of the undertaking that lies ahead is, in my view, not unlike other momentous
shifts in the economic history of our world," Clinton told an overflow crowd of diplomats from across the
Pacific Rim.

"I believe that here, at the beginning of the 21st century, we are entering the Participation Age, where every
individual, regardless of gender or other characteristics, is poised to be a contributing and valued member of the
global marketplace.

"When it comes to the enormous challenge of our time --- to systematically and relentlessly pursue more
economic opportunity in our lands -- we don't have a person to waste. And we certainly don't have a gender to
waste," she continued.

Clinton, citing studies, said that narrowing the gender gap could lead to a 14 percent rise in per capita incomes
by 2020 in APEC economies, including China, Indonesia, the Philippines, Russia, South Korea and Vietnam.

"When we liberate the economic potential of women, we elevate the economic performance of communities,
nations and the world," Clinton said.

"At the governmental level, we routinely measure unemployment, job growth, our national debt, GNP (gross
national product) and our balance of trade," she added.

"Shouldn't we be at least as attentive to collecting, analyzing and publicizing the facts as we seek to move
women into the mainstream of economic life in our nations?"

APEC, or the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, was expected to later agree on a declaration pledging
efforts to increase the role of women in the workplace, an initiative by Clinton as the United States heads the
bloc this year.

APEC, which accounts for more than half of global GDP and its three largest economies -- the United States,
China and Japan -- will follow up on the San Francisco meeting when the forum's leaders hold a November
summit in Hawaii.

Clinton, who narrowly lost a bid to Barack Obama to become the first female US president, acknowledged that
an APEC declaration would not bring changes in itself.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782645 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782645 Date: 09/30/2015



"It requires, rather, a fundamental transformation - a paradigm shift in how governments make and enforce laws
and policies, how businesses invest and operate, how people make choices in the marketplace," she said.

"In the United States and in every economy in APEC, millions of women are still sidelined, unable to find a
meaningful place for themselves in the formal workforce.

"And some of those who get jobs are confined to the lowest rungs on the job ladder by a web of legal and social
restrictions that limit their potential," she said.

Clinton credited a number of businesses in the APEC region for taking action to include women.

She praised Wal-Mart for recently announcing that it would double the amount of goods it will buy from
women-owned businesses globally to $20 billion by 2016.

The retailing giant has long been controversial for its labor practices, but Clinton has longstanding ties with
Wal-Mart from her time as first lady of Arkansas.

As the US first lady, Clinton delivered a landmark speech to a UN conference in Beijing in 1995 in which she
declared that women's rights are human rights.



AP: Clinton: Women the key to economic growth
SAN FRANCISCO — Women are the great untapped resource that can help the global economy recover and
expand, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said Friday as the U.S. and 20 other nations pledged to try to
lower barriers to women in the workforce.

Clinton and diplomats from 20 Asia-Pacific nations pledged to try to improve women's economic participation,
a task Clinton said will take a generation and will mark one of the most profound transformations of the world
economy. The agreement is a run-up to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting in Hawaii later this
year, which President Barack Obama will attend.

"With economic models straining in every corner of the world, none of us can afford to perpetuate the barriers
facing women in the workforce," Clinton said.

Barriers of law and custom mean that women in developing economies may have no right to inherit land or
businesses, or less access than men to land and good quality seed, Clinton said. In more developed economies
women still earn less than men, and have fewer opportunities, she noted.

She cited private studies to show what could happen if women were afforded fuller economic participation.

 A Goldman Sachs report says America's GDP would grow by 9 percent if barriers to women's workforce
 participation were lowered. Clinton said the increases for European countries that use the euro as their currency
 would be 13 percent, and Japan's 16 percent.

 She cited a Boston Consulting Group survey concluding that women will control $15 trillion in global spending
 by the year 2014 and be responsible for two-thirds of consumer spending worldwide by 2028.

 "There is a stimulative and ripple effect that kicks in when women have greater access to jobs and the economic


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782645 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782645 Date: 09/30/2015



lives of our countries," Clinton said. She listed greater political stability, fewer military conflicts, more food and
better educational opportunity for children.


Bloomberg: Clinton Calls Women Key to Fueling Asian, U.S. Economic
Growth
By Nicole Gaouette

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton announced today a commitment from 21 members of the Asia Pacific
Economic Cooperation to boost economic growth and productivity by removing barriers to women.

Clinton, in a speech, laid out an economic case for APEC members to end such discriminatory practices as
taxing women, limiting their ability to own property or to get access to capital, markets, jobs, training and
positions of leadership.

A Goldman Sachs Group Inc. (GS) report, cited by Clinton, found that increasing women's participation in the
economy could lead to a 14 percent rise in per capita income by 2020 in APEC countries including China,
Russia, Indonesia, the Philippines, Vietnam, and Korea.

"When everyone has a chance to participate in the economic life of nations, we can all be richer, because more
of us would be contributing to the global GDP," Clinton told an audience at an APEC meeting on women and
the economy in San Francisco.

The San Francisco Declaration adopted today commits APEC's members to pursue a "generation-long
journey," Clinton said. In doing so, they'll create a fundamental economic shift that leaves member countries
more competitive and prosperous, she said.

Clinton's announcement married two of her strongest interests. She has focused on women and children since
early in her professional life, she she has sought to leverage the State Department's power to boost economic
growth.

Women's Impact

Clinton cited today a study by consultants McKinsey & Co. that found that approximately one-quarter of U.S.
gross domestic product is attributable to productivity gains tied to the rise of women in the U.S. workplace over
the last 40 years, from holding 37 percent of all jobs, to 48 percent.

"That works out to more than $3.5 trillion," Clinton said. "More than the GDP of Germany, and more than half
the GDPs of China and Japan," she said.

And she highlighted a World Bank finding that by eliminating discrimination against female workers and
managers, companies "could significantly increase productivity per worker by 25 to 40 percent."

Getting more women into the economic life of a country has ripple effects that benefit everyone, Clinton said.

 Women Save

 Her list included greater political stability, fewer military conflicts, more food, more educational opportunity for
 children and financial stability for more families in the world.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782645 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782645 Date: 09/30/2015




Studies have shown that women spend more of their earned income on food, health care, home improvement
and schooling -- reinvesting in ways that lead to more job growth and ensure better educated, healthier citizens,
Clinton said.

Women also save more than men, according to research Clinton cited, with the higher savings rate translating
into a higher tax base.

APEC has discussed the issue of women's economic participation before and has made uneven progress toward
change, Clinton said. In the U.S. and every APEC economy, women are "still sidelined."

Only 11 of the CEOs of Fortune Global 500 companies are women, Clinton said.

Clinton has already launched women's economic projects in Africa. The African Growth Opportunity Act
created an initiative to help African women entrepreneurs build export capacity and take advantage of trade
opportunities.

And she has launched Tech Women, a technology program in which women from around the world have been
mentored by women in the Silicon Valley. At the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development,
Clinton has also advanced an effort to collect data on women's education, entrepreneurship, and employment.



Huffington Post: Women Are Vital in the Participation Age
Friday, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton chaired the first-ever Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
(APEC) High-Level Policy Dialogue on Women and the Economy in San Francisco, California. Hosted by the
United States, hundreds of private sector leaders and government officials gathered this week to discuss the
inclusion of women as an economic growth strategy and to recommend concrete policies to increase women's
economic participation in the region.

In her remarks, the Secretary made the evidence-based case for the inclusion of women as a vital source of
economic growth. She articulated important steps in a path toward the Participation Age -- where every
individual has the opportunity to be a contributing and valued member of the global marketplace -- including
strategies to remove barriers that have prevented women from being full participants in the economy and unlock
their potential as drivers of economic growth.



The Daily Beast: Clinton: Women Can Rescue the Economy
Echoing her 1995 address in Beijing in which she famously said "women's rights are human rights," Secretary
of State Hillary Clinton's declaration at the Asian-Pacific Economic Cooperation's (APEC) Women and the
Economy Summit in San Francisco on Friday underscored the necessity of women's powerful presence in the
global economy. Clinton called on policymakers from the APEC nations — which include the United States,
Russia, Japan, and China — to develop concrete tactics that will break down structural and social barriers
preventing women's economic and political participation in these countries and around the world. She heralded
women's progress over the years, but said "evidence of progress is not evidence of success, and the rate of
progress in our economies varies widely." In the agriculture industry, for example, women farmers have less
access to resources and training than men. "When resources are allocated equally and efficiently, women and
men are equally productive in agriculture," Clinton said, adding, "Unlocking the potential of women by
narrowing the gender gap could lead to a 14 percent rise in per capita incomes by the year 2020 in several
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782645 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782645 Date: 09/30/2015



APEC economies including Russia and Korea." Clinton cited studies on women's investing and consumer
productivity. Data show that women are stronger savers than men, she said. Clinton's declaration concluded that
the beginning of the 21st century marks the Participation Age when "we don't have a person to waste... and we
certainly don't have a gender to waste" if we want to make full potential of the world's economic opportunities.
"In pursuing the promise of the Participation Age, let us remember that by harnessing the economic potential of
all women, we boost opportunity for all people."




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782645 Date: 09/30/2015
