     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782460 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                 RELEASE IN
                                                                                                 FULL


From:                             Sullivan, Jacob 1 <SullivanJ1@state.gov>
Sent:                             Wednesday, March 30, 2011 5:31 PM
To:
Subject:                          FW: TNC Statement on Rejection of AI-Qaeda: March 30 Statement




From: Cretz, Gene A
Sent: Wednesday, March 30, 2011 4:21 PM
To: Rodriguez, Miguel E; Adams, David S
Cc: Schlicher, Ronald L; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Burns, William 3; Steinberg, James B; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Schrepel, Dawn M;
Roebuck, William V
Subject: TNC Statement on Rejection of Al-Qaeda: March 30 Statement

Following is rough and dirty translation of Arabic language statement issued by INC on March 30:

"The TNC affirms the Muslim identity of the Libyan people and the TNC's commitment to moderate Muslim
norms and values as well as its utter rejection of all extremist ideology and its complete commitment to the
combating of extremist ideology under all circumstances, and rejects all claims linking the AI-Qaeda
Organization to the Libyan opposition.

We emphasize that the danger of terrorism threatens all nations and there should be no connection with
terrorism to any religion, civilization, or ethnic group. We again affirm our strong condemnation of terrorism
and our commitment to combat it in all of its forms and manifestations and acts committed by whomever,
wherever, or for whatever purposes. We also recognize it as one of the most serious threats to peace and
international security.

The TNC underlines its commitment to the full implementation of Security Council resolutions relating to
combating terrorism, including resolutions on the Sanctions Committee on al Qaeda and the Taliban and their
full commitment to all the measures and sanctions relating to any individual or entity associated with Al
Qaeda and the Taliban as designated by the Committee.



The TNC is likewise committed to the implementation of all resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
concerning all measures to eliminate international terrorism, including the measures identified in the strategy
of the United Nations Global Counterterrorism group and is committed to working with Member States of the
United Nations and international and regional organizations on the implementation of the strategy to combat
terrorism and to work towards implementation of the strategy to completely eliminate terrorism.




The TNC likewise undertakes to work to strengthen the important role played by the United Nations and its
committees and task forces involved in combating terrorism. The TNC will cooperate fully with the United
Nations, and will join and comply with all international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism and
will work at the legislative and executive levels to adopt and implement the provisions and measures
contained therein."



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782460 Date: 09/30/2015
