        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785453 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov >
Sent:                                         Friday, May 13, 2011 5:23 PM
To:
Cc:                                           Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject                                       Fw: Pakistani parliament condemns U.S. raid (Reuters)



What fun we are missing.


From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Friday, May 13, 2011 05:20 PM
To: NEWS-Mahogany; NEWS-Pakistan
Cc: SES-O_Shift-III; SES-0_0S; SES-O_SWO
Subject: Pakistani parliament condemns U.S. raid (Reuters)

CHARSADDA (Reuters) - Military and intelligence chiefs gave parliament a closed-door briefing in which the
head of the main Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) agency told legislators he was ready to take responsibility for
any criminal failing, a minister said.

   "If any of our responsibility is determined and any gap identified, that our negligence was criminal
negligence, and there was an intentional failure, then we are ready to face any consequences," Information
Minister Firdous Ashiq Awan told Express TV, citing ISI chief Lieutenant-General Ahmad Shuja Pasha.

   Another member of parliament said Pasha told the assembly he did not want to "hang around" if parliament
deemed him responsible. "I am ready to resign," Riaz Fatyana quoted the ISI chief as saying.

  Pasha also said killing bin Laden was a common U.S.-Pakistani goal but the Americans had breached
Pakistan's sovereignty by going after him on their own.

   The U.S. raid had taken 40 minutes and the Americans had used superior technology including stealth
helicopters which Pakistan could not detect, the minister said.

   The spy chief also told parliament bin Laden had been isolated and "living like a dead man", the minister
said.

   "We had already killed all his allies and so we had killed him even before he was dead. He was living like a
dead man," Awan cited Pasha as saying.

  Parliament later adopted a resolution condemning the U.S. attack and calling for a review of ties with
Washington and an independent commission to investigate the whole affair.



NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785453 Date: 09/30/2015
