         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778586 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                            RELEASE IN FULL



From:                            Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                            Monday, March 14, 2011 2:57 PM
To:
Subject:                         Fw: Bahrain Update (SBU)


Latest


From: Fogarty, Daniel J
To: Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma
Cc: S_SpecialAssistants
Sent: Mon Mar 14 14:53:27 2011
Subject: FW: Bahrain Update (SBU)

Jake and Huma:

FYI, Ops has included below the latest developments in Bahrain.

Thanks,

Dan

From: VuAT3@state.gov [mailto:VuAT3@state.gov]
Sent: Monday, March 14, 2011 1:34 PM
To: Bahrain Unrest; NEA-ARP-DL; S_SpecialAssistants; D(N); D(S); P; SES_DutyDeputies; PA FO Group; NEA-Staff-
Assistants-DL
Cc: Operations Center
Subject: Bahrain Update (SBU)

(SBU) Although Shiite demonstrators blocked all three bridges leading from the island with the Bahrain
International Airport and Manama, Embassy Manama reports Assistant Secretary Feltman was able to depart
the airport. A/S Feltman is scheduled to meet with Crown Prince Salman, Foreign Minister Sheikh Khalid, as
well as Wefaq party leaders later March 14. Post confirms a second wave of military vehicles entered Bahrain
via the causeway, including armored vehicles, Humvees pulling trailers, 18-wheel trucks, fuel trucks, and
various utility vehicles headed to a training area south of Isa Air Base. Post notes UAE and Kuwaiti troops are
scheduled to arrive as a part of the GCC Peninsula Shield Force. Protesters are reportedly departing the Pearl •
Roundabout to confront the Saudi armor. Post comments there have been no reports of violence against foreign
troops. Masked Sunni vigilantes are stopping and searching vehicles in Muharraq. Post said there are ongoing
reports of armed groups manning unofficial checkpoints in many areas of the country where Ministry of Interior
(MOI) forces are present but not intervening. A MOI spokesman reported on Bahraini television 148 policeman
were injured since March 13 and 17 individuals were attacked by gangs. The Bahraini Information Affairs
Authority issued a statement on the arrival of the foreign troops, stating "the arrival of the first joint Peninsula
Shield Forces to the Kingdom of Bahrain is due to the tragic events [Bahrain has witnessed] that have shaken
the security and terrorized peaceful citizens and residents." Upon the arrival of the foreign troops, post re-issued
security and warden notices advising all American citizens to remain in their residences until further notice.
Post adds there is no indication AmCits are being targeted or threatened. Spontaneous demonstrations and
violence are expected throughout the next several days.



         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778586 Date: 09/30/2015
