         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778265 Date: 09/30/2015


                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                   B6



    From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
    Sent:                             Monday, January 24, 2011 10:27 AM
    To:
    Subject:                         FW: WSJ Op-Ed on Trade by McLarty and Cunningham




    From: Nelson W. Cunningham
    Sent: Monday, January 24, 2011 8:18 AM
    To: Steinberg, James B; Nides, Thomas R; Mills, Cheryl D
    Subject: WSJ Op-Ed on Trade by Mdarty and Cunningham

    THE WALL SMELT JOURNAL
•   WSicam

    OPINION
    JANUARY 24, 2011

    Obama's Free Trade Opportunity
    A fidl-throated campaign for passage of the Korea, Colombia and Panama agreements can help reset this
    presidency.
    By THOMAS "MACK" MCLARTY III AND NELSON W. CUNNINGHAM


    Much has been written about Bill Daley's selection as White House chief of staff, a position sometimes called "Chief
    Javelin Catcher" (a title whose accuracy one of us strongly affirms). Most agree that Mr. Daley is the perfect choice to
    help President Obama set a new tone for his presidency. He is a moderate, strongly rooted in Democratic principles
    and politics. Though he comes from the business community, he is no colorless technocrat or Republican shill. He is
    a Daley from Chicago and will not forget the needs of the lunchbucket voters who've supported Daleys for 50 years,
    or the political lessons he learned at the knee of his father, Mayor Richard J. Daley.

    Mr. Daley will need all his political skills to tackle what we think should become one of the signature
    accomplishments of his tenure: the return of liberalized trade as a centerpiece of Democrats' vision of economic
    competitiveness and globalization.

    Bill Clinton embraced this vision, and he understood that trade liberalization required strong bipartisan efforts. To
    pass the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta) in 1993, we set up a bipartisan war room within the White
    House, headed by Bill Daley and former Republican Congressman Bill Frenzel. Messrs. Daley and Frenzel worked
    together, with the full support of the president and White House staff, to push Nafta through the House with 102
    Democratic and 132 Republican votes, and on to an equally bipartisan total in the Senate.

    Liberalized trade was also at the heart of President Clinton's view that America needed international competition to
    succeed in an increasingly trade-dependent world. Not every Democrat supported this view, though Mr. Clinton
    strongly pushed it within the party.

    But we quickly lost this bipartisan consensus and the progress Mr. Clinton had forged in his own party. By 1997,
    when Mr. Clinton sought renewal of "fast track" authority to negotiate more trade agreements, Republican Speaker
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778265 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778265 Date: 09/30/2015




of the House Newt Gingrich could not corral his majority to support the president and the effort failed. And although
President George W. Bush did manage to make congressional headway on trade with his Republican majorities, he
did so principally with Republican support.

In the first two years of President Obama's tenure, progress on trade was largely frozen. Mr. Obama stated his
support for the uncompleted pieces of the Bush trade agenda—free trade agreements with South Korea, Panama and
Colombia, the dangling Doha World Trade Organization round, and Russia WTO accession—but little measurable
progress was made.
View Full Image




 David Gothard



 Now, in a few short weeks, Mr. Obama has renegotiated the U.S.-Korea free trade agreement and announced that it
 will be a priority in the new Congress. He has taken steps to resolve a longstanding trade dispute with Mexico over
 trucks that goes back to the Clinton years. And, with his selection of Mr. Daley, the president has hired the man who
 can make this trade revival a reality.

 What now? Our experience tells us that the only way to push a major trade agreement through Congress—even one
 where the nominally pro-trade GOP rules the House—is with strong and unyielding presidential leadership, a
 unified White House staff and cabinet, and a genuinely bipartisan approach to stakeholders and the Congress.

  First, the president must be fully committed. Nafta was a bipartisan success in no small part because of the personal
• involvement of Mr. Clinton and sometimes tortuous negotiations with members of Congress. It's true that some pork
  was doled out and more than one bridge was built as a result of a Nafta vote—something they probably still
  understand in Chicago.



       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778265 Date: 09/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778265 Date: 09/30/2015




Second, the White House and cabinet must be unified in pulling for passage. Everyone from Vice President Joe
Biden to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to Labor Secretary Hilda Solis and U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk
must be fully engaged, without hesitation. Don't forget the crucial role that then-Vice President Al Gore's 1993
debate with Ross Perot played in swinging public opinion in favor of Nafta.

Third, the effort must be genuinely bipartisan. We'll need scores of members from both sides to make passage
possible (this is particularly true with a large tea party GOP caucus that is as yet undefined on trade). Perhaps Mr.
Obama could even take a page from the 1993 playbook and bring into the White House a prominent Republican—
former U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills, former Reagan Chief of Staff Ken Duberstein, or a former
congressman such as Jim Kolbe or Chris Shays, for example—to help quarterback the effort.

Finally, the president has to show that his commitment to the U.S.-Korea free trade agreement isn't a one-off.
Moderates and independents who have been spooked by an economic approach they see as veering strongly to the
left are looking for signs that this president embraces their centrist views. A commitment to deficit reduction,
sustained outreach to business, and a genuine embrace of trade liberalization must go hand-in-hand. Most
importantly, the president should commit to advancing the pending trade agreements with Colombia and Panama
right now, instead of leaving them until later as some in his administration would prefer. Why bother taking a half-
measure on trade?

A full-throated campaign for the Korea, Colombia and Panama trade agreements, along with WTO accession for
Russia, can help reset this presidency. Capitalizing on his selection of Mr. Daley with a renewed American trade
policy, Mr. Obama has the chance to remind moderates in both parties and independent voters that he is the man
they voted for in 2008—a leader who appreciates the goals of businesses large and small, and who sees America as
confident and innovative enough to remain the global economy's True North.

It also gives the president the opportunity to strengthen ties with longtime allies who cultivate liberal democracy,
reject old and ugly political and social traditions, stand shoulder-to-shoulder with us when it comes to fighting the
world's darkest forces, and are willing to open their markets to us—or in the case of Russia, to encourage that
behavior. It won't be easy, and it may alienate some in the Democratic base, but it is essential.

Mr. McLarty was chief of staff to President Clinton in 1993-94 and helped bring Bill Daley into the White House to
lead the 1993 Nafta ratification effort. Mr. Cunningham was an aide to President Clinton and to then-Sen. Joseph
Biden.


Nelson W. Cunningham I Managing Partner
McLarty Associates I www.maglobal.com




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778265 Date: 09/30/2015
