UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779363 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL




                            Sitrep 3 — 1300 Reporting, Embassy Port-au-Prince

Key Points:

    •   Pierre Esperance, Director of RNDDH which sent out domestic observers, reports that despite
        intermittent irregularities, the electoral process as a whole appears to be going better than it
        did during the first round.
    •   Embassy team reports intimidation of voters in St. Marc area in the Artibonite department.
        Nearby, in Dessalines, one man among a group of armed men was shot outside a voting center
        and later died at a hospital of his wounds. It appears he was shot by MINUSTAH.
    •   Voter turnout by mid-day appears to be mixed: higher in some regions than during the first
        round, lower in others. It is too early to determine. Some observers are hearing that more
        people will come out to vote in the afternoon, after church.
    •   MINUSTAH is recommending that polls be closed later due to late delivery of materials.
    •   CEP reports the SMS system is still working, though slowly because of overload. More than
        23,000 messages are in the queue to be sent out to voters.

Media Reporting:

Haitian media, including Radio Caraibes, as well as Reuters, are now quoting Haitian police officials who
say that Wyclef Jean faked a bullet wound, that he actually cut his hand with a piece of glass.

Media are reporting on the death of a Haitian in Marchand Dessalines, Artibonite Department, after a
shoot-out between authorities and a gang. The municipality of Marchand Dessalines was also the site of
a fatal shooting during the first round.

Port-au-Prince area:

Voting continues without major incidents in the West Department despite continued logistical
problems. Most delayed voting centers have now opened. Voter turn-out is varied. Scattered problems
continue, mostly with unruly voters, and names not matching voters' lists.

At 1100am briefing, the UN noted that 54 of 70 voting centers had received additional materials. The UN
expected to have the issue resolved by noon. More sites reported opening late (Croix-des-Bouquests,
Varreux), but voting has been ongoing since without disruptions. The Lycee Kafou Fey received its
materials at 10:30am. Tensions lessened as voting began.

Observers report undisturbed voting in Cite Soleil, Port-au-Prince, Tabarre, Carrefour, and the Petionville
Club IDP camp. In Foret des Pins, east of Port-au-Prince, poll workers seemed overwhelmed by unruly
voters and crowds around the voting center. 3 Three HNP officers were assisting with crowd control. In
Petit Goave, election officials believe turnout is thus far lower than November 28. Many voters report
having used SMS system to find the correct voting center. No major disruptions reported.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779363 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779363 Date: 09/30/2015




 Elderly woman kneeling to vote at makeshift voting station in Cite Soleil.



 Artibonite:

 St Marc: Embassy personnel observed around noon that RNDP and INITE personnel (not mandataires)
 remained in the voting center, directing people and telling them how to vote. Observed three men
 using distraction and diversion techniques with CV and BV staff that allowed people to vote multiple
 times. One HNP officer removed excess mandataires from BV and then sat down in the back; did not
 intervene to help MINUSTAH control the entry points. Electoral security agents were selectively
 checking ID cards. Embassy team watched same individuals enter and exit multiple times between their
 voting iterations.

 Dessalines: Sometime in the morning, MINUSTAH shot at a group of 50 men (half of them armed) who
 were approaching a voting center and refused to stop. One man was shot and later died of his wounds
 in, the hospital.

 Valerieu: Poll supervisor said 40-50% of voters had already cast their votes by 11:30.

 Outside of Gonaives: One voting center in Marchand Dessalines is closed with voters alleging INITE
 kicked them all out. On the way to Miel, embassy team found rocks placed across the road, blocking
 movement. The voting center further down the road had already closed, and vote counting begun
 before noon. No observers were inside during the count, and the poll supervisor was wearing a pink
 Martelly hat.

 Center:

 Mirebalais: Poll supervisor says compared to first round, things were going much better today with
 finding names on voter lists. The mandataires were again outnumbering the voters, however they were
 helping voters, giving instructions. Voters arrived in a large truck used for sugar cane and lined up
 patiently. Lots of merchants around. Nepalese UN contingent off to the side. Turnout: about 50 voters
 at each voting bureau had completed voting by 11:00.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779363 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779363 Date: 09/30/2015




Thomode: Embassy team observes heavy involvement in voting process by mandataires. In two
instances, they saw mandataires stop short of writing on the ballot for one voter. This led to dispute
from the other mandataires. The HNP responded in little time to help calm the situation by talking to the
staff and voters.

North:

Cap Haitien:
 11:30: Embassy team observed a number of HNP at the gate and inside. The line moved smoothly.
Some people were seen climbing into the voting area at different points through holes and gaps,
bypassing security. The compound was expansive. The police tried to move people out after voting but it
is difficult to figure out whose milling around and who is looking for their voting bureau.
There are issues with matching lists - one man was directed to come to the voting center through the
call center but could not find his name on the inside list - he became very frustrated. People seem to be
using the call center and sms program. Embassy team heard of a man who found his name on both lists
but on the list inside there was no photo so he couldn't vote.
  12:00: Embassy team saw observers from OAS/CARCOM, EU, and CNO, and Jurimedia. Also saw press.
There was no main gate to screen people. There were lots of people hanging out, especially young men,
but few people voting. Embassy team noticed some political agents and felt tension. POL workers said
about 100 people voted so far in each room - the ballot boxes had lots of ballots inside. Team noticed
one man actively trying to wipe the ink off his hand and noticed one political agent going behind the
privacy screen though he was quickly reprimanded and removed.




Milot: Tension in large voting center around noon. Young men screaming at each other and about to
fight. HNP intervened and prevented violence but embassy team reported situation still unpredictable.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779363 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779363 Date: 09/30/2015




SUD EST Department

Fort Oge: Monitoring team arrived at Fort Oge around 1100 to verify radio reports of unknown
individuals paying voters. Several HNP officers present denied there was any evidence of vote buying
but indicated that they do not know who called in the irregularity to the radio station. Police stated that
everything appeared calm and the only problem they encountered was a mandataire who had not been
properly credentialed. Team noted some tension, commenting that the center supervisor was "tense, as
if something had just happened," but no further information. Nonetheless, election officials and
security were in control of the process and voting appeared to be progressing normally.

Jacmel: Team reports that at two schools visited in downtown Jacmel, election officials indicate lower
turnout than in November. The situation is calm with few individuals in the process of voting. Some
people remained confused in finding correct voting center, despite assistance of election officials and
the SMS system. Individuals report going to the location provided via SMS then not being able to find
their name on the voting list.

NIPPES:

Petite Goave: Voting is orderly at four voting centers visited. Election officials estimate that turnout as
of 1130 is far lower than November but assess it could increase in the afternoon. Many people report
using the SMS system to find correct voting center. Team reports small disturbances—typically one or
two agitators—that are quickly resolved by HNP or MINUSTAH or by other voters.

SUD Department

Les Cayes:
 At Ecole Nationale de Laborde, a rural voting center, all appeared calm. The poll supervisor indicated
medium levels of voting and assessed turnout was lower than in November. The center opened on time
with no major problems; local observers, HNP, and MINUSTAH observed. Four or five voters named in
the outside voting list were prevented from voting because their names were not on the BV list. Team
reported about a 10 minute wait at BV 4 if names were quickly found on voting list, but overall no
significant lines. Four voters used SMS system earlier this morning but said it was no longer working.




Voting lists at Ecole National Labourde




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779363 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779363 Date: 09/30/2015




At Ecole Saint Paul in Gouin, another rural voting center, all was calm and quiet as of 1140. Supervisor
said turnout was low. Team observed boxes were approximately half full. HNP and electoral security on
site.

At Lysee Caludy Museau Bergeau, the 21 BVs were staffed and had all necessary voting materials. Team
observed three CNO observers, along with party monitors for each candidate and two journalists. No
lines or major problems, although some voters' names on the outside lists are not found on the BV lists.
Not all orienteers showed up, exacerbating some of the confusion. Most people know of the calling
center but one individual indicated it directed him to the wrong location. BV workers claim center
opened at 0640.

College Evangelique de Simon CV has 16 BVs; supervisor indicated that center opened on time at 0600
but there have been some problems with the lists posted on exterior wall and deemed the internal lists
accurate. Individuals not on the internal lists were prohibited from voting. Team describes the mood as
positive and social with young people present, and turnout as of 1230 was medium. The calling
center/SMS system is reported to not be working for many people. UN and HNP present.

Torbeck: Team made second stop at Ecole Wesleyenne. The CV President and HNP reported no
problems, and ballot boxes are filling up. An orienteer is on location and providing support to voters.




An orienteer providing assistance at Ecole Wesleyenne




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779363 Date: 09/30/2015
