        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780308 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL



From:                            Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                            Friday, April 15, 2011 1:19 PM
To:
Subject:                         Fw: Qaddafi Forces Fire Cluster Bombs Into Civilian Areas (NYT)




From: OpsNewsTicker@state.gov [mailto:OpsNewsTicker@state.gov]
Sent: Friday, April 15, 2011 01:07 PM
To: NEWS-Libya; NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-O_Shift-II; SES-0_0S; SES-O_SWO
Subject: Qaddafi Forces Fire Cluster Bombs Into Civilian Areas (NYT)




MISURATA (NYT) — Military forces loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, who have surrounded this city and
vowed to crush its anti-Qaddafi rebellion, have been firing into residential neighborhoods with heavy weapons,
including cluster bombs that have been banned by much of the world and ground-to-ground rockets, according
to the accounts of witnesses and survivors and physical evidence on the ground.
Such weapons, which strike large areas with a dense succession of high-explosive munitions, by their nature
cannot be fired precisely, and when fired into populated areas place civilians at grave risk.

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, speaking at a news conference in Berlin, said she was "not aware"
of the specific use of cluster or other heavy weapons in Misurata, but said, "I'm not surprised by anything that
Colonel Qadaffi and his forces do."

She added: "That is worrying information. And it is one of the reasons the fight in Misurata is so difficult,
because it's at close quarters, it's in amongst urban areas and it poses a lot of challenges to both NATO and to
the opposition."

The cluster munitions were visible in use late Thursday night, in the form of what appeared to be 120-
millimeter mortar rounds that burst in the air over the city, scattering high-explosive bomblets below.

Remnants of expended shells, examined and photographed by The New York Times, show the rounds to be
MAT-120 cargo mortar projectiles, each of which carries and distributes 21 smaller submunitions designed both
to kill people and penetrate light armor.

Components from the 120-millimeter rounds, according to their markings, were manufactured in Spain in 2007
— one year before Spain signed the international Convention on Cluster Munitions and pledged to destroy its
stocks. Libya is not a signatory to the convention.

The cluster munitions are not the only indiscriminate heavy weapon system to imperil the city's neighborhoods.
An examination of the area of an intensive rocket barrage on Thursday near the city's port showed that the Qasr
Ahmed residential district was struck by multiple rockets, known as GRADs, which landed in a dense pattern
on houses and streets. One rocket shattered the wall beside a mosque.

The GRAD rockets, an area weapons system designed in the Soviet Union to blanket a battlefield with multiple
explosions, were readily indentified by their twisted fragments and remains, some of which bore markings
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780308 Date: 09/30/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780308 Date: 09/30/2015




indicating they had been manufactured during the cold war. They are fired from truck-mounted launchers that •
hold 40 rocket tubes, so that each truck is, essentially, a mobile system that can launch its own barrage 12 miles
or more.

One of the GRAD rockets alone killed eight civilians, according to survivors and witnesses, who then showed
two journalists eight hastily dug graves in a public park nearby, where relatives prayed over the dead. The
bodies had been interred beside two children's swing sets. Each grave was dated: April 14, 2011.

Taken together, the attacks of Thursday and the evidence they left behind, point to a campaign by Colonel
Qaddafi's forces against Misurata that relies in part on weapons designed to endanger the lives of the civilians
trapped within. They also support the rebels' frequent contentions that in the lopsided fight for Libya, Colonel
Qaddafi's forces have targeted civilians or at a minimum, taken few measures to avoid endangering them.

"This is a human tragedy," said Ali Salem, 40, a resident of Qasr Ahmed, who described his four children now
struggling to sleep. "What else do you call it when they bomb with artillery, rockets and mortars people who are
safely sleeping in their homes?"

The toll of the GRAD rocket strikes also framed the ways in which civilians in this war are forced into
vulnerability. Misurata has few open markets, almost no electricity and limited supplies of food. To eat, many
residents must stand in bread lines.

One of the rockets that landed in Qasr Ahmed exploded beside one of those lines, killing several people waiting
for food. "I jumped onto the ground when the explosions started," said Ali Hmouda, 36, an employee of the
port. "My friend did not. His head came off."

NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780308 Date: 09/30/2015
