        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779540 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                         B6


From:                            Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ©state.gov>
Sent:                            Friday, April 1,2011 5:28 PM
To:
Subject:                         FW: Information on Libya, AQ and al-Hasidi
Attachments:                     Hasidi Libyan rebel commander.docx; Hasidi Libyan rebel commander.docx


FYI

From: Wright, Janey F
Sent: Friday, April 01, 2011 5:27 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Information on Libya, AQ, and al-Hasidi

Jake,

Attached and below is what I was able to find out at the unclassified level on Libya, AQ, and al-
Hasidi. I can tell you a bit more at a higher classification level.

Janey

Information on Libya, AQ, and al-Hasidi

• Based on conversations with NEA, they do not believe that Abdulhakim al-Hasidi is linked to Al
  Qaeda or that Al Qaeda is fighting with the rebel forces in Libya.

      Per my query, NEA put the question to Ahmed Jabril, an advisor to Transitional National Council
      (TNC) Chairman Mustafa Abdeljalil. He responded that al-Hasidi does not have a role as a
      commander of the rebel forces. The military is currently co-coordinated by Omar Hariri &
      Abdelfattah Younis, former Minister of the Interior. But there are press reports that there is likely
      to be a military leadership change (see translated media report below).

      The TNC advisor also reported that Abdulhakim al-Hasidi himself denied allegations that he was a
      leader in the opposition's military campaign against the regime and that he was working to create
      an Islamic state in Darna (a city east of Benghazi).

      The TNC advisor said that these allegations were propagated by Saif al-Islam and the regime to
      disparage the opposition and cause the West to be distrustful of the opposition, council, and
      revolutionary movement. He added that Abdulhakim al-Hasidi appeared on CNN to flatly deny all
      of Saif al-Islam's allegation.

      Separately, former regime Ambassador to the UN Abdulrahman Shalgham (and current TNC
      representative to the organization) suggested to Ambassador Cretz that while there may be
      lingering Al Qaeda sympathizers in the country's east (about 100), the Libyan government did not
      believe there remained active Al Qaeda fighters.



        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779540 Date: 09/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779540 Date: 09/30/2015




  Others I have checked with say we just don't know enough about the make-up or leadership of
  the rebel forces (due to classification reasons, I can talk more in person about this if you would
  like).

  NEA also noted that The Economistyesterday published the following:

      The freeing by post-revolutionary Egypt and Tunisia of thousands of Islamist political prisoners
      has closed a dark chapter for human rights in those countries. Outfits like Libya's Islamic
      Fighting Group and Egypt's Jarnaat Islamiya, both of which pursued terror campaigns in the
      1990s and were on the radical fringe, express a newfound keenness for peaceful politics,
      explaining that their past resort to violence was only a response to repression. The Libyan
      Islamic Fighting Group has changed its name to the Libyan Islamic Movement, and its 12-
      member politburo has pledged allegiance to the National Council in Benghazi.

      Media Report (Translated from Arabic)

      The Interim National Transitional Council in Libya said that they are considering a change in
      the military leadership after Al Qadhafi forces took over Brega again and made a real progress
      in other areas of the East, while the revolutionaries are still trying to defend ljdabeya and
      Misurata.

      The recent developments on the ground in Libya - which Al Qadhafi forces managed through it
      to regain control again on the towns of Brega and Ras Lanuf — has prompted the Council to
      convene a meeting to review the aspects of the military affairs after the retreat of the
      revolutionaries.

      The meeting - which was held on Thursday, in the city of Benghazi in the east — was attended
      by the leaders of the Military Council and representatives of the coalition of February 17
      revolution, also it was attended for the first time by delegates from the people of Misurata.

      The head of the Council, Mustafa Abdul _MN said that the revolutionaries lack
      organization, and he did not rule out a change in military leadership of the
      management of operations in the field.

Background on LIFG/Libya/ al-Hasidi (due to classification reasons, I can tell you a bit more in
person, if you would like)

• In terms of info on al-Hasidi specifically, he admitted that in the past he fought against coalition
  troops in Iraq and recruited "around 25" men from Derna in Eastern Libya for this purpose.

• West Point's Combating Terrorism Center conducted a review of documents captured by allied
  forces from the town of Sinjar, Iraq, and released a report in the 2007 timeframe on foreign
  fighters entering Iraq via Syria.

• This report revealed that while Saudi Arabia was by far the most common nationality of the
  fighters in the sample, Libya was the next most common country of origin. Libya contributed far
  more fighters per capita than any other nationality in the Sinjar Records (these records document
  the city/town/country of origin).


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779540 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779540 Date: 09/30/2015




• Al-Hasidi was a member of the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group (LIFG). The LIFG initially
  cooperated with Al-Qaeda, culminating in officially joining al-Qaeda in November 2007. However,
  as noted above, LIFG recently changed its name and pledged its allegiance to the National Council
  in Benghazi.

•   As noted in the press, al-Hasidi participated in killing dozens of Libyan troops in guerrilla attacks
    around Derna and Benghazi in 1995 and 1996.

•   According to the 2007 West Point Report: "Both Darnah and Benghazi have long been associated
    with Islamic militancy in Libya, in particular for an uprising by Islamist organizations in the mid-
    1990s.

    The Libyan government blamed the uprising in the mid-1990's on "infiltrators from the Sudan and
    Egypt" and one group—the Libyan Fighting Group (jama'ah al-libiyah al-muqatilah)—claimed to
    have Afghan veterans in its ranks.

    The Libyan uprisings became extraordinarily violent. Qadhafl used helicopter gunships in
    Benghazi, cut telephone, electricity, and water supplies to Darnah and famously claimed that the
    militants "deserve to die without trial, like dogs."

    Abu Layth al-Libi, LIFG's Emir, reinforced Benghazi and Darnah's importance to Libyan jihadis in
    his announcement, at the time, that LIFG had joined al-Qa'ida, saying: It is with the grace of God
    that we were hoisting the banner of jihad against this apostate regime under the leadership of the
    Libyan Islamic Fighting Group, which sacrificed the elite of its sons and commanders in combating
    this regime whose blood was spilled on the mountains of Darnah, the streets of Benghazi, the
    outskirts of Tripoli, the desert of Sabha, and the sands of the beach."

• Qadafhi, in order to retain his power, fought the LIFG.

•   One particular view (just a view that I thought was worth noting) and one that some quarters
    might raise was characterized to me as follows:

    What is happening in Libya cannot be described as a problem, but as a condition (emanating from
    tribal culture, long historical conflicts, etc.). It's not something that is resolvable per se. But it can
    be leveraged.

    Ergo, for those who want Qadafhi gone, according to this view, care should be taken in who is
    supported, and before doing so, consideration should be given to removal of the remaining
    weapons infrastructure -- chemical, pharmaceutical, mustard gas, weapons plants, etc. -- before
    they come under new management.




Janey Wright
Policy Planning Staff
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779540 Date: 09/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779540 Date: 09/30/2015




U.S. Department of State
202/647-2289 (w)




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779540 Date: 09/30/2015
