             UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781009 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART B6




  From:                               Anne-Marie Slaughter
  Sent:                               Wednesday, June 15, 201110:45 AM
  To:
  Cc:                                 Abedin, Huma; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob
  Subject:                            great piece on Lebanon



  For the ride back (if you are not already there..)



   SUBSCRIBE
   TODAY
    TO FPI


   MAGAZINE

    ARCHIVE




        LOGIN

       FEEDS



                                                       •   JUNE 15, 2011



o BLOGS

  Daniel Drezner

  David Hoffman

  Parag Khanna

  Marc Lynch

  Clyde Prestowitz

  Tom Ricks

  David Rothkopf

  Stephen Walt



  The Cable

  The Call

  The Multilateralist

  Net Effect

  The Oil and the Glory

  Passport

  Shadow Govt.

             UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781009 Date: 09/30/2015
            UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781009 Date: 09/30/2015




    Road Rage in Russia - by Julia loffe

    Obama Can Stop the Killing in Syria - by Tony Bad ran

    Straight Gu in Scotland - b David Kenner

    The Man Who Would Be King - by Ben Van Heuvelen



    The Middle East Channel: Lebanon charts a new path

    The AfPak Channel: Daily brief: Pakistan arrests "CIA informants"

    The Middle East Channel: Mideast news brief: Syrian calls on refugees to return from Turkey

    The Oil and the Glory: Coal, batteries, and China's long, hot summer of protests

    FP Passport: Is the fix in at the IMF?

    The Middle East Channel: The dark closet

    The Middle East Channel: Obama can stop the killing in Syria

    Turtle Bay: The allies hit a wall of BRICS on Syria in the U.N. Securit Council
                     1111,                                                  -
        MI  DDLE EAST!                                                            1       0,

           CI-IANNEL

•       PEACE PROCESS

        The Obama-Netanyahu Debacle


•       TURKISH ELECTIONS

        AKP: Much Ado About Nothing


•       MIDDLE EAST

        Should Israel Support Assad?


    •   wrtnenhir 11■•SS     ttdtt, 1,1.1 ,ask I ■ Ime and Ow l`ouje.   MAII• 1,■•■ l'n111•1•1,kiene,




    Lebanon charts a new path
    'Posted By Elias Muhanna -Wednesday, June 15, 2011 - 10:17 AM Share




            UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781009 Date: 09/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781009 Date: 09/30/2015




This week, Beirut achieved an underwhelming milestone: after 140 days, Sunni billionaire Najib Mikati finally
managed to form a government. This may not seem like much, compared to the paroxysms of political change
which have toppled dictators and shaken the foundations of the Middle East's most entrenched authoritarian
regimes. Traditionally one of the region's most politically turbulent countries, Lebanon has seemed positively
serene by comparison to its neighbors. There has yet to be a replay of the seas of chanting protesters and billowing
flags in the streets of Beirut which followed the 2005 assassination of Prime Minister Rafik Hariri.
But while forming a new government may not be as stimulating as the million-person marches, Google-execs-
turned-revolutionary-heroes, and fake lesbian bloggers who have populated the rest of the region's struggles, it is
nonetheless highly significant and augurs the beginning of a sensitive new phase in Lebanese politics. The direction
of the new government could profoundly re-shape Lebanon's relationship with America and the international
community, just as it will play an important role in determining the fate of the Syrian opposition to the Assad regime.


The new prime minister of Lebanon, Najib Mikati, is, like his predecessor, a Western-educated Sunni billionaire with
extensive commercial interests around the globe. He was nominated to his post last January by the coalition known
as "March 8," which includes the two principal Shiite political parties in Lebanon -- Hezbollah and Amal -- as well as
the Free Patriotic Movement (FPM), a Christian party led by General Michel Aoun. In recent years, the Syrian-
backed March 8 parties have served as the major counterweight to the Western and Saudi-supported "March 14"
coalition, whose leader, Saad Hariri, has been the main champion behind a UN Special Tribunal investigating the
murder of his father.


The younger Hariri's cabinet collapsed earlier this year over its failure to come to consensus over Lebanon's
participation with the UN investigation. Extensive rumors and media leaks at the time suggested that the UN was
preparing to indict members of Hezbollah for participating in the crime -- an allegation which the party hotly denied
and claimed was part of an Israeli plot against it. When Hariri proved unwilling or unable to cast doubt upon the
credibility the UN investigation, Hezbollah and its allies resigned and ended his brief tenure as prime minister.


The international media and many Lebanese politicians have rushed to portray the new cabinet as being
dominated by Syria and Iran because of the preponderance of March 8 figures in key ministries. In response, Prime
Minister Mikati has insisted that he has no intention of threatening Lebanon's relationship with the West, and that he
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781009 Date: 09/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781009 Date: 09/30/2015




is not a fig leaf for a "Hezbollah government." For the time being, the Obama administration has opted to wait and
judge the government "by its actions," but there have already been calls by a few U.S. lawmakers to cut
Washington's aid and adopt a hard-line stance toward the new government in Beirut.
The claim that Mikati's government will actually be controlled by Hezbollah is an oversimplification, but there is no
question that this new cabinet marks a watershed in Lebanese politics. As per its usual custom, Hezbollah only
opted to accept two relatively insignificant portfolios out of a total of 30, while its allies (with whom it does not always
see eye-to-eye) occupy the important ministries of defense, justice, telecommunications, labor, etc. It should be
noted that the very fact that Mikati was chosen as prime minister rather than a more divisive "pro-Syrian" figure
suggested from the very beginning that the March 8 coalition was wary of letting this government be painted as
being "Made in Damascus and Tehran." Mikati's international stature, strong ties to Saudi Arabia, and his
possession of a (rather tenuous) cabinet veto will likely be sufficient to calm fears that he can be steamrolled by the
parliamentary majority, at least in the short term.


However, proof of Syrian and Iranian influence will ultimately be revealed by how his government deals with several
challenges that are looming ahead, foremost among them being the UN Tribunal's indictments, which are likely to
be made public later this year. Before Mikati's cabinet can be voted into office by the Lebanese Parliament, it has to
draft a policy statement which outlines the government's position on a range of issues, including the tribunal. Finding
a way to satisfy Hezbollah's demands vis-à-vis the Hariri investigation while maintaining Lebanon's international
obligations will be Mikati's first and most critical test. If he does not commit to continued material and moral support
of the tribunal, he runs the risk of alienating Lebanon's Sunni community, along with Saudi Arabia, the United
States, and various European states. If, on the other hand, he does not sever Lebanon's ties with the tribunal, his
government may not win the confidence of the Lebanese Parliament. The good news is that he only has 30 days to
succeed or fail.


The other major litmus test for the Mikati government will be its response to the events taking place in Syria. If
clashes between the opposition and the Assad regime's security forces escalate such that refugees and activists
begin spilling over the border into Lebanon (as they have in Turkey), Mikati will find himself in another
uncomfortable position. Syria will almost certainly demand that Lebanon shut its borders to those it deems to be
"insurgents" and "terrorists" and extradite those who manage to get across. However, among Lebanese Sunnis (and
particularly in Mikati's home town of Tripoli), sympathy for the protests in Syria runs very high. Once again, Mikati
will have to walk a very fine line between the competing demands of many different constituencies.
Thus far, Saad Hariri and his March 14 allies have opted to sit out of the Mikati cabinet, rebuffing his offers to join in
a national unity government. The clear calculation here seems to be that Mikati will not be able to balance the
pressures and opposing forces bearing down upon him, and that his government will be riven by its contradictions.
The next parliamentary elections are only two years away, and March 14 is banking on the belief that Hezbollah and


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781009 Date: 09/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781009 Date: 09/30/2015




its allies -- who have perfected the art of political back-seat driving -- will send the country careening into the ditch of
isolation and instability, when they finally slip behind the wheel.


This is a high-stakes gamble, and one with which many March 14 partisans are uncomfortable. If it succeeds,
Hariri may be able to capitalize on March 8's blunders in time for the next election (much as his father did during the
1990's). If it fails, on the other hand, Hezbollah and its allies will be in the perfect position to consolidate their gains
and shape the next electoral law to suit their own purposes. As usual, all of these contingencies will be refracted
through the lens of foreign influence and interest in Lebanese affairs, which is a lens that is being re-shaped as the
region itself is transformed by the Arab revolutions. Prognostication, never a safe business in Lebanese politics, is
becoming more difficult by the day.
Elias Muhanna writes the Lebanese political blog qifanabki.com, and is currently a Visiting Fellow at Stanford
University's Center for Democracy, Development, and the Rule of Law.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781009 Date: 09/30/2015
