        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780408 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, June 9, 2011 9:54 AM
To:
Cc:                                Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma
Subject:                           FW: Tunisia Democracy Support Surge Team - Report # 3
Attachments:                       ECA Update.docx; ECA Update.docx



Hope the trip is going well.


I am forwarding a copy of the most recent report from the Tunisia team. I do not plan to forward all these to you but
wanted you to get a sense of how things are moving forward. Note that some of the activities are beginning to get
positive media coverage which is one of the things we are looking for. I had a good meeting yesterday at Columbia Univ.
School of Journalism to see if they would be interested in working with universities in Tunisia. Also asked them about the
possibility of having their media law experts work with activists in Tunisia who are focused on ensuring media
protections are embedded in the new constitution.


Jose Fernandez has identified an econ officer to go out to Tunisia in the next few weeks to jump start the economic
development discussions, with a special focus on working with SMEs outside Tunis.


Finally, I met with Carol Giacomo at the Times yesterday to discuss with her all we have been doing over the past two
years. She was especially interested in the Tunisia story so we will see if it goes anywhere.


im


Tunisia Democracy Support Surge Team Report #3



American Corner Sfax: Tunis 10 Khile and TDS Surge team member Ismail in Sfax on June 9th to visit possible
alternative sites for the American Corner, including the originally proposed Space of Enlightenment site. Goal
is to finalize proposed site for R and Ambassador's approval and move quickly to MOU signing and Ribbon
Cutting.


MEDIA TRAINING

DVC June 8, with twice as many journalists (15) participating. Mina Al-Oraibi, Washington Bureau Chief for
Asharq Alawsat newspaper, was a hit, engaging local journalists in a lively discussion on covering elections and
political affairs. Mina emphasized the importance of establishing credibility as a professional journalist with
both officials and local audiences, in order to secure exclusive interviews and convey meaningful information
gathered to the public. Tunis Surge team producing short "hip" video on the training, set to music, for
Facebook and Website and blast to Tunisian and regional social media influencers.

Next DVC (June 28), will feature a senior Slovakian journalist who will speak about his experiences covering
democratic transitions and elections in Europe.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780408 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780408 Date: 09/30/2015




DVC on July 5 will feature Abderrahim Foukara, Washington Bureau Chief for Al-Jazeera. Tunisia Surge team
looking into possible Al coverage of this session, as well as another short "home-made" video for
Facebook/Website and blast out to Tunisian and regional social media influencers.

Tunisia Surge Team - Good Press for Media Training

Journalist Fatma Zourrig from Tunisie Afrique Press (TAP) participated in the DVC and also conducted an
interview with Tunisia Surge Team member Ana Escrogima on expanded USG outreach with Tunisian
media. During the interview, Zourrig praised USG efforts, commenting that the DVC series is "a very smart,
inexpensive, and speedy way to train and connect with journalists." TAP published (June 7) a positive article
on our outreach efforts, which was picked up by Arabic daily newspaper As-Sahafa.




 -Media Training: Preparations complete for next week's in depth media training with Elizabeth Bryant.

-CAPJC Partnership: On June 3, Surge team met with the Centre African de Perfectionnement des Journalists
et Communicateurs (CAPJC) to explore possible journalism training partnership. The center is a state of the art
facility, however its Director is pre-regime. We were approached by the CAPJC's Training Coordinator, who
seems eager to work with us to develop a program. Strategic Social is putting together a proposal for a
broadcast journalist media training that NEA/PPD will consider funding and pitch to CAPJC as a first step.

mobileEnglish/mobileCivic

Suzanne Hall is clearing a proposal for mE/mC with Washington stake holders. Once cleared, a Letter of Intent
and accompanying concept paper will move to Embassy Tunis for approval. Until then, no negotiations will
take place with Tunisiana. In parallel, we are determining ownership of the English language content
produced and sustainability beyond the 90 day promotional period.

Fulbright Program - Moving Forward on a Robust Return to Tunisia

Specialists: ECA graciously agreed to contact the 4 universities who have requested Fulbright specialists to go
over specifics on what the host institutions must provide, what they are looking for exactly via Fulbright
specialists, and will help them fill out the on-line forms. Embassy Tunis will take over once forms are
completed and ensure that host institutions are capable of fulfilling committments specified in the
forms. Institutions are: Tunis Business School, Espirit Engineering School, Univ of Sfax, and IPSI (ECA: Jason


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780408 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780408 Date: 09/30/2015




at Emb Tunis will send you the contact info on this one - it was added on after our Wed
teleconference.) Details in attachment.

Graduate-level Researcher: ECA found a researcher to send to Tunis this summer who will fulfill the goal of
"testing the system" on improved Tunisian paperwork processing and hopefully re-open the pipeline for a
regular stream of researchers. ECA is working with post to secure GOT approval of her research project.

Scholars: ECA has identified four Fulbright scholars who will be traveling to Tunisia for 2011-2012
academic year.

Maghreb Digital Library - Moving Ahead Rapidly

IIP/IR is meeting with CRDF staff Thurs, Jun 9, for update on inauguration of Maghreb Virtual Library in Tunisia.
CRDF will sign an MOU with the Tunisia Ministry of Information this month, then start implementing and
training on the Virtual Science Library.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780408 Date: 09/30/2015
