UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784027 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL


 SBU

 Benghazi Sitrep —August 14, 2011

 (U) Military Update: TNC military forces continued to make progress toward taking Gharyan and
‘Zawiyah during the day, but fighting continued in both cities. One contact predicted that even
 if the rebels took Zawiyiah, loyalist forces would re-group and attempt to take it back, given its
 proximity to Tripoli and strategic location on the main road to Tunisia.

 (U) Opposition Media -- Top Regime Figure Flees: According to Libyan opposition media TV
 station "Libya al-Ahrar," the head of Libya's internal security service, Tuhami Kha lid, fled to
 Tunisia on August 13. The same report suggested that former security official, revolutionary
 committee leader and Qadhafi confidant Ammar Tayif also fled. A INC MFA source said he
 could confirm the report regarding Khalid but not Tayif. Khalid's departure would be a
 significant blow to the regime, given his security portfolio.

 (SBU)Jibril to Return to Benghazi to Discuss Forming a New Government: A senior foreign
 ministry official told us that PM Mahmoud Jibril is planning to return to Benghazi on/about
 August 17 to resume discussions on reconstituting the Executive Committee (i.e., cabinet). The
 official refuted reports that the Council is becoming divided into factions, claiming that
 disagreements and differences reflect "legitimate politics" and are good for the Council.
 Nonetheless, he expressed concern that the Council "is not qualified to lead" and that there is
 no clear division of powers between the Executive Committee and the Council. As a result the
 Council regularly interferes with the Executive Committee. Another problem is that the Council
 lacks transparency and does not do a good job of explaining its decisions to "the street." For
 example, the TNC recently prepared a new plan for an interim constitution but "nobody knows
 about it or understands it." The official expressed hope that the military gains made by the TNC
 this week would be a unifying force within the TNC and Libyan society.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784027 Date: 09/30/2015
