      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777671 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Reines, Philippe I <reinesp@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, January 27, 2011 9:20 PM
To:
Cc:                                Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject:                           Re: Uganda



STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON

Murder of Ugandan LGBT Activist David Kato

We are profoundly saddened by the loss of Ugandan human rights defender David Kato, who was brutally murdered in
his home near Kampala yesterday. Our thoughts and prayers are with his family, friends, and colleagues. We urge
Ugandan authorities to quickly and thoroughly investigate and prosecute those responsible for this heinous act.

David Kato tirelessly devoted himself to improving the lives of others. As an advocate for the group Sexual Minorities
Uganda, he worked to defend the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals. His efforts resulted in
groundbreaking recognition for Uganda's LGBT community, including the Uganda Human Rights Commission's October
2010 statement on the unconstitutionality of Uganda's draft "anti-homosexuality bill" and the Ugandan High Court's
January 3 ruling safeguarding all Ugandans' right to privacy and the preservation of human dignity. His tragic death
underscores how critical it is that both the government and the people of Uganda, along with the international
community, speak out against the discrimination, harassment, and intimidation of Uganda's LGBT community, and work
together to ensure that all individuals are accorded the same rights and dignity to which each and every person is
entitled.

Everywhere I travel on behalf of our country, I make it a point to meet with young people and activists -- people like
David -- who are trying to build a better, stronger future for their societies. I let them know that America stands with
them, and that their ideas and commitment are indispensible to achieving the progress we all seek.

This crime is a reminder of the heroic generosity of the people who advocate for and defend human rights on behalf of
the rest of us -- and the sacrifices they make. And as we reflect on his life, it is also an occasion to reaffirm that human
rights apply to everyone, no exceptions, and that the human rights of LGBT individuals cannot be separated from the
human rights of all persons.

Our ambassadors and diplomats around the world will continue to advance a comprehensive human rights policy, and to
stand with those who, with their courage, make the world a more just place where every person can live up to his or her
God-given potential. We honor David's legacy by continuing the important work to which he devoted his life.

###




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777671 Date: 09/30/2015
