       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782669 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                                           RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                        Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                        Saturday, September 17, 2011 2:17 PM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: Turkey refuses US mediation in crisis with Israel (AFP)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Saturday, September 17, 2011 01:32 PM
To: NEWS-NEA; NEWS-EUR; NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-O_Shift-II; SES-O_OS
Subject: Turkey refuses US mediation in crisis with Israel (AFP)



ISTANBUL (AFP) — Turkey does not need United States' mediation to solve a long-lasting crisis with Israel
over a deadly 2010 flotilla raid, Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said on Saturday.
"We do not need mediation ... for Israel in any way," Davutoglu said during a televised press conference in the
central province of Konya when asked to comment on the possibility of the US helping to resolve their
differences.
"There is no such situation in which mediation is needed. The demands of Turkey are clear" if its former ally
Israel wants to improve relations, Davutoglu said.
"No one should test our resolve on this matter," he said, adding that Israeli-Turkish relations might be on the
agenda among other issues of a meeting between Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and US
President Barack Obama next week on the sidelines of the UN general assembly.
"The Americans are probably the people who best understand Turkey's position on this issue," Davutoglu
added.
Israel and Turkey have been locked in a bitter dispute since May 2010 when Israeli naval commandos stormed a
convoy of six ships trying to reach the Gaza Strip in defiance of an Israeli naval blockade, killing nine people.
Earlier this month Turkey expelled the Israeli ambassador and froze military ties and defence trade deals.
Relations plummeted still further when Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan threatened to send warships to
escort any Turkish vessels trying to reach Hamas-ruled Gaza.
Obama will discuss the political crisis in Syria and wider turmoil throughout the Middle East in talks in New
York on Tuesday with Erdogan, deputy US national security advisor Ben Rhodes said on Friday. Obama will
also likely address the rift between Turkey and Israel

NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782669 Date: 09/30/2015
