     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776304 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                      RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                      B6


From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Monday, June 14, 20109:29 PM
To:                                'JilotyLC@state.gov'
Subject:                           Fw: Its complicated (Presidents Bill Clinton and Barack Obama,Frenemies)            Zito
                                   Sunday Column



Pls print for me.

    Original Message
From: Burns Strider <
To: H
Sent: Sun Jun 13 09:36:25 2010
Subject: Fw: It's complicated (Presidents Bill Clinton and Barack Obama,Frenemies)            Zito Sunday Column



     Original Message
From: Salena Zito
To: zito.salena
Subject: It's complicated (Presidents Bill Clinton and Barack Obama,Frenemies)            Zito Sunday Column
Sent: Jun 13, 2010 9:24 AM

It's complicated By Salena Zito, PITTSBURGH TRIBUNE-REVIEW Sunday, June 13, 2010 CLICK HERE FOR LINK:

If you're keeping score of who is better at getting Democrats elected this cycle, President Obama is 0-for-4 while former
president Bill Clinton is golden at 2-for-2.
  Last fall's gubernatorial races in New Jersey and Virginia, and this year's U.S. Senate races in Massachusetts and
Pennsylvania, proved Obama impotent at influencing voters.
  Conversely, Clinton's performances for Democrat Mark Critz in last month's special election to replace the late U.S.
Rep. Jack Murtha, D-Pa., and for U.S. Sen. Blanche Lincoln, 0-Ark., in her squeaker of a primary last week, were nothing
short of brilliant.
  Villanova University political science professor Lara Brown says the Obama-Clinton relationship "is complicated. Both
are politicians of enormous stature whose reputations are made daily in the competitive and constantly changing world
of politics."
  Their relationship is not unlike that between the dollar and gold: While the valuations of each change daily and the
connections are not always evident, they almost always trend in opposite directions.
   In an election year full of disconnect between Main Street and Washington, each man symbolizes specific
constituencies with different visions of their party.
   Clinton represents the common-man, blue-collar-worker middle class — those who work hard and play by the rules,
who view themselves as fighters who dig in and don't give up.
   "Clinton also represents the pragmatic side of politics," Brown said, "the side which does not adhere to ideological
tenets, the side that is interested in winning."
   Clinton can be clumsy, not cool (although he liked to think he was just like Elvis, playing his saxophone on the Arsenio
 Hall Show in 1992). According to Brown, that is "part of why many Americans feel like they can relate to him." Obama
 represents the party's intellectual elite and ideological progressives. He is a cool hipster who knows about technology.
(Remember, this is the guy who did not want to give up his Blackberry when he became president, despite security
concerns.)
   He is intellectually sophisticated and likes to surround himself with those at the cutting edge of cultural trends:
 musicians, artists, technology whiz-kids. He eats arugula, drinks Chablis, and has "date nights" in trendy D.C. restaurants.
   Clinton is all about the heart and emotion; Obama seems to be about the brain and intellect.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776304 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776304 Date: 09/30/2015




  No one ever doubted Clinton's intelligence but some did wonder about his appetite and his seeming inability to set
limits on himself.
  Obama seems all about setting limits: He exercises regularly, never gets too high or low, and doesn't seem to like
emotional expression. He believes it is better to be discerning and rational than reflexive and, perhaps, impulsive.
  He represents Democrats who believe in Thomas Frank's thesis that "there is something the matter with Kansas." In
other words, people in Kansas (read: "mostly rural people") are not educated enough to understand their own rational
self-interest and are too emotionally attached to their guns and their religion.
  "That side of the party believes that people on Main Street are kept back by their ignorance and that the job of the
Democratic elite is to 'enlighten' them as to what would really make their lives better," Brown explains.
  Clinton's beliefs are quite the opposite, she says, and are similar to what makes Republican Sarah Palin resonate: "He
believes that some of America's greatest wisdom and strongest spirit comes from those people who do wrestle with the
joys and hardships of everyday life in ways that the intellectual elite believe are too mundane ... to be meaningful."
  Obama's is the "coastal" part of the party — the secular, educated, wealthier side that, despite its ardent belief in
helping others, rests on a noblesse oblige service-ethic towards those less fortunate.
  Clinton's is the "fly-over" part of the party — the religious, hard-working, more middle-class side that believes in pulling
oneself up by one's bootstraps with help, not a handout, from government.
  If Obama passes off to Clinton the job of helping Democrats in the midterm elections (either because he is too busy or
too unpopular in certain districts), then those Democrats may not be so willing to help him in 2012.
  "Obama is eventually hurting Obama by employing Clinton to be his partisan wrangler in this election," Brown said.
  Clinton, however, doesn't lose a thing: The more he helps Democrats, and the more successful they are, the more they
will carry on his vision and his political legacy.




Salena Zito
Tweets
Tribune-Review Political Reporter
44th Estate Blog
PAPoliticsBlo




Burns Strider




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776304 Date: 09/30/2015
