UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784359 Date: 09/30/2015




                           SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED                          RELEASE IN FULL


                              R/NEA Delegation to Tunisia
                                    Trip Report

 Trip Overview:
        With the overthrow of the Ben Ali regime in Tunisia and rapidly
 approaching elections in July, the United States faces a unique moment to engage
 the Tunisian people. In order to ensure that we are fully incorporating Tunisians'
 new needs and priorities into our approach, Under Secretary Judith McHale (R) led
 a short trip to Tunisia to interact with Tunisian civil society, to hear from Tunisians
 about their priorities for forging a more democratic and prosperous society, and
 help set a path forward that takes full advantage of the changed landscape for
 engagement and the unique opportunity which the United States faces.
        Given the critical role that the people of Tunisia played in the recent
  revolution, and the lead role they will play moving forward, the trip focused on
  State Department programs that engage people and civil society—particularly
  public diplomacy and Middle East Partnership Initiative (MEPI) programs.
         The trip was built around a full day workshop with a broad cross-section of
  Tunisian civil society intended to provide a platform for collaborative
  brainstorming on how U.S. programs can better support Tunisian priorities and to
  cast our ongoing relationship as a two-way conversation. During the workshop,
  approximately 60 Tunisians, drawn from a diverse range of civil society, media,
  and student groups, participated in small breakout groups focused on brainstorming
  priorities for Tunisia's transition to democracy and suggesting programs that the
  US could undertake to support their needs. The groups also heard about current
  Embassy programming from Public Affairs, USAID and MEPI representatives and
  provided feedback.
         Participants quickly coalesced around a number of priority themes:
         1) Preparing for elections and political reform: Large opportunities
            emerged in supporting political party development, voter education,
            training for Tunisian election monitors, and strengthening the rule of law.

         2) Strengthening the media and freedom of expression: Given a previous
            lack of competitive elections, media outlets have not had to cover real
            elections or conduct deep investigative reporting. With a profound and
            swift change in censorship rules and a rapid proliferation of new media,
            participants highlighted the need for extensive media capacity building,


                                                                                            1
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784359 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784359 Date: 09/30/2015




                           SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIID

            particularly focused on covering elections.

         3) Bolstering economic opportunity and job creation: High unemployment,
            particularly for educated Tunisians, was a major cause of the revolution.
            Tunisians continue to place paramount importance on creating jobs and
            facilitating economic growth. In addition to significant regulatory reform
            and lowering of trade barriers, participants highlighted the need to help
            build professional associations, connect Tunisian businesses with
            American businesspeople, and enhance internship and apprenticeship
            opportunities for young Tunisians.

         4) Improving educational opportunities: Tunisians see education as a
            critical tool for building a post-Ali society and advancing individual
            opportunity. Participants emphasized access to scholarly materials,
            scholarships, and English language teaching. They also suggested
            deepening partnerships between U.S. and Tunisian higher education
            institutions.
 In addition, participants highlighted the need to engage youth and women in order
 to be successful on each of these fronts. Participants were extremely positive
 about the Embassy reaching out to solicit input in program design, and even
 skeptical participants admitted that this was a promising approach.
        The delegation also met with government officials, business leaders,
 students and educators to get a broader perspective on how the U.S. could
 strengthen our relationship with the Tunisian people during this transition.
 Meetings at the Ministry of Higher Education and University of Sfax in particular
 highlighted a deeper desire for educational and people-to-people exchange. Finally,
 the Ambassador described his ongoing efforts, which have been received very
 positively by Tunisians, to explore bringing the Peace Corps back to Tunisia.


  Suggested Path Forward:
        Tunisia — the country that began the wave of unprecedented political change
 across the Middle East and North Africa — has the potential to cross the threshold
 from dictatorship to full democracy. Its success is critical to the USG's efforts to
 encourage responsible democratic institutions in the region. Millions of
 Tunisians, who previously had no voice, now are eager to play a role in shape their
 country's future. We have gone from needing to engage a small set of influential
 Tunisians to needing to touch nearly all Tunisians. This monumental

                                                                                            2
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784359 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784359 Date: 09/30/2015




                           SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

 transformation presents a challenge but also a tremendous window of opportunity,
 which we must rise to seize—particularly before the July elections for constituent
 assembly.
         However, Embassy Tunis requires additional attention, support, and
 resources to take advantage of these new opportunities. Embassy Tunis was
 appropriately staffed during the time of the Ben Ali regime, when access to
 individuals and information was tightly controlled. Circumstances have drastically
 improved since the revolution, and opportunities for engagement and advocacy are
 exploding: the Embassy's NGO and private sector contacts are eager to move
 from occasional and tentative contacts to continuous and very substantive
 cooperation. Universities are now open to Embassy visits without prior GOT
 approval. The Government of Tunisia (GOT) now seeks robust cooperation and
 assistance in almost all areas of bilateral cooperation. With all of this new activity,
 current Embassy leadership is overtaxed, and fully engaged with running the
 Embassy, reporting requirements, managing an increased workload of high-level
 visits, and administering our programs.
        To help support the Embassy realize the opportunities the revolution has
  presented, we suggest establishing a Transition Engagement Support Team that
  can provide focused support in country and in Washington to ensure that we can
  quickly mobilize resources and deeply engage with Tunisians, especially in the
  three months before July elections. The Support Team will focus on four major
  themes, with a lead identified for each area: (1) democracy and elections; (2)
  media; (3) business and job creation; (4) education. In addition, across these
  categories, we will ensure special attention is paid to youth and women as critical
  demographics to be engaged.. This entire effort would be coordinated by a senior
  Foreign Service officer who would oversee these streams of activity, reporting to
  the Ambassador and working closely with NEA.
         Each thematic group would begin activity immediately, focused on the
  tangible ideas which emerged during the trip as starting points for a more robust
  and strategic agenda in each area.
  Initial program suggestions include:
     1) Democracy and Elections
        • Create regular DVCs with democracy activists in the US and elsewhere
         • to provide training on: how to create a party, develop a political platform,
           engage with the media, etc.
        • Leverage NDI, IRI and other entities to provide training on how to
           monitor elections, coordinate information, and be effective watchdogs

                                                                                            3
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784359 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784359 Date: 09/30/2015




                           SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

        • Seminars/workshops focused on training for female politicians (since
          50% of each slate is now legally required to be female)
        • Dispatch DRL delegation to explore other avenues for partnership in
          preparing for elections (already scheduled to be led by A/S Posner)
        • Find partners for producing PSAs to encourage democratic participation
          (e.g. MTV "Rock the Vote" etc.)

     2) Media
        • Establish weekly DVC/CoNX sessions with journalists (American and
          others) to impart practical information and engage in a dialogue about
          how to cover elections
        • Explore feasibility of creating of a credible media training or advisory
          center in Tunisia, to help create capacity on everything from basic media
          skills to determining the best business models for media enterprises
        • Include more Tunisians on IVLP programs focused on freedom of
          expression and media
        • Connect young Americans with budding bloggers and journalists through
          virtual channels to discuss techniques of information dissemination .
        • Create exchanges (in person or virtual) focused on the technical side of
        • media: building a rolodex to book guests or line up interviews,
          production, editing, design, platform distribution, etc.
        • Help introduce and explain the role of audience analysis
        • Help nurture a regulatory environment and legal framework for freedom
          of information through the development of a credible professional
          association for journalists, including the development of a code of ethics
          and possibly drafting legislation

     3) Business and Job Creation
        • Leverage Embassy network to serve as a convener for curriculum-
           designers (Ministry of Education) and business people to collaborate to
           ensure market needs are reflected in education
        • Help to create and strengthen professional associations to ensure a
           stronger voice for business in advocacy to the government, educational
           institutions, and the labor force
        • Create business exchange program for informal mentoring and exchange
           between American businesspeople and Tunisians
        • Work with Tunisian companies to establish broader array of internship
           and apprenticeship opportunities to expose younger Tunisians to the
           workforce

                                                                                           4
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784359 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784359 Date: 09/30/2015




                           SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

            Establish DVC series on "Building Businesses"—including soft skills
            like establishing corporate culture, and training employees

     4) Education
        • Pursue parity in Fulbright programs and in the near future put emphasis
          on science and technology
        • Expand English-teaching, especially through technological solutions to
          broaden our reach
        • Create teacher-to-teacher exchanges to focus on teaching critical
          thinking, project-based learning, and civic education
        • Use inexpensive technologies, like Skype, to connect American
          classrooms with Tunisian classrooms
        • Develop a multidimensional exchange agenda modeled on the 'WHA
          NEXUS initiative with a focus on sectors identified by Tunisians as areas
          where they have a comparative advantage (perhaps biotech) or a pressing
          need which could be addressed through such an effort (for example, in
          Latin America, smart growth)
        • Extend access to American Corner resources more broadly—including
          online databases and other reference materials
        • Explore creating a joint.U.S.-Tunisian commission focused on science
          and technology to expand "lab-to-market" programs, innovation
          corridors, and other tools to strengthen linkages between academic
          pursuits and business creation
        • Explore creation of an American Corner at University of Sfax to expand
          access to reference materials and other educational resources

  To complement these focus areas, we have already begun discussions on bringing
  the Peace Corps back to Tunisia Initial conversations with Aaron Williams, Peace
  Corps' Director, have been productive. Peace Corps will be sending a team to
  Tunisia to explore initiating a small-scale program, potentially focused on English
  teaching in business schools—well-suited to dovetail with the priority areas
  highlighted by Tunisians.




                                                                                            5
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784359 Date: 09/30/2015
