        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785517 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL


From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Sunday, May 15, 2011 5:32 PM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: Palestinians say Israel to release tax funds (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTidcer
Sent: Sunday, May 15, 2011 04:10 PM
To: NEWS-NEA; NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-O_Shift-III; SES-O_SWO; SES-O_OS
Subject: Palestinians say Israel to release tax funds (Reuters)

RAMALLAH (Reuters) - Israel has agreedto release millions of dollars in suspended tax transfers to the
Palestinian Authority (PA), a Palestinian official said on Sunday.

   Earlier this month Israel had blocked the routine handover of about 300 million shekels ($88 million) in
customs and other levies it collects on behalf of the Palestinians after Western-backed President Mahmoud
Abbas struck a unity deal with Hamas, his Islamist rivals.

   Israeli Finance Minister Yuval Steinitz said at the time he would only allow the transfer after receiving
guarantees the money would not reach Hamas, an Islamist militant group who runs the Gaza Strip and whose
charter calls for Israel's destruction.

   An official in Palestinian Prime Minister Salam Fayyad's office said they had been informed by U.S.
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Middle East envoy Tony Blair that Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu had approved the transfer.

   An aide to Steinitz, who as finance minister oversees the funds, said he had "received some clarifications" in
recent days, but that the money had not been transfered.

   Fayyad had sought international intervention to prevent the Israeli measure. The PA is also heavily
dependent on aid from donors including the United States, which has said its future assistance will depend on
the shape of a new Palestinian government, expected to be formed under the unity agreement.

    Netanyahu said the Palestinian unity deal was a blow to peace efforts.

    The tax transfers provide the PA, which exercises limited self-rule in the West Bank, with $1 billion to $1.4
billion annually. Palestinian officials said they would not be able to meet their commitments, including paying
salaries, without the funds.


News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785517 Date: 09/30/2015
