      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785552 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL


From:                         McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sent:                         Tuesday, May 17, 2011 5:57 AM
To:
Cc:                           Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject:                      Tunisia Update


I wanted to give you a brief update on the Democracy Transition Team for Tunisia. As you recall the
areas of focus include education, elections, economic empowerment, media engagement and
training, women's issues, and, launching Peace Corps in Tunisia. The concept is to identify targets of
immediate opportunity for supporting the democratic transition thus enhancing the perception of
the US as a strategic partner. Since there are a number of USG projects already in the works it
essential that the efforts of the transition team be closely coordinated with the Embassy and other
with other government departments and agencies.

The team will help identify gaps in our programming and focus primarily on short term initiatives
to provide a bridge to the longer term projects already in the planning stage. For example, we have
identified media training as a critical need. MEPI and USAID are already developing programs in this
area but because of standard planning and contracting processes their programs will not be
deployed for a number of months. The transition team will begin to immediately address this issue by,
among other things, launching a series of virtual training sessions on how to cover elections.

We have now identified team leads for each area and have designated Greta Holtz from NEA as the
team leader. Two team members are in Tunisia now and working with the Embassy on expanding
access to English language training and providing universities across Tunisia with digital links to a
broad array of critical resources and materials. The media specialist departs tomorrow and will work
to dramatically expand our engagement with Tunisian media, with a particular focus on the social
media activists who played such a critical role in the revolution. As noted above, she will also identify
areas for enhanced training and create links between Tunisian journalists and their counterparts in
the United States and throughout the world.

I met with Mike Posner yesterday and he told me he has talked to Gordon Gray about a trip out
there but has met with some resistance from Gray who wants to postpone Mike's trip until after the
election since "the Embassy is swamped". I will be meeting with Jeff later this week and will try to
move this along.

We are also working with Jose Fernandez and the EEB team to rapidly expand our efforts to support
the Tunisian SME sector. As you know, helping kick start programs to expand SMEs could help address
the unemployment situation and provide a tangible benefit to ordinary citizens. There seems to be a
bit of internal politicking between EEB and NEA in this area which I am trying to sort out. I am
reasonably confident we can work it through but I will let you know if I need any help.

As anticipated, since a transition team is a new idea for the Department, it has been met with both
anxiety and skepticism. My feeling is that the best way to overcome the traditional bureaucratic
resistance to anything new is to plow ahead and hopefully be able to quickly demonstrate some
quantifiable achievements without upsetting too many apple carts.

Will keep you posted.

jrn
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785552 Date: 09/30/2015
