      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780346 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Sullivan, Jacob 1 <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Saturday, April 16, 2011 2:14 AM
To:
Subject:                           FW: Update on Japanese funding for Afghanistan and Pakistan
Attachments:                       2011-04-14 Note to Son Japanese assistance to Afghanistan.docx; 2011-04-14 Note to
                                   S on Japanese assistance to Afghanistan.docx



fv1

From: Feldman, Daniel F
Sent: Friday, April 15, 2011 8:40 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob Abedin, Huma
Cc: Blanc, Jarrett N
Subject: Update on Japanese funding for Afghanistan and Pakistan

Jake/Huma —Just wanted to flag this Note for you on the road (attached and pasted below). You should be getting it
through formal channels, but wanted to make sure you saw it en route to Japan, as the Japanese SRAP called us about
this last night, and their Political Counselor came to deliver the message to us in person. Given the scope of the
catastrophe, this is about as good as we could have hoped for on continued Afghan funding. DF

NOTE FOR THE SECRETARY
FROM:         S/SRAP — Ambassador Marc Grossman
SUBJECT:      Temporary Cuts to Japanese Assistance in Afghanistan

         Japan remains committed to its pledge of $5 billion over five years for Afghanistan (of which roughly $1.66
billion has already been disbursed), but it will reduce appropriations in the short term in order to free money for
post-earthquake reconstruction.

         Japanese SRAP Ambassador Tadamichi Yamamoto called me on April 14 to report that a supplementary budget
is likely to pass as early as the end of April which will include cuts in the already-adopted FY2012 budget. Total overseas
development assistance will be cut by roughly 17% from its planned level of almost $7 billion. The $400 million
budgeted for Afghanistan is likely to be cut by a larger percentage, but the lost funding will be restored in future budgets
to meet the overall pledge. Specific cuts have not yet been identified, but Japan will prioritize sustained funding for ANP
salaries, ANSF training and support, support to the Ministries of Defense and Interior and to provincial governors, and
funding for ongoing projects. The remaining $100 million of Japan's $1 billion Tokyo pledge for Pakistan is currently on
hold pending a new IMF program, so it is unlikely to be delayed by short-term fiscal management.

         Foreign Minister Matsumoto may raise this with you in your meeting on Sunday. I recommend that you
express gratitude for Japan's continued commitment to its pledge and also understanding for Japan's need to reduce its
assistance budget in the short term. I also encourage you to mention your gratitude for Japan's tradition of assistance
to both Afghanistan and Pakistan in your public remarks — our public recognition of Japan's role strengthens the
Government's ability to defend foreign assistance in a difficult budgetary environment.

        The Government of Japan has informed the Government of Afghanistan and us of these likely cuts, but
Yamamoto asked that we keep the substance of expected budget cuts private until the Diet finalizes the supplemental
budget.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780346 Date: 09/30/2015
