      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780068 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                  RELEASE IN
                                                                                                  PART B6



From:                               Jake Sullivan <jake.sullivan
Sent:                               Monday, February 28, 2011 5:24 AM
To:
Subject:                            Fwd: FW: TOP CONFIDENTIAL - IMPORTANT MESSAGE TO FORWARD



Fyi


        Forwarded message
From: Catherine Rimmer
Date: Mon, 28 Feb 2011 08:37:23 +0000
Subject: FW: TOP CONFIDENTIAL - IMPORTANT MESSAGE TO FORWARD
To: "jake.sullivan              <jake.sullivan

Latest from Aref



Dear Tony,


Greetings. Last night, Ali al-Sallabi, a key figure in the Libyan Muslim brotherhood and Qaradawi's man in Libya criticized
the formation of the interim government announced by Mustafa Abdaljalil.
He also called upon the youth to be more involved in the government.
This indicates an early Ikhwan attempt at having a leading role in what is emerging.


Yesterday., I managed to block plans for setting Ur, legal-issues committees in Doha, and to get the East-based
coordinators to assign the task to my close and trusted Abu-Dahbi-based friend Dr. Abdul Rahman Habil (Former
Professor of Law in Benghazi, and Legal Advisor to Abu Dhabi Islamic Bank). We would like to start to do our work from
the UAE, and will make sure that it is technocratic and is not politicized. It is vital, therefore that I see Sheikh Abdullah
and get his blessing. His office have already railed, and I am awaiting a meeting time.


 I have already called several leading Muslim scholars to pressure Qaradawi to press his student Saliabi to stand back,
and let the interim government stand on its feet. It is very important that the international community support the
interim government, quickly so that it does not crumble. It is our best hope, right now, of having an orderly
transmission.


The negative operational development late yesterday in both Misrata and Zawiah, and the demoralizingtactics Gaddafi
is using via his broadcasting company and by giving fee Money (500 LYD for every family
booklet!) are not good. We losing important momentum. Gaddafi used air power (mainly helicopters) again. The no fly.
zone, or the jamming of his controls is VITAL. The broadcasting needs to be brought down URGENTLY.

Today, the criminal case against Gaddafi must pressed forward to with practical steps towards arrest taken. If he feels
that he has a chance to come back, he will not take any option out. There is very little time to move.


Last night I was asked by an advisor of HM the King of Morocco to suggest some names for a possible central figure.
Here is my answer:

"Honestly, and because of the 42 years of darkness, there is not a single figure who can unite and galvanize all Libyan's.
That is why it is best to encourage the consolidation of local galvanizers, and support the emerging interim government
for now. Some sort of national council or committee can then emerge connecting all the consolidated centers. Any
attempt to impose a central figure head may back fire, for the time being.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780068 Date: 09/30/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780068 Date: 09/30/2015




 Here are some names:

Prof. D. Zahi Bashir al-Megherbi, son of Bashir al-Megerbhi, Omar al-Mukhtar association. Professor of Political Sciences,
widely published, and well-respected in Benghazi and abroad.

Prof. Dr. Najib al-Hasadi, Professor of Philosophy and writer. He participated in galvanizing intellectuals in the East, and
some in the West through an annual Derna-based cultural event. He is an important connection between Derna and
Benghazi, and is well respected in Tripoli.

Jurist Mustfa Abdaljalil. Former Minister of Justice, with a clean record, and very strong tribal base in the East. His family
is of Sanusi sympathies, and is willing to work with others. He can bring in the entire network of Eastern tribes, and is
well coordinated with Benghazi-based and Derna-based notables. He has some good connections with Tripoli as well. His
 presentation skills are quite limited, however.

Dr. Juma' al-Zreghi. Senior Counselor to the Supreme Court. A respected legal expert and historian. Can play add an
important juridical dimension to such a council. Strong presence in Tripoli.
Would be ideal of heading judiciary.

Prof. Dr. Aref All Nayed, Professor of Islamic Studies and Philosophy.
Has been working for the past several years on building together a network of traditional Azhari-type Ulerna and Sufi
Teachers. He has connected with all schools and all major tariqahs. This is very important for rehabilitating the spiritual
and moral fabric of the country, and for preempting lkhwan and Salafi radicalization. He contributed to the A Common
Word initiative, and well connected with theological circles abroad, both Muslim and Christian. He is from the Wirfallah
tribal grouping.

Eng. Ousama Otrnan Assed. Son of a former PM of Libya Architect with a practice in Morocco and has recently started
to reestablish himself in Tripoli. Hones and clean and carries a family name that is still respected in the South, especially
amongst the Zwiah clans."

If I think of any further suggestions of people who maybe able to help achieve stability for the future, I will update the
list.

Thank you very much.

 Best regards.

Aref




 DISCLAIMER •

  WARNING —This email is only intended for the person to whom or entity to which it is addressed and, together with any
 'files transmitted with it, is confidential and may also be privileged. If you are not the intended recipient, you must not
• copy, forward, use or rely on any part of it or disclose its contents to any person. If you have received it in error, please
  notify our system manager on +44 20 7647
  7782 and delete all copies immediately.

 Except where this email is sent in the usual course of our business, the views expressed in this email are those of the
 sender and not those of The Office of Tony Blair.


        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780068 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780068 Date: 09/30/2015



The Office of Tony Blair accepts no responsibility for software viruses and you should check for viruses before opening
any attachments. Internet communications are not secure and therefore The Office of Tony Blair does not provide any
guarantee or warranty that this email or any attachments shall remain confidential.

The Office of Tony Blair is a trading name of Windrush Ventures Limited and Windrush Ventures No.3 LP. Windrush
Ventures Limited is a limited company registered in England and Wales with registered number 06397276. Its registered
office is 50 Broadway, London SW1H OBL.

Windrush Ventures No. 3 LP is a limited partnership registered in England and Wales with registered number LP012665.
Its registered office is 50 Broadway, London SW1H OBL. The members of Windrush Ventures No.3 LP are BDBCO No.819
Limited and Windrush Ventures No.2 LLP and the address at which each of these can be served is 50 Broadway, London
SW1H OBL.

This email may relate to or be sent from other members of the Windrush group.



This email has been scanned by the MessageLabs Email Security System.
For more information please visit http://www.messagelabs.com/email




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780068 Date: 09/30/2015
