        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781335 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Wednesday, July 27, 2011 6:01 AM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: "New era" for Pakistan, India relations, say ministers (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Wednesday, July 27, 2011 05:52 AM
To: NEWS-Pakistan; NEWS-SCA; NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: "New era" for Pakistan, India relations, say ministers (Reuters)

NEW DELHI (Reuters) - Indian and Pakistani foreign ministers hailed a new era in ties between the nuclear-
armed rivals on Wednesday and agreed to fight militancy and boost trade and travel, a step forward in reducing
tension in the world's most dangerous region.

   The comments from Indian Foreign Minister S.M. Krishna and his Pakistani counterpart, Hina Rabbani
Khar, were unexpectedly positive and may be a small step towards improving regional stability, made more
urgent with a U.S. troop drawdown in Afghanistan looming.

  . "This is indeed a new era of bilateral cooperation between the two countries," Khar, Pakistan's first female
and youngest-ever foreign minister, told the media after two and a half hours of talks, standing next to
Krishna.

   "(It) is our desire, and I believe after having spoken to you, Mr Foreign Minister, that it is the desire of both
the governments, to make it an uninterrupted and an uninterruptable process."

  Expectations of a breakthrough in peace talks have been low, but the fact the South Asian rivals are talking
was a sign that neither side wants to slide back towards conflict.

  The countries have fought three full-scale wars since winning independence in 1947, two of them over
Kashmir, the disputed Himalayan region both claim in full but rule in part.

   India and Pakistan in February resumed a formal peace process broken off after the 2008 attack on India's
financial capital of Mumbai by Pakistan-based militants, which killed 166 people.

   "We have some distance to travel, but with an open mind and consistent approach, which has been
demonstrated in this round of dialogue, I am sure we can reach our desired destination of having a friendly and
cooperative relation between our two countries," Krishna said.

NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781335 Date: 09/30/2015
