       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782010 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                                                                  RELEASE IN
                                                                                                                                                  FULL


From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
Sent:                                         Monday, August 22, 2011 7:02 AM
To:
Subject                                       Fw: Saadi Gadhafi, Hollywood Investor and Dictator's Son, Arrested




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Monday, August 22, 2011 06:58 AM
To: NEWS-Ubya; NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Saadi Gadhafi, Hollywood Investor and Dictator's Son, Arrested

Rebel forces closing in on Moammar Gadhafi's regime have arrested two of his sons, including Saadi Gadhafi,
a businessman who recently invested in numerous Hollywood movies, according to numerous reports from
Libya.
Since the insurgency broke out earlier this year, Saadi — a former soccer player— returned to Libya to serve as
commander of special forces in his father's regime.
Libya's National Transitional Council, the rebels' governing body, said on Sunday they had arrested Saif al-
Islam and Saadi Gadhafi. A third, Muhammad, was reported to have handed himself in.
The Wrap reported in 2010 about the unusual alliance between producer Matty Beckerman and Gadhafi
(pictured above), and how they came to become business partners in Natural Selection, a movie company with
plans to make five movies over the next 20 years.
Read also: Gadhafi Goes Hollywood: Dictator's Son Gets In With $100M
Gadhafi's invested $100 million in the company which had by last year invested in a $12 million-budget movie,
"The Experiment," and fully financed the $3 million "Isolation," a thriller directed by Steven Kay ("The
Shield").
The company has been paralyzed since the insurgency broke out earlier this year.
Reports were widespread on Sunday that Moammar Gadhafi had fled the country.
It was not immediately clear what would happen to the $100 million that Saadi Gadhafi had invested in Natural
Selection.
CNN reported that the International Criminal Court will hold talks Monday with Libyan rebels on transferring
Saif al-Islam Gadhafi to its custody. He is wanted on a war crimes charge for allegedly having ordered attacks
on unarmed anti-regime protesters.
Saif al-Islam Gaddafi once had a very close relationship with the West and was considered by many to represent
a more democratic future for Libya. But since the uprising began he has become closely allied to his father.
Saadi had a career as a professional soccer player, and headed Libya's soccer federation. According to an
investigative report on HBO's Real Sports, Saadi used his family's wealth and power to buy his way onto some
of the world's best soccer teams.
He's been known to have been pursuing a partnership in Hollywood for the past two years or so and his main
occupation is working to build a free-trade zone in Libya.
But since the insurgency, reports emerged that the movie deals have come to a halt.
Beckerman has not returned multiple calls and emails from TheWrap since the revolt seeking clarification of the
company's status.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782010 Date: 09/30/2015
