UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015




                                Draft June 30 2011 Palmer+Bilateral                   RELEASE IN FULL




                                           Confidential

                     Joint Statement of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman
                  Concluding the work of the United Nations Panel of Inquiry
                             on the 31 May 2010 Flotilla Incident



 On 2 August 2010 the Secretary General of the United Nations established a Panel of Inquiry
 regarding the flotilla incident that occurred on 31 May 2010. In the course of its work, the
 Panel reviewed the comprehensive national investigation reports submitted by Israel and
 Turkey, as well as additional information presented by both countries in response to a series
 of questions addressed by the Panel to each country, where further information or
 clarifications were required. The Panel convened a number of sessions, in the course of
 which, inter alia, the Panel met with Points of Contact on behalf of the two sides, each of
 whom provided the Panel with additional necessary information. After long deliberations we
 arrived at certain conclusions. They are outlined in the attached "Conclusions of the Chair"
 (Annex I).

  A few days ago, the Panel was presented with the text of two Agreements (Annex II and
  Annex 111) between the Republic of Turkey and the State of Israel concerning the incident,
  which had been reached on the basis of understandings arrived at by the parties in the course
  of the Panel's work. We warmly welcome this development and consider that the terms of
  these Agreements and the "Conclusions of the Chair" complete and conclude the work of the
  Panel. We are grateful for the participation and full cooperation of the two sides with the
  work of the Panel and are pleased that this process contributed to the successful resolution of
  the matter between the two countries.

  [Signatures of Palmer and Uribe




                                                                                                1

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015




                                 Draft June 30 2011 Palmer+Bilateral




  Annex I: Conclusions of the Chair (Summary Part of the Report of the Secretary
  General's Panel of Inquiry on the 31 May 2010 Flotilla Incident.)


 On 31 May 2010 at 4.26 a.m. a flotilla of six vessels was boarded and taken over by Israeli
 Defense Forces 72 nautical miles from land. The vessels were carrying people and humanitarian
 supplies. The flotilla had been directed to change course by the Israeli forces who stated that the
 coast of Gaza was under a naval blockade. Nine passengers lost their lives and many others were
 wounded as a result of the use of force during the take-over operation by Israeli forces.


  The Secretary-General established the Panerof Inquiry on the 31 May 2010 Flotilla Incident on 2
  August 2010. The Panel received and reviewed reports of the detailed national investigations
  conducted by both Turkey and Israel. Turkey established a National Commission of Inquiry to
  examine the facts of the incident and its legal consequences, which provided an interim and final
  report to the Panel along with annexes and related material. Israel provided the report of the
  independent Public Commission that it had established to review whether the actions taken by the
  State of Israel had been compatible with international law.


  The Panel reviewed these reports and further information and clarifications it received in written
  form and through direct meetings with Points of Contact appointed by each government. In light
  of the information so gathered, the Panel has examined and identified the facts, circumstances
  and context of the incident and considered and recommended ways of avoiding similar incidents
  in the future. In so doing it was not acting as a Court and was not asked to adjudicate on legal
  liability. Its findings and recommendations are therefore not intended to attribute any legal
  responsibilities. Nevertheless, the Panel hopes that its report may resolve the issues surrounding
  the incident and bring the matter to an end.


  Facts, Circumstances and Context of the Incident


  The Panel finds:

  i. The events of 31 May 2010 should never have taken place as they did and strenuous efforts
  should be made to prevent the occurrence of such incidents in the future.
  ii. The fundamental principle of the freedom of navigation on the high seas is subject to only
  certain limited exceptions under international law. Israel faces a real threat to its security from
  militant groups in Gaza. The naval blockade was imposed as a legitimate security measure in
  order to prevent weapons from entering Gaza by sea and its implementation complied with the
  requirements of international law. It therefore provided an exception to the fundamental principle
  of the freedom of navigation.

  iii. The flotilla was a non-governmental endeavour, involving vessels and participants from a
  number of countries.


                                                                                                       2

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015




                                   Draft June 30 2011 Palmer+Bilateral


 iv. Although people are entitled to express their political views, the flotilla acted recklessly in
 attempting to breach the naval blockade. The majority of the flotilla participants had no violent
 intentions, but there exist serious questions about the conduct, true nature and objectives of the
 flotilla organizers, particularly MR. The actions of the flotilla needlessly carried the potential for
 escalation.

 v. The incident and its outcomes were not intended by either Turkey or Israel. Both States took
 steps in an attempt to ensure that events did not occur in a manner that endangered individuals'
 lives and international peace and security. Turkish officials also approached the organizers of the
 flotilla with the intention of persuading them to change course if necessary and avoid an
 encounter with Israeli forces. But more could have been done to warn the flotilla participants of
 the potential risks involved and to dissuade them from their actions.

 vi. Israel's decision to board the vessels with such substantial force at a great distance from the
 blockade zone and with no final warning immediately prior to the boarding was excessive and
 unreasonable:
                   a. Non-violent options should have been used in the first instance. In particular, clear
                         prior warning that the vessels were to be boarded and a demonstration of
                         dissuading force should have been given to avoid the type of confrontation that
                         occurred;

                  b. The operation should have reassessed its options when the resistance to the initial
                        boarding attempt became apparent so as to minimize casualties.


                  boarding attempt became apparent so as to minimize casualties.

 vii. Israeli Defense Forces personnel faced significant, organized and violent resistance from a group
 of passengers when they boarded the Mavi Marmara requiring them to use force for their own
 protection. Three soldiers were captured, mistreated, and placed at risk by those passengers. Several
 others were wounded.

  viii. The loss of life and injuries resulting from the use of force by Israeli forces during the take-
  over of the Mavi Marmara was unacceptable. Nine passengers were killed and many others
  seriously wounded by Israeli forces. No satisfactory explanation has been provided to the Panel
  by Israel for any of the nine deaths. Forensic evidence showing that most of the deceased were
  shot multiple times, including in the back, or at close range has not been adequately accounted
  for in the material presented by Israel.

  ix. There was significant mistreatment of passengers by Israeli authorities after the take-over of
  the vessels had been completed through until their deportation. This included physical
  mistreatment, harassment and intimidation, unjustified confiscation of belongings and the denial
  of timely consular assistance.

  How to Avoid Similar Incidents in the Future


  The Panel recommends:



                                                                                                           3

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015




                                 Draft June 30 2011 Palmer+Bilateral


 With respect to the situation in Gaza

 i. All relevant States should consult directly and make every effort to avoid a repetition of the
 incident.
 ii. Bearing in mind its consequences and the fundamental importance of the freedom of
 navigation on the high seas, Israel should keep the naval blockade under regular review, in order
 to assess whether it continues to be necessary.

 iii. Israel should continue with its efforts to ease its restrictions on movement of goods and
 persons to and from Gaza with a view to lifting its closure and to alleviate the unsustainable
 humanitarian and economic situation of the civilian population. These steps should be taken in
 accordance with Security Council resolution 1860, all aspects of which should be implemented.

 iv. All humanitarian missions wishing to assist the Gaza population should do so through
 established procedures and the designated land crossings in consultation with the Government of
 Israel and the Palestinian Authority.

 General

 v. All States should act with prudence and caution in relation to the imposition and enforcement
 of a naval blockade. The established norms of customary international law must be respected and
 complied with by all relevant parties. The San Remo Manual provides a useful reference in
 identifying those rules.
 vi. The imposition of a naval blockade as an action in self-defence should be reported to the
 Security Council under the procedures set out under Article 51 of the Charter. This will enable
 the Council to monitor any implications for international peace and security.

 vii. States maintaining a naval blockade must abide by their obligations with respect to the
 provision of humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian missions must at all times act in accordance
 with the principles of neutrality, impartiality and humanity and respect any security measures in
 place. Humanitarian vessels should allow inspection and stop or change course when requested.

 viii. Attempts to breach a lawfully imposed naval blockade place the vessel and those on board at
 risk. Where a State becomes aware that its citizens or flag vessels intend to breach a naval
 blockade, it has a responsibility to take pro-active steps compatible with democratic rights and
 freedoms to warn them of the risks involved and to endeavour to dissuade them from doing so.

 ix. States enforcing a naval blockade against non-military vessels, especially where large
 numbers of civilian passengers are involved, should be cautious in the use of force. Efforts
 should first be made to stop the vessels by non-violent means. In particular, they should not use
 force except when absolutely necessary and then should only use the minimum level of force
 necessary to achieve the lawful objective of maintaining the blockade. They must provide clear
 and express warnings so that the vessels are aware if force is to be used against them.

 Rapprochement




                                                                                                     4

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015




                                 Draft June 30 2011 Palmer+BilateraI


 x. An appropriate statement of regret should be made by Israel in respect of the incident in light
 of its consequences.
 xi. Israel should offer payment for the benefit of the deceased and injured victims and their
 families, to be administered by the two governments through a joint trust fund of a sufficient
 amount to be decided by them.

 xii. Turkey and Israel should resume full diplomatic relations, repairing their relationship in the
 interests of stability in the Middle East and international peace and security. The establishment of
 a political roundtable as a forum for exchanging views could assist to this end.




                                                                                                      5

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015




                                 Draft June 30 2011 Palmer+Bilateral




 Annex II: Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Turkey and the
 Government of the State of Israel Concerning the Flotilla Incident

 Israel and Turkey cherish the shared history and centuries old ties of strong friendship and
 cooperation between the Jewish and Turkish peoples. Both countries view their relationship
 as having vital strategic importance for the peace and stability of the region and regret its
 recent deterioration. Both countries are committed to overcoming their differences and to
 working together to strengthen Turkish-Israel relations and to advance peace and stability in
 the region.

 It is in this spirit and in an effort to resolve the issues that relate to the unfortunate events
 surrounding the flotilla's departure, its interception, and its outcome on May 31st, 2010 (the
 "incident") that the parties have agreed to the following:

 1) In light of Israel's investigation into the incident which pointed to a number of operational
 mistakes, Israel expresses its apology to the Turkish people for any mistakes that might have
 led to the loss of life or injury.

  2) A procedural agreement is included as an annex to this agreement and forms an integral
  part of this agreement. Turkey agrees that the payment will be a fulfillment of any and all
  claims against Israel, and there will be no further demands from Israel by Turkey, its citizens
  or legal persons, with respect to the incident.

  3) Israel and Turkey pledge to immediately resume the good diplomatic and other relations
  that existed between them.

  4) Israel and Turkey agree that this understanding will be considered as covering and
  terminating all outstanding issues relating to the events surrounding the flotilla incident, its
  outcomes and consequences. Israel and Turkey agree that they do not attribute legal or other
  liability to the other side or its agents, and agree that this understanding will not be construed
  as admittance of or the placing of criminal or civil liability on any side.

  5) Each country shall have the exclusive jurisdiction to investigate, and where appropriate
  prosecute, allegations of criminal activity by its nationals or citizens relating to the incident.

  6) Israel and Turkey agree not to bring or support any legal or diplomatic action relating to
  this incident against each other or each other's citizens, in any domestic or international fora.

  7) This agreement will be submitted by the parties to the UN Secretary General and to the
  UN Panel of Inquiry, and will come into force after it is adopted by the UN Panel and serves
  as a completion of the Panel's work.



                                                                                                  6

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015




                                Draft June 30 2011 Palmer+Bilateral


 Done in .... on..... in two original copies in English language.

 For the Government of                                        For the Government
 the Republic of Turkey                                               of the State of Israel




                                                                                               7

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015




                                 Draft June 30 2011 Palmer+Bilateral




 Annex III: Procedural Agreement Concerning the Flotilla Incident

                                 PROCEDURAL AGREEMENT

 In furtherance of their other agreement and in the spirit of cooperation, Israel and Turkey
 have agreed to the following:

  1. The Government of Israel agrees to pay r             (PS dollars) to a Trust Fund established
  by the Government of Turkey to compensate the bereaved families and injured individuals
  during the flotilla incident that took place on 31 May 2010.


  2. This payment is not and will not be construed or considered as the placing on or the
 admission of any legal liability by Israel under international law, or any domestic law.


 3. The above amount shall be provided in lump sum, at the latest by                    (date): The
  Government of Turkey shall inform the Government of Israel through diplomatic channels,
  of the bank account to which the amount shall be transferred.


  4. The distribution of the above amount falls within the exclusive competence of the
  Government of Turkey in accordance with such methods of distribution as it may choose to
  adopt, without any responsibility arising therefrom for the Government of Israel.


  5. Israel and Turkey agree that they do not attribute legal or other liability to the other side or
  its agents, and agree that this understanding will not be construed as admittance of or the
  placing of criminal or civil liability on any side. In any event, should any claims be made,
  this agreement will constitute full release from any liability of Israel, its agents and citizens
  with respect to any and all claims against them, direct or indirect, by the Republic of Turkey
  or Turkish real and legal persons, in relation to the flotilla incident.


  6. Should any claim against the Government of Israel or its natural or juridical persons be
  advanced or maintained by or on behalf of any Turkish natural or juridical person,

                                                                                                   8

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015




                                Draft June 30 2011 Palmer+Bilateral



 notwithstanding the aforesaid provisions, the Government of Israel, its agents and/or citizens,
 shall be indemnified by the Government of Turkey against all loss, costs, damages, and/or
 expenses.


 7. This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of last notification by the Contracting
 Parties, in writing and through diplomatic channels, of the completion of the respective
 internal legal procedures necessary to that effect.

        Done in          on        in two original copies in English language.


 For the Government of                                         For the Government
 the Republic of Turkey                                                of the State of Israel




                                                                                                9

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780979 Date: 09/30/2015
