     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783264 Date: 09/30/2015


                                                                                                          RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                          B6



From:                              Anne-Marie Slaughter
Sent:                              Thursday, September 22, 2011 10:03 PM
To:
Cc:                                Abedin, Huma; Cheryl Mills; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject:                           my piece in the Financial Times tomorrow



I want to make sure I give you a heads-up (albeit short notice; I only finished the editing process on this piece late today)
on a piece I have coming out in the Financial Times tomorrow. I hope you like the first part, though I suspect you will not
like the end. I honestly do think that war could break out — it's certainly happened before and the conditions are
ripe. That would be catastrophic. It's no longer just a matter of U.S. interests and Israeli security. And frankly, Israel has
given us nothing in return for an enormous amount of time and support from us, while dragging us ever deeper into
situations that are increasingly against our interests. I understand the domestic politics, but that's not what people are
going to vote on in this election. At any rate, at least I'm defending the strategy to date. You and Cathy Ashton are doing
great work. Best, AM

The showdown at the UN corral has been averted, for now. Palestinian president Mahmoud Abbas will deliver a
letter seeking statehood to the UN Security Council, but has made clear that he does not expect an immediate
vote, thereby at least delaying the need for a US veto. But no one should be breathing a sigh of relief because,
without swift action, the Middle East is now teetering on the edge of a new period of armed conflict.

In recent months, the existing order in the Middle East and north Africa has been upended; new powers are
jockeying for position and old ones (including Israel) have many reasons to deflect attention from internal
unrest by magnifying external threats. Avoiding a vote on the current proposal for Palestinian statehood is the
right short-term expedient for all concerned, but a new international strategy to move the peace process forward
is now a regional and global imperative.

The US and Israel have recently pushed abstention strategy, getting enough Security Council members to
abstain to avoid a veto. Diplomatic observers and the media have framed this process as a case of America and
Israel versus the world. But in fact all Security Council members have an overriding responsibility to avoid a
vote. The Security Council is meant to act promptly to stop any "threat to the peace". A vote on the Palestinian
request for statehood, or any US veto of such a request, would be just such a threat.

The potential paths to a future war in the region are increasingly easy to trace. In recent weeks Recep Tayyip
Erdogan, Turkey's prime minister, has called Israel a "spoiled child" and stated that the Turkish navy would
challenge Israel in the eastern Mediterranean. Recent Israeli behaviour, most notably a refusal to apologise for a
disproportionate use of force in the exercise of rightful self-defence, also shows a state that is becoming
dangerously defensive and defiant.

In theory, any UN Security Council resolution in favour of Palestinian statehood ought to increase international
leverage to bring Israel to the peace table. In practice, it will probably deepen Israeli intransigence and trigger a
frightening round of brinkmanship. Just imagine the domestic Israeli impact of statements that statehood is a
"step to wiping out Israel", as Iran's ambassador to Egypt noted last week.

The disappearance of Hosni Mubarak, Israel's staunchest peace partner in the region, followed by widespread
protests against Israel and a violent attack on the Israeli embassy in Cairo, intensify the sense among many
Israelis that the Arab spring means nothing but bad news. Many, myself included, would disagree; many others
would argue that Israel has backed itself into its present corner. But however we got here, this is where we are.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783264 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783264 Date: 09/30/2015




So, fine, let the US issue its veto. Then what? The move is likely to trigger violence in Gaza and possibly the
West Bank; Israeli countermeasures risk igniting more demonstrations, particularly in Egypt and possibly in
Syria. A direct clash between Israel and Egyptian or Syrian soldiers in the Sinai or the Golan Heights is all too
possible, with potentially catastrophic consequences.

Elswhere the situation is just as bad. Saudi Prince Turki al-Faisal has already said that a US veto would trigger a
Saudi re-evaluation of the extent to which it will work with the US, particularly with respect to Iraq and
possibly Yemen. Saudi opposition to the Shia government in Baghdad would destabilise Iraq, and heighten
tensions between Saudi Arabia and Iran. The beleaguered Yemeni president is currently in Riyadh; Saudi
refusal to co-ordinate its diplomacy in Yemen with the US would make it nearly impossible to resolve the
current impasse.

These are threats growing daily on the horizon. The move from threat to confrontation may seem unlikely, but
remember the inexorable sequence of mobilisation that turned the assass-ination of an Austrian archduke into
the first world war.

An abstention strategy is at best a holding pattern, creating a moment of respite. The Security Council should
now move to adopt — and the US should allow — a resolution endorsing the Palestinian aspiration to UN
membership, while also condemning the steady Israeli encroachment on Palestinian land. It should set forth the
parameters for negotiating that President Barack Obama set out in May. Oversight should be delegated to the
Quartet.

The US can and should stop the Palestinian request going forward in the Security Council as a request divorced
from a larger process of negotiations. But it cannot put the genie back into the bottle and insist that resolution of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict be a purely or even primarily US preserve. A threat to international peace and
security is just that. The world must respond.



Bert G. Kerstetter '66 University Professor of Politics and International Affairs
Princeton University




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783264 Date: 09/30/2015
