      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777865 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                   B6


From:                               Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                               Friday, February 18, 20111:52 PM
To:
Subject:                            FW: thank you!




From: Labowitz, Sarah
Sent: Friday, February 18, 2011 1:47 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob • R              ; Mills, Cheryl D; Ross, Alec); Scott, Ben; Baer, Daniel B; Parker, Emily; Klevorick,
Caitlin B; 'jkenn                   ; Daniel, Joshua 3; Spector, Phillip M; Koh, Harold Hongju
Subject: RE: thank you!

Agree with Jake.

And who would have thought the speech would generate praise from Evgeny Morozov, the professional critic? Quite a
feat, Megan. I've copied the first part of his HuffPo piece below. He goes on to make a more general critique of why this
issue is complicated (tensions!), but on the speech itself, he's surprisingly upbeat. We achieved at least one of the
Secretary's objectives in that we responded to our critics.

Strong work, team.

-Sarah



http://www.huffingtonpost.comievgeny-morozoviamericas-internet-freedom b 824434.html


PALO ALTO -- When Hillary Clinton delivered her first major speech on Internet freedom in January 2010 little did she
know about WikiLealcs and the yet-to-come revolts in Tunisia and Egypt. Proclaiming Internet freedom to be a new
priority for American foreign policy, Clinton provided scant details on how this new idealistic initiative would fit with its
existing realpolitik foundations -- the ones that have often prized stability over liberty.

Clinton's follow-up speech, delivered on February 15th at George Washington University, was an effort to capitalize on the
universal excitement about the role of social media in the recent events in the Middle East, correct some of the rhetorical
excesses of the 2010 address, and try to reconcile the inherent contradictions of aspiring to export Internet freedom
abroad while limiting it at home, with National Security Agency and Department of Homeland Security seeking more
oversight over cyberspace.

First, the good news. Gone is the Cold War-era view of the Internet as a faster and leaner network of fax machines on
steroids. While Clinton's 2010 address was full of references to the "information curtain [that] is descending upon much of
the world", to the Berlin Wall that is being replaced by "virtual walls", and to "viral videos and blog posts [that] are
becoming the samizdat of our day", her most recent speech has avoided such banal cliches and historically inappropriate
metaphors altogether.

Equally sobering was Clinton's acknowledgment that "there is no app" for solving the problem of Internet control. While
it's important to continue investing in tools to circumvent censorship schemes of authoritarian governments, Internet
filtering is just one of the many tools in their arsenal. Finding a way to protect independent publishers from cyber-attacks
and other forms of online intimidation is equally important.
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777865 Date: 09/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777865 Date: 09/30/2015




Another piece of good news is the State Department's reluctance to take a stand in the brewing debate of whether the
Internet is a tool for liberation or oppression (Clinton characterized this debate as "largely beside the point"). Clearly, it's a
tool for both; the degree to which it's liberating or oppressing often depends on the political and social context -- and not
on the individual characteristics of a given Internet technology. It's reassuring to see Hillary Clinton strike a reasonable
balance between cyber-utopianism and cyber-pessimism; adopting a cyber-realist posture and treating the Internet as it is
(and not how we would like it to be) is the right way forward.



From: Sullivan, Jacob J
Sent: Friday, February 18, 2011 1:18 PM
To: Rooney, Megan; Mills, Cheryl D; Ross, Alec 3; Scott, Ben; Baer, Daniel B; Labowitz, Sarah; Parker, Emily; Klevorick,
Caitlin B; lkennedy                      Daniel, Joshua J; Spector, Phillip M; Koh, Harold Hongju
Subject: RE: thank you!

Nice work all — this speech will stand the test of time.


From: Rooney, Megan
Sent: Friday, February 18, 2011 12:32 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D, Sullivan, Jacob 3 Ross, Alec 3; Scott, Ben; Baer, Daniel B; Labowitz, Sarah; Parker, Emily; Klevorick,
Caitlin B; lkennedy                      Daniel, Joshua 3; Spector, Phillip M; Koh, Harold Hongju
Subject: thank you!

Dear Team Internet Freedom,

Now that the speech is behind us, I just wanted to thank you all for being such phenomenal colleagues. This was one
the most complex speeches I've ever worked on and the process was *so smooth,* it was really remarkable. You all had
so many good ideas, strong examples, great language... Dan, Ben, and Jake took the lead on significant changes in the
final 18 hours, which was clutch... Cheryl sent final edits from Haiti, Harold sent edits from Europe... and all of you turned
around comments quickly and cheerfully again and again during the previous two weeks. What a team. I'm so
grateful. Please convey my thanks to all your staffers as well

Looking forward to the next time!

--Megan




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777865 Date: 09/30/2015
