      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778556 Date: 09/30/2015


                                                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Thursday, February 3, 2011 9:41 PM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: White House, Egypt Discusses Plan for Mubarak's Exit (NY Times)




From: OpsNewsTicker@state.gov <OpsNewsTicker@state.gov >
To: NEWS-Egypt; NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0_0S; SES-0 SWO; SES-O_CMS; SES-O_Shift-III
Sent: Thu Feb 03 20:26:57 2011
Subject: White House, Egypt Discusses Plan for Mubarak's Exit (NY Times)

WASHINGTON (New York Times) - The Obama administration is discussing with Egyptian officials a proposal
for President Hosni Mubarak to resign immediately, turning over power to a transitional government headed
by Vice President Omar Suleiman with the support of the Egyptian military, administration officials and Arab
diplomats said Thursday.

Even though Mr. Mubarak has balked, so far, at leaving now, officials from both governments are continuing
talks about a plan in which, Mr. Suleiman, backed by Sami Enan, chief of the Egyptian armed forces, and Field
Marshal Mohamed Tantawi, the Defense Minister, would immediately begin a process of constitutional
reform.

The proposal also calls for the transitional government to invite members from a broad range of opposition
groups, including the banned Muslim Brotherhood, to begin work to open up the country's electoral system in
an effort to bring about free and fair elections in September, the officials said.
Senior administration officials said that the proposal is one of several options under discussion with high-level
Egyptian officials around Mr. Mubarak, though not him directly, in an effort to convince him to step down
now.

The officials cautioned that the outcome depended on several factors, not least of all the mood of the
protesters on the streets of Cairo and other Egyptian cities and the dynamics within the Egyptian government.
Some officials said there was not yet any indication that either Mr. Suleiman or the military were willing to
abandon Mr. Mubarak.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778556 Date: 09/30/2015
