      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782114 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL



From:                            Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                            Sunday, August 14, 201112:40 PM
To:
Subject:                         Fw: Yemen opposition figure asks West to freeze Saleh assets (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Sunday, August 14, 2011 10:48 AM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Yemen opposition figure asks West to freeze Saleh assets (Reuters)

ADEN, Aug 14 (Reuters) - A leading member of Yemen's opposition called on Western countries to freeze the
assets of President Ali Abdullah Saleh, who is clinging to power despite months of protest against his 33-year
rule.

    Sheikh Hamid al-Ahmar, a key tribal figure who belongs to Yemen's main opposition party, the Islamist
Islah, also lashed out at Saleh's sons' "desperate" attempts to keep the family in power as their father recovers in
Saudi Arabia from a June assassination attempt.

   "I call on Western states... to begin proceedings to seize the possessions and money of Saleh and his family,
because they belong to the Yemeni people," he said in an interview with pan Arab daily al-Hayat, adding those
funds could be used to repay the country's debts.

   The protests have paralysed the impoverished Arabian Peninsula state, where even before the unrest some 40
percent of the population lived on less than $2 per day.

   Governments worldwide have responded to crackdowns on Egyptian, Tunisian and Libyan protesters this
year by freezing their long-time leaders' assets.

   But while veteran presidents in Egypt and Tunisia bowed to pressure they quit, Saleh has proved a shrewd
political survivor, and officially remains in power.

   Al-Ahmar praised Saudi Arabia's role in mediating the crisis, dismissing accusations by some protesters it is
thwarting their demands: "I see the Gulf initiative, which was essentially a Saudi effort, as one of the supporting
aspects of the revolution," he said.

   Saudi Arabia has spearheaded a Gulf Arab plan to end Yemen's political deadlock by easing Saleh out of
office, but he backed out of signing it three times at the very last minute, leaving Yemen in political limbo.

   Last week Saleh said he would look at reviving the initiative, which would see him hand over power to Vice
President Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi, but his opponents question whether this is yet another stalling tactic.

   Away from the negotiating table, violence flared anew in Yemen's south, where Islamist militants have
exploited a political vacuum, taking over at least two cities in the volatile province of Abyan, including its
capital Zinjibar.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782114 Date: 09/30/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782114 Date: 09/30/2015




  Two soldiers and four militants were killed in fighting on Saturday night when militants attacked an army
compound and a sports stadium used as a makeshift military base, a local official said. Seven more militants
were killed in air strikes after planes were sent to help repel them.

  A loose coalition of tribesmen and the army last month launched an offensive to try to flush militants out of
Abyan, but they have yet to regain much of the lost ground.

    Opponents of Saleh, who earned U.S. backing by presenting himself as a vital partner in the West's counter
terrorism strategy, say he has deliberately let militants expand their foothold in the south to convince the
international community only he can keep al Qaeda's Yemen-based wing in check.

   The United States and Saudi Arabia, both targets of al Qaeda in Yemen are worried instability there could
create a serious security threat.

NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782114 Date: 09/30/2015
