      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785550 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL


From:                               Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                               Tuesday, May 17, 2011 5:45 AM
To:
Subject:                            Fw: The Cable blog on Toria




    Original Message
From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Monday, May 16, 2011 09:33 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: The Cable blog on Toria

Again, don't know who is talking.

Victoria Nuland to be State Department spokesman

Posted By Josh Rogin

Monday, May 16, 2011 - 7:49 PM

The Cable has confirmed that career Foreign Service officer Victoria "Toria" Nuland will soon be named as the State
Department's top spokesperson, the latest in a string of promotions for senior career officers in Foggy Bottom.

Nuland's job will somewhat different than her predecessor P.J. Crowley, who resigned after making off-message
comments criticizing the Defense Department's treatment of alleged WikiLeaks source Bradley Manning. Unlike Crowley,
Nuland will not be dual-hatted as assistant secretary of State for Public Affairs. Former National Security Council
spokesman Mike Hammer will be officially named to that job soon, a State Department official confirmed.

Hammer is also a career Foreign Service officer who was temporarily assigned to the NSC. He returned to State with
another Foreign Service officer who spent time at the White House, Ben Chang. The arrangement will be a new one,
where Nuland will conduct the daily briefings and be the point person on dealing with the press, while Hammer will
manage the public affairs bureaucracy behind the scenes. We're told that space is being cleared out in the front office
on the 6th floor of State Department headquarters that Nuland will soon call home.

"The FSO's run State," one State Department official said, noting the trend of giving career officers high-profile posts.

Nuland has had a long career in the Foreign Service, working for both Democratic and Republican administrations.

•She is now the special envoy for Conventional Armed Forces in Europe; during the George W. Bush administration, she
 was the U.S. ambassador to NATO, and before that the principal deputy foreign policy advisor to Vice President Dick
 Cheney.

During the first term of Bill Clinton's administration, she was chief of staff to Deputy Secretary of State Strobe
Talbott and then moved on to serve as deputy director for former Soviet Union affairs.

In an interview, Talbott, now president of the Brookings Institution, praised Nuland as a consummate professional who
proved that Foreign Service officers could be trusted to put professionalism over politics.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785550 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785550 Date: 09/30/2015



"Her appointment demonstrates that Secretary Clinton has, quite rightly, an extremely high estimation of the value and
confidence in the Foreign Service," Talbott said, "The more use that's made of the foreign policy civil service and the
Foreign Service, the better."

He noted Nuland's public role as the U.S. envoy to NATO as evidence she can handle the spotlight and highlighted her
roles across several administrations as evidence of her apolitical nature.

"She has a high degree of self confidence and an absolute dedication to working for the administration she is working
for, whatever administration that is," Talbot said.

Several State Department officials noted that career civil servants and career Foreign Service officers are on the rise at
State. The clearest example is the promotion of Bill Burns to the position of deputy secretary, making him the first career
officer to fill that post since Walter Stoessel in 1982.

Burns's replacement for the post of undersecretary of State for Political Affairs is also expected to be a career Foreign
Service officer. The smart money is on recently departed Ambassador to Pakistan Anne Patterson, although our sources
insist that two others are still under consideration -- former State Department counselor Wendy Sherman and
Ambassador to South Korea Kathleen Stephens.

Nuland is married to Washington Post columnist Bob Kagan and is the daughter of Yale professor Sherwin B. Nuland. The
announcement of her new role is expected this week




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785550 Date: 09/30/2015
