UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776945 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL




                                                                                        ..-----(Formatted: Centered


                                    MEMORANDUM

To: S                                                                                                Formatted: Space After: 0 pt

FROM: ANNE-MARIE
RE: To TEN LIST FOR IMPLEMENTING THE QDDR                                                    ...„...-{Formatted: Font: Bold, Small caps

DATE: JAN. 4, 2010
         I r.                                                                                     „..iFormatted: Font: Bold, Small caps
This is certainly not a comprehensive list of all the things that we need to do. For that
I would suggest drawing up a_matrix just as we have done for Iraq and for the S&ED
so that we can track progress on specific recommendations. Many of those changes
are already underway in the excellent work that USAID is doing and that D(L) and
now D(N) is doing with regard to overhauling the way we do planning and budgeting.
The list below is rather my own personal list of how to signal most quickly that we
mean business in implementing the QDDR; how best to align individual and
institutional incentives in favor of the changes we want to make; and which specific
changes are likely to have a larger cascade effect in terms of how we do business.

Locking It In                                                                                                    Underline


   1) Ask Congress to legislate the QDDR so that it must be done again in four                                    Font: Bold

        years and thus there will be pressure actually to implement the
        recommendations in this one. Very few people are likely to take on such a
        review voluntarily.
                                                                                                      Formatted: Indent: Left     0.5", No
                                                                                                      bullets or numbering

   2) Appoint a senior Foreign Service officer who is respected in the building but ,,....,( Formatted:           Font: Bold

        who also recognizes the need for real change to serve as the point person in
        D(N) for QDDR Implementation. Ensure that one of his/her support staff is
        well versed in M issues. Tom Nides' office (PERHAPS WITH A WORKING
                           • _ . e , • Appoint a QDDR implementation PoC in each

        bureau and focus on those employees, including many women, who have long
        wanted change.
        3)     _This is critical to getting the reforms in the diplomacy and conflict       4--       Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", No
                                                                                                      bullets or numbering
        prevention chapters made.

   5-}3)      Do the actual reorganization as quickly as possible and get Bob and             _....„....-{Formatted: Font: Bold

        Maria going on resolving issues — they have an incentive to get it done and
        make it work.
          • Change titles of the two Under Secretaries U/S
          • Change bureau reporting lines




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776945 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776945 Date: 09/30/2015




        • Appoint the Assistant Secretaries for Energy Resources and Conflict and
          Crisis Operations and ensure that they are strong, experienced hires
                                                                                               --(Formatted
              0a. The new head of CCO should have an incentive immediately to •
                  reach out to DoD. USAID, and the UN and regional
                 •organizations to develop our new capability based on what others
                  already have and how we can work together most effectively
        • Appoint Chief Economist and ensure that s/he immediately plugs into
          network of Chief Economists at other agencies (USAID, Labor,
          Agriculture etc.) as a way of learning much more about what other
          agencies are doing in areas where we can collaborate
        • Task Bob and Maria immediately with identifying areas that can be
          streamlined and consolidated within their new jurisdictions — e.g.,
          consolidating things that INL and PRIV{ and S/CRS all do or that both
          EEB and OES have been doing.
                                                                                        • --      Formatted: Indent: Left: 1", No
                                                                                                  bullets or numbering
  4) Prioritize the changes to incentive mixtures — promotion, recruitment.,
                                                                                                  Formatted: Numbered + Level: 1 +
     and training. The only way to make many of the changes that we recommend                     Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, — + Start
     real is to build them into iob descriptions, promotion precepts, and recruitment             at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:
                                                                                                 h
                                                                                                        + Ilident. al„. 0.5-
     and training. That requires digging deep into personnel reforms but unless we
     ensure that the messages we are sending are received at the micro level, the
     bureaucracy will simply wait us out. We should also make several visible DCM
     and ambassadorial appointments based on track records of successful
     collaboration with the interagency innovation in public-private partnerships,
     etc. And at every turn, senior leadership has to emphasize that we are not
     rewarding defense of turf; we're rewarding getting things done. Don Steinberg is
     doing an excellent job of communicating this message to folks in USAID.
     Saving Money._                                                                               Formatted: Normal, No bullets or
                                                                                                  Formatted: Underline
  5 Start ne otiatin inter-as enc a • reements re c ntrac II. immediate!                          Formatted: Numbered + Level: 1 +
    All agencies are in a tight budget environment; many want and need to be more                 Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, _ + Start
                                                                                                  at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:
    active internationally. Now is the time to negotiate agreements that bring inter-
                                                                                                  Formatted: Font: Bold
    agency contracting costs down in ways that are visible to Congress and that
    reap clear whole-of-government benefits. This should also broaden the
    constituencies for State/USAID finds.
                                                                                                  Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", No
                                                                                                  bullets or numbering
  6) Move more budget authority from the bureaus to COMs. In briefing all of 4--
                                                                                                  Formatted: Numbered + Level: 1 +
     our COMs and DCMs on the concept of COMs as CEOs of multi-agency                             Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, _ + Start
                                                                                                  at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:
     missions, the constant refrain was that our COMs cannot be CEOs without                      0.25 +         dt. 0.5-
     more control over their budgets. Giving them greater authority and autonomy
     will make it easier to hold them accountable for meeting their performance
                                         2




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776945 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776945 Date: 09/30/2015




      measures, many of which will be directly related to QDDR goals, and allocate
      funds accordingly. It will be easier to do this as a de facto corollary of the
      QDDR emphasis on COMs as CEOs than it would have been to tee up as an
      issue for the QDDR.
                                                                                           Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", No
                                                                                           bullets or numbering
   7)• Implement regional circuit riders and beef up regional hubs. We should
                                                                                           Formatted: Numbered + Level: 1 +
       be able to reduce staffing at individual embassies by basing more FSOs at           Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, _ + Start
       regional hubs and giving them travel funds to circulate around the region.          at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:

       Many younger FSOs are very excited about this idea, which offers the promise
       of specializing in issues like the elevation of women, public-private
       partnerships, conflict prevention, etc. that they care about while working in the
       field. To make this happen, it will be necessary to overcome a lot of resistance
       to the idea that any one embassy is more central than others and to sort out
       turf issues regarding whether these circuit riders will report to the ambassador
       at the regional hub (and thus to the regional bureau) or directly back to the
       relevant functional bureau.
                                                                                           Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", No
                                                                                           bullets or numbering
   8) Ask POTUS to insist that DoD, State, and USAID regional demarcations'-
                                                                                           Formatted: Numbered + Level: 1 +
      be the same. We cannot really have joint planning and budgeting, and the             Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, - + Start
      savings that should result, if we are planning and budgeting for different           at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:
                                                                                           0.25" 4-       ,it. 0.5'
      regions. It is less important where the lines are drawn than that they are the
      same across agencies. Making this change is one of the single fastest ways to tell
      the government and Congress that we are serious about a new way of doing
      business. The relevant agencies are not going to do it voluntarily, but it surely
      falls with the President's authority.

      Changing Culture                                                                     Formatted: Normal, No bullets or
                                                                                           Formatted: Underline
   —.Start issuing policy directives/strategic guidance immediately on specific            Formatted: Font: Bold
      subjects to accustom the building to taking more direction from the top in           Formatted: Numbered + Level: 1 +
      tenns of S's priorities.                                                             Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, _ + Start
                                                                                           at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:
   9)
                                                                                           Formatted: Font: Bold

   10) Make clear we are serious about wanting a more operational culture by:              Formatted: Numbered + Level: 1
                                                                                           Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, - + Start
          • Reducing reporting requirements as much as possible building on the            at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:
                                                                                                   _
             initiative Jack launched last year. It's also a good way to engage Congress   Formatted: Font: Not Bold
              on how we can work more efficiently.                                         Formatted: Bulleted + Level: 2 +
                                                                                           Aligned at: 0.75" + Indent at: 1"
          • Appointing the task force to report back on how to change the risk
              management posture within six months.                                        Formatted: Font: Not Bold
      1)      Prioritize the changes to incentive structures changing promotion            Formatted: Indent: First line: 0.5",
                                                                                           No bullets or numbering
precepts to value inter agency experience and collaborative leadership. Make several

                                           3




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776945 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776945 Date: 09/30/2015




visible DCM and ambassadorial appointments on these grounds (that also has the
                                                                 •    •

and then never make them. But for-anyone to take the central ideas of thc QDDR
seriously, the message has to be received at a very micro level that we arc not
                                                        .;       r.



PROMOTION OF CAREER FOL
                     _ Al            _
                                                                                         Formatted: Font: Bold
                                                                                         Formatted: Indent: Left: 0", First
                                                                                         Formatted: Indent: First line: 0.5",
                                                                                         No bullets or numbering
QDDR changes. Many people in the field have a major incentive to make these things
happen, but they need more discretionary funds to do it. I WOULD FRAME THIS



                                                                                         Formatted: Font: Italic
                                                         Mib _       P • _       A_


BE OUT BY MID JAN PER JEANNE); Start issuing policy directives immediately
on specific subjects to accustom the building to taking moire direction from the top.    Formatted: Font: Italic
       _                P._ P.._         NC. .. 1111._                       _
OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE CLEAR TI TAT WE ARE SERIOUS.
       3)
       1)     Appoint a small task force to flesh out precisely what it means to have
amhassade          -                   ." ":"                                    ee
issues in particular must be resolved:
                                                                                         Formatted: Indent: Left: 0", First
                                                                                         Formatted: Indent: First line: 0.5",
      o      Those from a functional bureau do not feel under the SaITIC authority of-   No bullets or numbering
the COM and more specifically the regional A/S as they will often just report back to
their home bureau. This leads to the need for greater definition and clarity of
leadership reporting, including regional A/S' authority hack in DC.

Ambassadors as CEOs will involve finagling in DC as many functional bureaus have
separate funds and make it clear they LUC it how they wish. Often feel that we arc not
CEOs so message will need to be made clear in DC and beyond.

CEO and tools to carry it out. In regards to the concept of Ambassadors as CEOs,



                                                4




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776945 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776945 Date: 09/30/2015




for both arnbax,ad rs and their family in order for them to be thought of in thc CEO

                                                                                           (
                                                                                           7.7rmatt:
                                                                                                   d;., Indent: Left,   0., First



                       .-- -                          ; :.• •                               Formatted: Indent: First line: 0.5", j

which offers the promise of specializing in issues like thc elevation of women or the      [No bullets or numbering

promotion of public private partnerships that they care about and doing so in the
field. But to make this happen, it will be necessary to allocate travel expenses to the
regional hubs and-above all to sort out turf issues of whether these circuit riders
report to the ambassador at the regional hub (and thus to the regional bureau) or
directly back to the relevant functional bureau. Both the regional and the functional
bureaus immediately grasped this issue when I briefed the QDDR. It is but one of a
number of divisions between the regional and functional bureaus that ideally should
be taken up in the next QDDR.
                                                                                           (Formatted: Indent: Left: 0", First       )
                                                                                            line: 0.5-

     6)     Ask for a volunteer or appoint someone in every bureau to be the POC            Formatted: Normal, Indent: First line:
                                                                                             0.5", No bullets or numbering
for QDDR implementation for his/her bureau. If we are appointing people„ choose
many of the women who are anxious to make change.

       7)     Begin negotiating inter agency agreements re contracting immediately
and have Tom Nides oversee it to make sure progress is being made. Why are you
recommending going to the interagency vs. contractors? The IA is often not as
qualified or cost effective. Turning to the interagency is often more expen3ive, i.e.

                                                                                            Formatted: Indent: Left: 0", First
                                                                                            Formatted: Indent: First line: 0.5",
                                                                                            No bullets or numbering
TILING AND MOBILIZE OUTSIDE GROUPS.

STREMLINING OF REPORTING REQUIREMENTS GOING ( THAT WILL
FREE UP TIME FOR OUR DIPLOMATS IN THE FIELD TO DO ALL THE

MANAGEMENT CHANCES HAPPEN. AGAIN CRITICAL TO WIIAT WE
             011._AP       •,111A-              AMA


IT JUST DIES OTHERWISE.
     o ALL TI--LE NEW TRAIN INGS THAT ARE PROPOSED. AGAIN IT

                                                                                           (Formatted: List Paragraph, Indent:
                                                                                            hlYSL line: u."


                            ;                           ---                                  Formatted: Indent: First line: 0.5",
                                                                                             Space After: 10 pt, Don't add space
3ccurity, will ask for expertise from other agencies but have often found that the other     between paragraphs of the same style,
                                                                                             Nu bulleLb ul numilJeriny

                                            5




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776945 Date: 09/30/2015
 UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776945 Date: 09/30/2015




agencies ele fiat have the people/staffing to provide, in this budgct restricted climate
how will this bc resolved?
                                                                                           'Formatted: List Paragraph, Indent:

       From Courtcncy assessmcnt: We recommend that: 1) Chiefs of Mission                   Formatted: List Paragraph



            111 .•._   • ___.•••_•     •
                       e   e• ee                         _ _e:•_:_ ee: _ •
overseas are executing a single foreign-policy—(See-alse

                                                                                           Formatted: Indent: First line: 0.5",
                                                                                           Space After: 10 pt, Don't add space
                                                                                           between paragraphs of the same style,
                                                                                              bulleLb




eh-ha-I:wreck




       4—
                                                                                           t=td: List Paragraph, Indent:
                                                                                               ne. çr.




                                            6




 UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776945 Date: 09/30/2015
