      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779143 Date: 09/30/2015


                                                                                        RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                        B6



From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov >
Sent:                            Monday, January 31, 2011 5:58 AM
To:
Subject:                         Fw: Egypt/Hill Outreach Feeback


Fyi



From: Verma, Richard R
To: Burns, William 3; Sullivan, Jacob ); Feltman, Jeffrey D; Nides, Thomas R; Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Adams, David S; Rodriguez, Miguel E; Schlicher, Ronald L; Turk, David M; Vaden, Andrew ); Epping, Jerome N; Wells,
Alice G; Campbell, Piper
Sent: Mon Jan 31 05:13:26 2011
Subject: FW: Egypt/Hill Outreach Feeback

Thanks for making these calls yesterday.


Burns Call Read-out:

Got Reid, McConnell and Pelosi. Pelosi and Reid were quite interested, and conversations were each about 30
mins, about Egypt and wider region. Sen Reid appreciative of call. Agrees with Admin approach. Concerned
about contagion, esp re Jordan. McConnell characteristically more succinct -- but appreciative and positive
about Admin general approach. Boehner's staff said they appreciated outreach, but he couldn't do call today.

Nides Call Read-out:

Granger said she would leave aid as is until situation is clear. Senator Leahy worried about leahy law. Tom
also spoke with Congresswoman Lowey and provided her with a general read-out. She appreciated the call.

Feltman Call Read-out:

Talked with Senator Lugar. Much of the discussion was simply an update of what is happening. He believes
we have struck the right balance in our comments. He was very concerned that Mubarak may not, despite the
street and despite our prodding, move in a sufficiently significant way to calm things. He appreciated that we
are reinforcing the need for him to do so.

A/S Feltman spoke with Rep. Berman at approximately 4:30 Sunday. Feltman called to update Rep. Berman
and solicit his views. Berman inquired after private USG contacts with GOE. Berman subsequently responded
that our balanced public stance of promoting reform while refraining from public calls for Mubarak to step
down - so long as we remain prepared to increase private pressure, if necessary, in future - "makes sense."

Berman inquired how the current situation might affect the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel. Feltman
responded that indeed aspects of Egypt's strategic position in the region could potentially be jeopardized if the
GOE did not respond to the Egyptian people with real reforms. There is a real need for an "orderly transition"
that preserves those strategic positions. Berman thanked Feltman for the call.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779143 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779143 Date: 09/30/2015




A/S Feltman spoke with Senator Lieberman at approximately 4PM Sunday. Sen. Lieberman called to convey
his support for POTUS and SECSTATE, whose public messages he said were "exactly in the right place,"
balancing support for change and reform while refraining from public pressure on Mubarak to step down.

Lieberman noted with concern that public pressure from USG for Mubarak to step down would likely have very
negative ramifications among our allies in the Arab world. Also, he advised that we continue relative silence
regarding our assistance to Egypt as we need to avoid sending negative messages to the Egyptian military.

A/S Feltman gave an update on the day's events. He thanked Senator Lieberman and said he would pass the
Senator's words on to S and the WH.



Jake Walles spoke with Mariah Sixkiller from Congressman Hoyer's staff at Hoyer's request. They had a
good conversation and Jake provided a general update on the political situation, consular response, etc.



A/S Feltman also spoke with Senator Feinstein. She appreciates our position, but she also advocated that we
use Egypt's constitution as the means to persuade Mubarak that he must go. (She would also welcome talking
to S, if S has time.)



Senator Feinstein opened by noting that the U.S.-Egypt relationship has served our interests well. Mubarak has
been a good partner in a number of key issues (which she articulated). Nevertheless, the dynamics on the
ground are such, that, in Senator Feinstein's view, we need to find a way for Mubarak to retire. Mubarak needs
to understand that, if he retires now, he can do so in a way that preserves his legacy and Egypt's stability and
role in the region.

The Senator spent a lot of time on the process. She believes that, for all of its flaws, the Egyptian Constitution
is the means to follow. While it has some unpalatable restrictions, it calls for presidential elections within 60
days and offers enough latitude for a wide panoply of candidates. The U.S. ought to advocate using the
constitution in this manner, she said. She mentioned Arab League chief Amr Moussa as well as ElBaradei as
potential candidates. Omar Soliman "is not the solution," since people in Egypt are demanding change. The
idea of calling for a national dialogue "is ridiculous," in that the loudest voices rather than the most credible
voices are the ones heard.

Senator Feinstein noted that she made her pitch with some regret, for she doesn't like, as she said, to "sell
friends up the river." But there was no choice: we have to persuade Mubarak that he has to go, that it's in his
interest and Egypt's interest that he do so. Jeff briefed her on our position as reflected in the four themes
stressed by the Secretary in her talk show appearances today, and I noted that the Secretary had made reference
to the need for an orderly transition.

Isztessa7 were left for Majority Leader Cantor and Chair Ros-Lehtinen
         We reached out to staff of both offices and provided general updates.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779143 Date: 09/30/2015
