       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776971 Date: 09/30/2015


                                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL




From:                               Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                               Thursday, January 6, 2011 10:51 AM
To:
Subject:                            FW: Iran Calls for Immediate Pullout of Foreign Troops from Iraq; Calls for Regional
                                    Security Treaty



FYSA


From: Slotkin, Elissa B
Sent: Thursday, January 06, 2011 8:38 AM
To: Steinberg, James B; Sullivan, Jacob.]
Subject: Iran Calls for Immediate Pullout of Foreign Troops from Iraq; Calls for Regional Security Treaty



Yesterday, the acting Iranian Foreign Minister declared in Baghdad that "foreign forces" must leave Iraq
sooner rather than later.

Iran's media is also reviving Ahmadi-nejad's remarks in August, challenging the legitimacy of U.S. forces
remaining in Iraq. Now that the government is formed in Iraq, Iran is re-starting its campaign to prevent a
new or amended agreement for US troops. They launched an all-out campaign in 2008 to avoid the original
SOFA, to include the use of violence on our forces, and one can expect the same if we decide to pursue some
sort of agreement.

Elissa




Fars News Agency (Tehran)
6 Jan 2011

Iran Calls for Immediate Pullout of Foreign Troops from Iraq
 TEHRAN (FNA)- Iranian Foreign Ministry Caretaker Ali Akbar Salehi in a meeting with Iraqi
 Parliament Speaker Osama al-Nujaifi renewed Tehran's call for an immediate withdrawal of foreign
 forces from Iraq.

"Iraqis are free and brave people," Salehi said.

Salehi hoped that the Iraqi nation would gain their independence without the interference of alien forces.

Salehi said that having a strong parliament is necessary for an independent country, adding that if the parliament supports
a government, it will be successful.

'The Iraqi statesmen showed that their will originates from that of the Iraqi nation,' he said.

He said that he was pleased with the Iraqi national solidarity and that they have established a strong parliament.

He called for the resumption of activities of Iran-Iraq Friendship Association and hoped that agreements such as
extradition of the prisoners signed between the two countries would take effect.

He noted that Iran is ready to make consultations with the Iraqi high-ranking officials -- President Jalal Talabani and Prime

       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776971 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776971 Date: 09/30/2015



Minister Novi al-Maliki through Tehran-Baghdad commission on foreign policy and national security.

Salehi said that Iraqi parliament is expected to help hold Tehran-Baghdad commissions on regular basis.

'Iran favors Iraq's unity and security,' he said, stressing the need to conclude a regional treaty among Iran, Iraq, Turkey
and Syria.

Such a treaty will help establish regional peace and security and solve economic problems, he said.

Al-Nujaifi said for his part that the Iraqis favor stability and security and are in need of assistance by the regional
countries.

Iran has many times urged withdrawal of foreign forces from the region, describing it as the only way to restore
peace and tranquility in this part of the world.

Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad said in August that withdrawal of American forces from the region is the only
way for US President Barack Obama to prove he is serious about implementing his campaign motto of change.

Ahmadinejad criticized his American counterpart for failing to realize his campaign trail promise of "change."

"They (the Americans) announced that they had pulled out part of their forces from Iraq in recent days and claimed that
their move was in line with their slogan of 'change," Ahmadinejad said in August.

"You said you would withdraw all your troops from Iraq, why is it that some of them are still in this country? Secondly,
where are you relocating your forces from Iraq?"




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776971 Date: 09/30/2015
