      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780326 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL


From:                         McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sent:                         Sunday, June 5, 2011 8:32 AM
To:
Cc:                           Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma
Subject:                      US -Brazil



We had good meetings with our Brazilian counter-parts in the education, cultural and sports arenas.
As you know we already have a significant number of programs and initiatives in these areas and we
are exploring a number of ways to build on these activities with a specific focus on expanding youth
engagement. There was one new idea in the cultural exchange area I thought you might find of
particular interest.

 As we look for news ways to expand our engagement with younger demographics in ways which
 resonate with them, we need to develop initiatives which go beyond traditional geopolitical
 boundaries and which support the creation and/or expansion of social networks. The culture arena
 provides some unique opportunities for us to this. Following models from other fields such as scientific
 and technological collaboration, one of the ideas are exploring with the Brazilians is to bring groups
 of young Brazilian musicians together with their American counterparts and take them all to
 Mozambique for an event where they would interact with young African musicians. One event --
•three objectives met: strengthen Brazilian-US ties; increase outreach to African youth; reinforce image
 of US as willing partner.

We believe this is doable with existing resources, that it will provide a model for other similar projects
around the world and that it may attract significant positive media attention.

Will keep you posted.

im




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780326 Date: 09/30/2015
