      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780075 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                     B6



From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Monday, February 28, 2011 9:46 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: Iran HR org claims forced disappearance of Mousavi and Karroubi



Fyi



    Original Message
From: Burns, Jillian L
To: Sullivan, Jacobi; Powell, Catherine; Baer, Lauren E; Rand, Dafna H•
Sent: Mon Feb 28 09:30:46 2011
Subject: Fw: Iran HR org claims forced disappearance of Mousavi and Karroubi

Pretty close to arrest of the opposition leaders.

    Original Message
From: Jillian Burns [mailto
Sent: Monday, February 28, 2011 09:25 AM
To: Burns, Jillian L
Subject: Iran HR org claims forced disappearance of Mousavi and Karroubi

Iran: End Forced Disappearance of Opposition Leaders and Wives

http://www.iranhumanrights.org/2011/02/end-forced-disappearance-of-opposition-leaders-and-wives/



Judiciary must clarify their condition and legal situation

(26 February 2011) The International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran called for the immediate release of Mir Hossein
Mousavi and Mehdi Karoubi and both their wives, who have been removed to an unknown location—reportedly a "safe
house"— from their homes. Under international law, the secret holding of Musavi and Karroubi and their wives is an
enforced disappearance.

The two leading opposition figures had been confined in their homes under an illegal "house arrest," with no arrest
warrant, summons or charge, since before
14 February, when they called for public demonstrations in solidarity with Egyptian and Tunisian pro-democracy
activists.

"Mousavi and Karoubi and their wives have been disappeared; they are being held incommunicado in an unknown
location, a severe breach of Iranian and international law," stated Aaron Rhodes, a spokesperson for the Campaign.

"Given the lynch mob-like calls for their execution by numerous Iranian politicians and clerics, there is reason to be
deeply concerned for their safety and well being," he said.

An informed source told the International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran that the two political dissidents and their
wives are no longer under "house arrest"
and have been moved to a "safe house" in an area close to Tehran. He added that their detention location is not a
prison. A "safe house" is considered a place for the secret detention of high security- value detainees, which is not

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780075 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780075 Date: 09/30/2015




under the control of the Judiciary or any other monitoring mechanisms. The Revolutionary Guards and Iranian
intelligence agencies are well-known for using safe houses for all methods and techniques to get confessions from
detainees without scrutiny or pressure from other legal bodies. Given the use of so-called safe houses to mistreat
opponents of the government in the past, the Campaign finds it deeply disturbing that Mousavi and Karoubi have
reportedly been removed to such a facility.

One of Mehdi Karoubi's neighbors told the Campaign that there are no security forces present on Karoubi's street any
longer. "I am certain that they are no longer inside their home. All the windows are broken and nobody is home," his
neighbor said.

 An eye witness in Tehran's Pastor neighborhood, where Mir Hossein Mousavi and his wife Zahra Rahnavard live, also
told the Campaign that no comings or goings into the house on Akhtar Alley had been observed. Iron bars were installed
on the alley leading to the couple's home last week, barring any traffic into and out of their property. No official source
has yet assumed responsibility for the abduction of the two reformist leaders and their wives. Some reports received by
the Campaign indicate that the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, which led the brutal crackdown on citizens protesting
the tainted 2009 presidential election, is responsible for holding them in a secret location. "The enforced disappearance
of opposition leaders along with their wives and removal to a secret place of shows the inability of the Iranian Judiciary
to protect the rights of citizens from abuse by security agencies," Rhodes said.

The Campaign believes that with the attention of the international community focused on events in Libya, Iranian
authorities have moved to neutralize the two opposition leaders as the people of Iran have again massively raised their
voices against human rights violations by the government. While demonstrations on 14 and 20 February were met with
violent repression resulting in at least three deaths, new demonstrations have been announced for the coming three
Tuesdays. The Islamic Republic endorsed a 25 February statement by the Organization of the Islamic Conference (01C),
which demanded an end to violence against Libyan civilians and human rights violations there, and noted, "The world is
witnessing far-reaching developments in a number of OIC countries at present. It is a time of awakening; a time for
reckoning. Muslims will no longer be denied their rights."

"All members of the OIC and of the wider international community need to think of the fate of Mousavi and Karoubi,
and to demand accountability for their legal treatment and safety from the Iranian government," Rhodes said.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780075 Date: 09/30/2015
