      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779910 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                    B6



From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                             Tuesday, September 28, 2010 12:03 PM
To:                               'monica.hanley                                                                            B6
Subject:                          Fw: (no subject)



Pls print.

    Original Messa e
From: PVervee              PVerveer
To: H
Sent: Tue Sep 28 09:15:41 2010
Subject: (no subject)

I wanted to download a few items from the days in NY that I was asked to transmit to you.

The FM of Norway would like to do an op ed with you to be published around the time of the Security Council meeting
on 1325 - women, peace and security. He said that he mentioned this to you when he saw you. They have given me a
draft and I will run it through the system if this is something you would like to do.

The Community of Democracies event was very successful. There were several hundred attendees in the ECOSOC
chamber -- both men and women. The Presidents of Lithuania, Liberia, Finland and Kyrgyzstan all participated, along
with Bachelet, Wallstrom and Helen Clark --- all seated on the dais. Roza made an impassioned plea regarding the fragile
situation for the nascent democracy in Kyrgyzstan and got sustained applause. The US got kudos for our work co-
chairing the panel on women's political participation and there were several references to your speech in Krakow.

Nafis Sadik asked to meet with me to talk about the American Pakistan Foundation. She said she has a good plan that
she and her staff are working to implement. They are looking for some seed money -- sort of a planning grant -- to
support their effort and hoping it might be possible through USAID. They have BRAC more engaged. An equivalent
group has been set up in the UK and the US/UK counterparts are working well together. She also said they want to
target women and youth. They are hoping a higher level State Dept. official can be designated to work with them in a
way that will keep the lines of communications open.

Vartan wanted you to know that he made a grant to Calvin Butts for 250k.
Also, his son Rafi has been back from his overseas assignment for a couple months now but hasn't landed another post.

The clean cookstove initiative has generated a lot of positive responses and the prospects for more partners. There was
a post CGI event organized during UNGA by several of our offices at State with broad participation from all the partners.
It garnered a standing-room only crowd which seems reflective of the interest.

Maggie, Cheryl and I have talked about our "valuing the girl" project and we are working on it.

We're off to Japan for the APEC Women's Economic Summit. For the first time, we will have this issue on the APEC
agenda. We have gotten tremendous support for the GOJ, including financial support and high-level official
participation.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779910 Date: 09/30/2015
