     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772037 Date: 09/30/2015
                                                                                                            RELEASE IN
                                                                                                            PART B6




From:                              Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                              Friday, December 17, 2010 6:44 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: EMBARGOED: Weekly Address: START is About the Safety and Security of America;
                                   Not Scoring Political Points




From: Milakofsky, Ben
To: Lu, Chris                                    Smith, Elizabeth S.                                   Kimball,
Astri B. <                             ; Greenawalt, Andre                                         Phadke, Shilpa
<Shilpa_                       Maisel, Chad P. •
Sent: Fri Dec 17 18:41:31 2010
Subject: EMBARGOED: Weekly Address: START is About the Safety and Security of America; Not Scoring Political Points

Dear Chiefs of Staff and WH Liaisons:

Please see the below text of the President's weekly address.

--Cabinet Affairs

                                                   THE WHITE HOUSE
                                                Office of the Press Secretary

                         EMBARGOED UNTIL 6:00 AM ET, SATURDAY, December 18, 2010

  WEEKLY ADDRESS: START is About the Safety and Security of America; Not
                     Scoring Political Points
WASHINGTON — In this week's address, President Obama called on members of Congress to come together to ratify the
new START treaty just as they were able to come together to pass the essential economic package he signed into law on
Friday. Ratifying a treaty like START is not about winning a victory for an administration or a political party, it is about
the safety and security of the country. This is why it has been endorsed by both Presidents George H.W. Bush and Bill
Clinton, every living Republican Secretary of State, our NATO allies, and the leadership of the military.

The audio and video of the address will be available online at www.whitehouse.gov at 6:00 a.m. EDT, Saturday,
December 18, 2010.

                           Remarks of President Barack Obama — As Prepared for Delivery
                                                  Weekly Address
                                                 The White House
                                                 December 18, 2010

This week, Congress passed — and I signed into law — an essential economic package that will help grow our economy,
spur businesses, and jumpstart job creation.

Instead of a New Years Day tax hike on the vast majority of Americans, two million Americans who've lost their jobs
through no fault of their own will now know with certainty that they won't lose their emergency unemployment insurance
at the end of the month. Eight million college students who'd otherwise face a tuition hike next semester will continue
having access to the American Opportunity Tax Credit. Twelve million families with twenty-four million children will

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772037 Date: 09/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772037 Date: 09/30/2015




benefit from extensions of the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Child Tax Credit. And millions of entrepreneurs who've
been waiting to invest in their businesses will receive new tax incentives to help them expand, buy new equipment, or
make upgrades, freeing up money to hire new workers.

This package, which is so important for our economy at this pivotal time, was the product of hard negotiations. Like any
negotiations, there was give and take on both sides. But I'm heartened by our ability to come together to do what's best
for middle class families across this country, and our economy as a whole.

Before going away for the holiday break, I'm hopeful we can also come together on another urgent national priority — and
that is, the new START treaty that will reduce the world's nuclear arsenals and make America more secure. Twenty-five
years ago, the Soviet Union and United States each had about 25,000 nuclear weapons. In the decades since, that number
has been reduced by over 70 percent, and we have had on-site inspections of Russian nuclear facilities. That progress
would not have been possible without strategic arms control treaties.

During the past year, however, our old treaty with Russia expired, and without a new one, we won't be able to verify
Russia's nuclear arsenal, which would undercut President Reagan's call to trust, but verify, when it comes to nuclear
weapons. Without a new treaty, we'll risk turning back the progress we've made in our relationship with Russia, which is
essential to enforce strong sanctions against Iran, secure vulnerable nuclear materials from terrorists, and resupply our
troops in Afghanistan. And we'll risk undermining American leadership not only on nuclear proliferation, but a host of
other challenges around the world.

Ratifying a treaty like START isn't about winning a victory for an administration or a political party. It's about the safety
and security of the United States of America. That's why this treaty is supported by both Presidents Bill Clinton and
George H.W. Bush. That's why it's supported by every living Republican Secretary of State, our NATO allies, and the
leadership of the United States military. Indeed, the Vice-Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General loss Cartwright,
said this week that the military needs this treaty, and they need it badly. And that's why every President since Ronald
Reagan has pursued a treaty like START, and every one that has been reviewed by the Senate has passed with strong
bipartisan support.

We have taken the time to get this right. The START treaty has now been under review by the Senate for over seven
months. It's gone through 18 hearings. Nearly 1,000 questions have been asked — and answered. Several Republican
Senators have come out in support of ratification. Meanwhile, further delay comes at a cost. Every minute we drag our
feet is a minute that we have no inspectors on the ground at those Russian nuclear sites.

It's time to get this done. It's time to show the same spirit of common purpose on our security that we showed this week
on our economy. It's time to remember the old saying that politics stops at the water's edge. That saying was coined by a
Republican Senator, Arthur Vandenberg, who partnered with a Democratic President, Harry Truman, to pass landmark
national security measures at the dawn of the Cold War. Today, over sixty years later, when we're threatened not only by
nuclear weapons, but an array of other dangers, that's a principle we must continue to uphold. Thank you, and have a nice
weekend.




Unsubscribe

The White House • 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington DC 20500 • 202-456-1111




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772037 Date: 09/30/2015
