       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776528 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                     RELEASE
                                                                                                     IN FULL


From:                               Jiloty, Lauren C <JilotyLC@state.gov>
Sent:                               Monday, January 17, 2011 8:45 AM
To:
Subject:                            Mass-China Solar Article


Solar Panel Maker Moves Work To China
Evergreen Solar plans to close its main American factory, in Devens, Mass., seen here in September, and lay off 800
workers.

By KEITH BRADSHEB

Published: January 14, 2011


BEIJING — Aided by at least $43 million in assistance from the government of Massachusetts and an innovative solar
energy technology, Evergreen Solar emerged in the last three years as the third-largest maker of solar panels in the
United States.




Matthew Cavanaugh for The New York Times


Michael El-Hillow, chief executive of Evergreen, said falling prices for panels led to the closing.
But now the company is closing its main American factory, laying off the 800 workers by the end of March and shifting
production to a joint venture with a Chinese company in central China. Evergreen cited the much higher government
support available in China.
The factory closing in Devens, Mass., which Evergreen announced earlier this week, has set off political recriminations
and finger-pointing in Massachusetts. And it comes just as President Hu Jintao of China is scheduled for a state visit next
week to Washington, where the agenda is likely to include tensions between the United States and China over trade and
energy policy.
The Obama administration has been investigating whether China has violated the free trade rules of the World Trade
Organization with its extensive subsidies to the manufacturers of solar panels and other clean energy products.
While a few types of government subsidies are permitted under international trade agreements, they are not supposed to
give special advantages to exports — something that China's critics accuse it of doing. The Chinese government has
strongly denied that any of its clean energy policies have violated W.T.O. rules.
Although solar energy still accounts for only a tiny fraction of American power production, declining prices and concerns
about global warming give solar power a prominent place in United States plans for a clean energy future — even if critics
say the federal government is still not doing enough to foster its adoption.
Beyond the issues of trade and jobs, solar power experts see broader implications. They say that after many years of
relying on unstable governments in the Middle East for oil, the United States now looks likely to rely on China to tap
energy from the sun.
Evergreen, in announcing its move to China, was unusually candid about its motives. Michael El-Hillow, the chief
executive, said in a statement that his company had decided to close the Massachusetts factory in response to plunging
prices for solar panels. World prices have fallen as much as two-thirds in the last three years — including a drop of 10
percent during last year's fourth quarter alone.
Chinese manufacturers, Mr. El-Hillow said in the statement, have been able to push prices down sharply because they
receive considerable help from the Chinese government and state-owned banks, and because manufacturing costs are
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776528 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776528 Date: 09/30/2015



generally lower in China.
"While the United States and other Western industrial economies are beneficiaries of rapidly declining installation costs of
solar energy, we expect the United States will continue to be at a disadvantage from a manufacturing standpoint," he
said.
Even though Evergreen opened its Devens plant, with all new equipment, only in 2008, it began talks with Chinese
companies in early 2009. In September 2010, the company opened its factory in Wuhan, China, and will now rely on that
operation.
An Evergreen spokesman said Mr. El-Hillow was not available to comment for this article.
Other solar panel manufacturers are also struggling in the United States. Solyndra, a Silicon Valley business, received a
visit from President Obama in May and a $535 million federal loan guarantee, only to say in November that it was
shutting one of its two American plants and would delay expansion of the other.
First Solar, an American company, is one of the world's largest solar power vendors. But most of its products are made
overseas.
Chinese solar panel manufacturers accounted for slightly over half the world's production last year. Their share of the
American market has grown nearly sixfold in the last two years, to 23 percent in 2010 and is still rising fast, according to
GTM Research, a renewable energy market analysis firm in Cambridge, Mass.
In addition to solar energy, China just passed the United States as the world's largest builder and installer of wind
turbines.
The closing of the Evergreen factory has prompted finger-pointing in Massachusetts.
Ian A. Bowles, the former energy and environment chief for Gov. Deval L. Patrick, a Democrat who pushed for the solar
panel factory to be located in Massachusetts, said the federal government had not helped the American industry enough
or done enough to challenge Chinese government subsidies for its industry. Evergreen has received no federal money.
"The federal government has brought a knife to a gun fight," Mr. Bowles said. "Its support is completely out of proportion
to the support displayed by China — and even to that in Europe."
Stephanie Mueller, the Energy Department press secretary, said the department was committed to supporting renewable
energy. "Through our Loan Program Office we have offered conditional commitments for loan guarantees to 16 clean
energy projects totaling nearly $16.5 billion," she said. "We have finalized and closed half of those loan guarantees, and
the program has ramped up significantly over the last year to move projects through the process quickly and efficiently
while protecting taxpayer interests."



Link to article: http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/15/business/energy-
environment/15solar.html?_r=18(scp=1&sq=solarcY020china&st=Search




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776528 Date: 09/30/2015
