     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780988 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL



From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Tuesday, July 5, 2011 7:25 PM
To:
Subject:                         Fw: President Obama Announces More Key Administration Posts


Remind me re this announcement

From: Samuelson, Heather F
Sent: Tuesday, July 05, 2011 05:40 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Stock, Ann
Cc: Toiv, Nora F; Gelber, Ethan M
Subject: Fw: President Obama Announces More Key Administration Posts

Fyi - the announcement for Tom is out!



From: White House Press Office [mailto:noreply@messages.whitehouse.gov]
Sent: Tuesday, July 05, 2011 05:31 PM
To: Samuelson, Heather F
Subject: President Obama Announces More Key Administration Posts

                                             THE WHITE HOUSE
                                          Office of the Press Secretary
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
July 5, 2011

                      President Obama Announces More Key Administration Posts

WASHINGTON - Today, President Barack Obama announced his intent to nominate the following
individuals to key Administration posts:

   • Matan Koch, Member, National Council on Disability
   • Stephanie Orlando, Member, National Council on Disability

The President also announced his intent to appoint the following individuals to key Administration
posts:

    • Denis J. Cruz, Member, President's Advisory Commission on Educational Excellence for
      Hispanics
    • Dr. Millie Garcia, Member, President's Advisory Commission on Educational Excellence for
      Hispanics
    • Monica R. Martinez, Member, President's Advisory Commission on Educational Excellence
      for Hispanics
    • Veronica E. Melvin, Member, President's Advisory Commission on Educational Excellence for
      Hispanics
    • Brenda S. "Sue" Fulton, Member, Board of Visitors to the United States Military Academy

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780988 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780988 Date: 09/30/2015




   • Tom Healy, Member, J. William Fulbright Foreign Scholarship Board
   • Warren Glenn Hioki, Member, Board of Trustees of the Christopher Columbus Fellowship
     Foundation
   • Marc Lefar, Member, President's National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee

President Obama said, "I am proud to nominate such impressive men and women to these important
roles, and I am grateful they have agreed to lend their considerable talents to this Administration. I
look forward to working with them in the months and years ahead."

President Obama announced his intent to nominate the following individuals to key
Administration posts:

Matan Koch, Nominee for Member, National Council on Disability
Matan Koch is an Associate at Kramer, Levin, Naftalis, & Frankel LLP, where he focuses on
Commercial Litigation and Advertising matters. He was born with Cerebral Palsy and has been
actively involved in the disability community for many years. From 2001 until 2002, Mr. Koch served
as the Vice Chairman of the New Haven Commission on Disabilities where he also chaired the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Subcommittee. In addition, he has served as a member of the
Union for Reform Judaism-Department of Jewish Family Concerns' Disability Task Force and
currently serves on the union's Special Needs Camping Committee. While working in the Legal
Division of Procter & Gamble, Mr. Koch was a member of the company's People with Disabilities
Network. Mr. Koch also served on the board of Jewish Vocational Services of Cincinnati. He has a
J.D. from Harvard Law School and a B.A. cum laude from Yale University where he served as the
President of the student disability community.

Stephanie Orlando, Nominee for Member, National Council on Disability
Stephanie Orlando is the Director of YOUTH POWER! of Families Together in New York State, a
statewide advocacy network comprised of young people who have disabilities and experience in
state child-serving systems. After receiving children's mental health, special education and
residential services herself, Ms. Orlando has become a strong advocate for youth with disabilities on
county, state and national levels. Beginning in 2006, she served a term as Chairperson of the Youth
Advisory Committee to the National Council on Disability. Ms. Orlando serves on the New York
State Commissioners' Committee on Cross-Systems Services for Children & Youth, the New York
State Commissioner's Advisory Panel for Special Education Services, the New York Mental Health
Services Planning Council, and the Board of Directors of the Children's Mental Health Coalition of
Western New York. She received the Diana Vietz Award in 2008 from the National Council on
Independent Living, the mpower Award in 2006 from Mental Health America (formerly National
Mental Health Association) and the 2004 Erie County Executive Award for Disability Employment
Awareness Month. Ms. Orlando earned her Bachelor of Arts in 2005 from the State University of New
York at Buffalo.

President Obama announced his intent to appoint the following individuals to key
Administration posts:

Denis J. Cruz, Appointee for Member, President's Advisory Commission on Educational
Excellence for Hispanics
Denis J. Cruz is the principal of Laurel Elementary School, in the East Whittier School District in
California. Previously, Mr. Cruz held a number of posts in the East Whittier School District,
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780988 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780988 Date: 09/30/2015




including Curriculum Director, Middle School Program Specialist and Language Arts Coach; but he
spent the majority of his career as a fifth and sixth grade teacher. As Director of Curriculum, Mr.
Cruz assisted teachers in the curriculum alignment process that identified the specific academic
needs of English Language Learners and at-risk students; he also facilitated the writing of lessons
for all grade levels on topics including integrity, courage, bully prevention, perseverance, and
assertive behaviors. Mr. Cruz was named California's Teacher of the Year in 2006. Mr. Cruz holds a
Master of Arts in Education from Champan University and a B.A. from California State University,
Long Beach.

Dr. Millie Garcia, Appointee for Member, President's Advisory Commission on Educational
Excellence for Hispanics
Dr. Millie Garcia is the seventh president of California State University, Dominguez Hills, and the
first Latina president in the California State University system. Previously, Dr. Garcia served as
President of Berkeley College in New York and New Jersey. Her research concentrates on equity in
higher education and its impact on policy and practice. She has authored numerous books, articles,
book reviews and commissioned reports, concentrating her research on equity in higher education
and its impact on policy and practice. Dr. Garcia serves on several boards, including the American
Association of Hispanics in Higher Education and the Advisory Board for Hispanic Outlook in
Higher Education. Additionally, Dr. Garcia is a founding member of National Council for
Community and Education Partnerships. Dr. Garcia holds a Doctor of Education and M.A. from
Columbia University, an M.A. from New York University, a B.S. from Bernard Baruch College, and
an A.A.S. from New York City Community College.

Monica R. Martinez, Appointee for Member, President's Advisory Commission on Educational
Excellence for Hispanics
Monica R. Martinez is currently an independent educational strategist for foundations and non-
profits. She is a leading national expert in secondary and post secondary education with experience
directing and researching major education innovation and reform initiatives. Most recently, Ms.
Martinez was the CEO of New Tech Network where she directed the organization's strategic
direction and growth strategy. Previously, she was the Vice President of Education Strategy for
KnowledgeWork, and a Senior Associate at the Institute for Educational Leadership. Ms. Martinez
holds a Ph.D. in Higher Education from the Steinhardt School of Education at New York University,
and she received her B.A. from Baylor University.

Veronica E. Melvin, Appointee for Member, President's Advisory Commission on Educational
Excellence for Hispanics
Veronica E. Melvin is the Chief Operating Officer for Communities for Teaching Excellence, which
partners with communities across the U.S. to advocate for effective teaching for all
students. Previously, Ms. Melvin served as the Executive Director of the Alliance for a Better
Community (ABC), an organization that promotes equity for Latinos in the areas of education, health,
economic development and civic participation. As its first Executive Director, Veronica led the
organization through various community based advocacy campaigns that included promoting
college preparatory curriculum for all Los Angeles Unified high school students, seeking greater
access to quality preschool for L.A.'s children, and banning junk food and sodas in schools. ABC
achieved its goals by organizing local communities in policy advocacy and by facilitating the
development of model programs that demonstrate innovation and excellence. Ms. Melvin holds a
B.A. from UC Berkeley and a M.P.P. from UCLA's School of Public Affairs.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780988 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780988 Date: 09/30/2015




Brenda S. "Sue" Fulton, Appointee for Member, Board of Visitors to the United States Military
Academy
Brenda S. "Sue" Fulton is the Executive Director and co-founder of Knights Out, an organization of
LGBT West Point graduates and allies. She is also a Founding Board member of OutServe, and
serves as Communications Director for the Forum for the Military Chaplaincy and the Service
Academy Gay and Lesbian Association. Ms. Fulton worked until recently at Schering-
Plough/Merck. Prior to this, she did volunteer work in the U.S., India, and Israel from 1988 to 1989
after working for Procter & Gamble from 1986 to 1988. In 1980, Ms. Fulton was commissioned in the
Army Signal Corps and served for five years in Germany. She commanded a Military Intelligence
company and was honorably discharged from the Army at the rank of Captain. Ms. Fulton is a 1980
West Point graduate, part of the first class to admit women.

Tom Healy, Appointee for Member, J. William Fulbright Foreign Scholarship Board
Tom Healy is a poet and writer. His book, What the Right Hand Knows, was a finalist for the 2009 L.A.
Times Book Prize and the Lambda Literary Award. Mr. Healy teaches at New York University and
was recently a fellow at the Goree Institute in Dakar, Senegal. He served as President of the Lower
Manhattan Cultural Council and received the 2006 New York City Arts Award from Mayor Michael
Bloomberg for his work to rebuild the downtown art community after 9/11. Mr. Healy opened one
of the first contemporary art galleries in Manhattan's Chelsea neighborhood. Under President
Clinton, Mr. Healy served on the White House Council on HIV/ AIDS and has remained engaged in
AIDS and microfinance projects across the world. He received an A.B. from Harvard University and
an M.F.A. from Columbia University.

Warren Glenn Hioki, Appointee for Member, Board of Trustees of the Christopher Columbus
Fellowship Foundation
Dr. Warren Glenn Hioki is the Executive Director of Technical Programs and High School
Partnerships for the College of Southern Nevada (CSN). Prior to starting his career with CSN in 1995,
Dr. Hioki worked as a senior design engineer and project engineer for Electromagnetic Systems
Laboratories (ESL) in Silicon Valley. He also taught full-time for 14 years at San Jose City College. Dr.
Hioki has served in various capacities for CSN, including teaching faculty, Director of Engineering
Technology, Associate Dean, Interim Chief Campus Administrator, and Principal Investigator for
CSN's National Science Foundation grant. He is the author of Telecommunications, a Prentice-Hall
publication and leading seller in the college area for over a decade. Dr. Hioki holds a B.S. in
Engineering Technology from California Polytechnic State University, an M.S. in Electrical
Engineering from San Jose State University, and a Ph.D. in Educational Leadership from the
University of Nevada, Las Vegas.

Marc Lefar, Appointee for Member, President's National Security Telecommunications Advisory
Committee
Marc Lefar is the CEO of Vonage Holdings Corp. Prior to joining Vonage, Mr. Lefar was Chief
Marketing Officer of Cingular Wireless, now AT&T Mobility. Prior to joining Cingular, Mr. Lefar
served as Executive Vice President, Marketing and Value-Added Services for Cable and Wireless
Global. He also held senior leadership roles at Verizon Wireless and GTE Wireless. Mr. Lefar's
career began at Procter and Gamble. He holds a B.S. from the University of Virginia.

###



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780988 Date: 09/30/2015 •
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780988 Date: 09/30/2015




Unsubscribe

The White House • 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW • Washington DC 20500 • 202-456-1111




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780988 Date: 09/30/2015
