      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777441 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, January 20, 2011 11:16 AM
To:
Cc:                                Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma
Subject:                           Pakistan Media Interactions: January 8-14



We have talked so much about the changes we have been implementing in Pakistan I thought you might like to see
some concrete results. The report below, which covers just one week, shows the breadth and depth of our media
engagement strategy. Obviously Pakistan presents enormous challenges for us on every front and it is unlikely that we
will see the results of all this work in the short term. However, I am convinced that a sustained effort, which moves the
conversation beyond the issue of security, will prove beneficial to us in the long run.

Pakistan Media Interactions: January 8-14, 2011
Islamabad

January 10: CIO Rodriguez spoke with Dawn News reporter Baquir Sayyed to express disappointment about a
negative headline on one of his stories which mischaracterized the contents of a speech by Ambassador
Munter. Although Dawn is usually a very credible source, the headline was deliberately written out of context
to sensationalize the story. The next day Dawn published an editorial which more positively and accurately
portrayed the Ambassador's remarks.

January 11: CIO Rodriguez answered questions in the days leading up to the arrival of Vice President Joe
Biden's trip to Pakistan. CIO spoke to GEO TV and other outlets to provide information in response to an
inaccurate Washington Post Article about the purpose of the trip. This information helped dispel rumors of
additional aid to be announced during the trip and prevented a backlash when additional aid was not
announced.

January 11: DIO Beale met with UNESCO representatives to discuss plans for World Press Freedom Day in
May. PAS Islamabad is considering possible programs to show support for freedom of the press, under
increasingly dangerous circumstances, in Pakistan.

January 12: PAS organized a photo spray at the beginning of Vice President Biden's meeting with President
Zardari and a press conference after his meeting with Prime Minister Gilani. During his remarks, Biden
dispelled common misconceptions about the United States and its policies in Pakistan. The speech was covered
by all major media outlets (photo below) and received very positive coverage in the following days (see
additional reporting on media reaction in Islamabad 152). AIO Jones organized a Facebook contest with quiz
questions about VP Biden to engage Facebook fans in the visit and increase our fan base.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777441 Date: 09/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777441 Date: 09/30/2015




 January 14: DIO Beale met with Reuter's Senior Correspondent in Pakistan Michael Georgy to discuss an
 interview request with the Economic Counselor and press coverage for an upcoming event at the Ambassador's
 residence with the winners of the Pakistan Fast Growth 25 Contest winners. The Pakistan 25 event will
 highlight U.S. support for entrepreneurship and job growth in Pakistan.

 Peshawar

 January 11: US Coordinator for Economic and Development Assistance Ambassador Robin Raphel gave a
 press briefing about USAID's Agricultural Recovery Program to provide assistance to farmers who suffered
 losses during last summer's floods. The event, which also included the Provincial Minister of Agriculture,
 received wide coverage in print and broadcast media. Later that day, Ambassador Raphel conducted interviews
 regarding USG development assistance in Khyber Palchtunlchwa and FATA with Radio Deewa (Pashto service
 of VOA), Mashal Radio (Pashto service of Radio Liberty), and Khyber TV (Pashto language satellite
 television). The radio stations have broadcast multiple portions of the interviews. Khyber TV has broadcast
 excerpts of the interview and will broadcast the full interview within a week.

• January 12: INL DAS Brian Nichols and US Coordinator for Economic and Development Assistance
  Ambassador Robin Raphel, as well as Khyber PalchtunIchwa Chief Minister, participated in the groundbreaking
  ceremony for a project to improve and widen the Peshawar Ring Road. After the ceremony, DAS Nichols
  spoke with Radio Deewa and Mashal Radio. The event was widely covered in both print and broadcast media.

 Lahore

 January 8: A/PAO Perry promoted Consulate Lahore's Facebook page in a live 60-minute interview on Radiol
 (FM91) where he spoke on social media and current outreach to Pakistani youth, as well as the U.S-Pakistan
 Strategic Dialogue.

 January 10: City42 television covered CG Conroy and her parents' visit to the Lahore Fort and Badshahi
 Mosque. To a question on the current security situation, the CG praised Punjab government and police support
 to American diplomats. She also reiterated USG support for preserving historic treasures in Pakistan under the
 Ambassador's Fund for Cultural Preservation.

 January 11: The print and broadcast media gave extensive coverage to CG Conroy's remarks at Government
 College University's annual fundraiser and exhibition. The media highlighted her remarks that cultural activities
 could play a vital role in improving Pakistan's image and that the USG would continue to support Pakistan in
 raising the standard of education.

 January 12: PAS invited print and broadcast media to cover the opening of a new Hardees branch where CG
 Conroy spoke about U.S. investment in Pakistan and American firms' contribution in generating jobs. The CG
 also gave an interview to Urdu weekly Family magazine where she and her parents talked about life in the U.S.
 and similarities between family relationships in Pakistan and the U.S. A/PAO Perry met with General Manager
 Farrukh Bashir and Managing Director Yousuf Beg Mirza to discuss PTV's role as a media partner in the
 upcoming flood recovery fundraiser as well as a potential TV Co-op program.

 January 13: A/PAO Perry promoted Consulate Lahore's Facebook page in a live 90-minute interview on
 FM103 where he spoke on social media and outreach to Pakistani youth. Later, he met with several reporters
 from Express Tribune where the discussion focused on the paper's internal politics and the current English
 language print media scene.

 January 14: CG Conroy opened "Furniture Pakistan" an exhibit featuring products made by exclusively by
 women entrepreneurs. Her remarks to the media focused on the importance of women entrepreneurs in
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777441 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777441 Date: 09/30/2015




Pakistan, the working groups of the Strategic Partnership, and their role in the economic uplift of Pakistan. The
event was covered by Samaa-TV, PTV, City42 and ARY, as well as at least eight print outlets. A/PAO Perry
met with Dunya TV's Moeed Pirzada and talked about changes at Dunya including Najam Sethi's departure to
Geo and the aftermath of Governor Taseer's murder.

Karachi

This week, Karachi Consulate's Official Facebook page launched an "I Have a Dream for Pakistan..."
Facebook Competition. King's "I Have a Dream" speech was posted as was a YouTube video of the speech for
fans to watch. On January 13th "The Nation" newspaper covered the contest saying "This kind of interaction is
2-way, not only can Pakistanis get information about the American Consulate, but the American Consulate is
listening in return to what Pakistanis have to say in a brand new format." The Consulate Facebook page grew
from 2050 fans to 3300 in just one week! This competition not only informs Pakistanis about American culture
by introducing Martin Luther King Jr.'s legacy, but it invites them to interact directly with the Consulate about
their hopes for the future of Pakistan.

January 12: 10 De Arment met with senior APP reporter Ithushnood Shaihk to discuss the consulate move
and do an interview about the move with photographs immediately following the move. PAS organized an
internal flag lowering ceremony for the Consulate on the historic occasion of closing our old Consulate
building. Photographs taken at the event are being used as part of press coverage on our move this week. It has
been crucial to keep the media as informed as possible about our move to the new building and the facilities
available at the new Consulate, as the new complex allows greater interaction between the people of
Balochistan and Sindh and the U.S. Consulate. The NCC, a symbol of America's long term commitment to
Pakistan, allows the Consulate to expand our development assistance operations and expand visa services.

January 14: Pakistan Today covered Consul General William Martin and JO De Arment at the HUM TV
Telefilm Awards on Janaury 14, 2011. This demonstrated the Consulate's support to the creative community
and strengthened the relationship with the HUM TV owners. Consul General William Martin condemned the
targeted killing of Geo journalist Wali Khan Barbar. His statement on freedom of the press and continued
cooperation with Pakistani journalist was covered on Geo TV, in The News & Jang newspapers, as well as
Express Tribune, which ran a picture of the Consul General. During these violent times in Karachi, it was
important to express not only condemnation, but also to support the work journalists do here every day. 10
Andie De Arment also gave a two-hour interview with FM103 about Martin Luther King Jr. Day and the
Consulate's Facebook Outreach/Contest. The program explained how Dr. King gave a voice to the voiceless
and was not afraid to stand up for what was right. There was also a portion of the interview where JO De
Arment answered questions from callers. This interview served to educate Pakistanis about Martin Luther
King, Jr. and to talk about non-violent protest and action, which is a timely subject during a period of violence
and curfews in Karachi.

Press Releases

 Date            Title                                                   Release#       Media Placement



 1/15/2011       Correction: No NATO Cross border Shelling            013               The Nation

 1/13/2011       U.S. Supports Trade-led Jobs, Growth for Pakistan 012                  Ausaf, Pakistan,
                                                                                        Express, B/recorder,
                                                                                        the News


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777441 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777441 Date: 09/30/2015




 1/13/2011    U.S. Embassy Condemns Terrorist Attacks in       011              Ausaf, Jinnah, Islam,
              Bannu and Peshawar
                                                                                Pakistan Observer

' 1/12/2011   U.S.-Funded Road Upgrade Improves Daily Life     010              Ausaf, B/R, Pakistan
              in KPk                                                            Observer, Statesman,
                                                                                The Nation

 1/11/2011    U.S. Helps Flood-Affected Farmers               - 009             The Nation, Express, .
                                                                                Aaj Kal, Jong,

                                                                                Nawa-e-Waqt

 1/8/2011     U.S. Embassy Supports Cultural Heritage in                       Dawn, The
              Pakistan                                                         News, The Nation,
                                                               008             Express tribune,
                                                                               Statesman, Ausaf,
                                                                               Aaj Kal




Compiled by Info Office
Public Affairs Section
U.S. Embassy Islamabad
Pakistan
http://islamabad.usembassy.gov




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777441 Date: 09/30/2015
