     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778853 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART B5,B6



From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Saturday, January 29, 2011 9:04 PM
To:
Subject:                           FW:



See traffic below from bottom up- Peter Kujawinski is our political counselor; David Lindwall is our DCM

    Original Message
From: Lindwall, David E
Sent: Saturday, January 29, 2011 8:59 PM
To: Kujawinski, Peter I; Mills, Cheryl 0; Merten, Kenneth H; Mcdonald, Kara C; Adams, Thomas C
Cc: Sullivan, Jacob
Subject: Re:

I couldn't put it better! However much Haitians from all sectors are conflicted about the role of the IC, I can't imagine
this benefiting Preval. Most of the radio interviews blame us for being Preval's sole source of support. Evans Paul this
week revived Manigat's old arguments that if it wasn't for us, Haitians would remove Preval on February 7 (don't know if
that is still her position). It will be interesting to see if Egypt is on Preval's mind.

    Original Message
From: Kujawinski, Peter I
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Merten, Kenneth H; Lindwall, David E; Mcdonald, Kara C; Adams, Thomas C
Cc: Sullivan, Jacob
Sent: Sat Jan 29 20:43:43 2011
Subject: RE:

two thoughts -

1) I believe a lot of this radio chatter about                                  is nothing more than the flavor of the
month. Remember when nobody could stop talking about Duvalier? Now, he's barely mentioned even though he's still
here. Although there are some long-standing annoyances about                     this talk about the international
community has taken off because Inite has done a good job with that message in the past few days. However, we are
receiving few indications that this is resonating among Haitians. I believe all this is occurring because we are in a holding
pattern. Everyone is waiting for the CEP to issue its final decisions. In the meantime, giving a platform to
                  in my opinion. They have little popular support - in a recent long-publicized demonstration they
mustered about 100 people and only in Port-au-Prince,                       are opportunists hoping there is a transitional
government, because they know that is their only path to power. That is why they are currying favor with
because they think he might still have some influence and could help them get named to something in a provisional
government.

2) All this being said, it makes sense - I believe -
                                                 We've already sent stern messages and for this visit, I believe our focus has
to be on supporting the Haitian people. That's why the CTC visit is a great way to begin the visit. The more we talk
about Haiti and the Haitian people and the less about the international community/OAS/MINUSTAH, the better.

peter

SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778853 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778853 Date: 09/30/2015




    Original Message
From: Mills, Cheryl 0
Sent: Saturday, January 29, 2011 8:17 PM
To: Merten, Kenneth H; Lindwall, David E; Kujawinski, Peter I; Mcdonald, Kara C; Adams, Thomas C
Cc: Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: FW:

Laura states a simmering concern I know we all have - backlash against the IC.

I am particularly concerned if it appears by standing up to S/USG that Preval is embraced for the fraud he committed
rather than rejected for it.




                                                                        (yes - a lot of worlds colliding for me this
weekend) of saying one thing but acting another when the people stand up for what is right
                                                            here they pushing for new clean elections and we

          we have rationalized that based upon a run-off).

All to ask --

cdm

    Original Message
From: laura
Sent: Saturday, January 29, 2011 7:54 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:

For what its worth-bc I think about this a lot. Does IC have a strategy to deal w those that oppose this solution-mms in
second round-preval staying? In event that the group of 12 and lavallas unify against this bc their ultimate goal may be
cancellation of elections-new elections. I think you need to consider a message and outreach strategy to ensure that
different elements of haitian society (church leaders, business, etc) buy into the mms solution and are out their on radio
messaging why its good. You need to counter what appears to be a building up and potential unifying of oppositon
parties-naturally unusal alliances btw right and left who have nothing to gain w current solution and at a minimum some
hope with new elections and a provisional goh where they may get a seat at the table and a chance to reset their
campaigns for a new election a year or 2 from now. Seems to me IC needs a complimentary message-outreach strategy
to support this solution and in usg best interest to have this since IC for many here equals USG. Additionally, the radio is
24-7 messaging against the current solution, turning RP and JC from villans into patriots. Its unbelievable. These radio
hosts and guests have forgotten that they cheated. The IC and USG taking hits and looking like villan. Nationalism views
on rise. HRC was specifically criticized today for imposing this solution and pressuring RP. Confidentially-i met with
Mullet yesterday and raised this and he totally disregarded the unification of these groups. He thinks that somehow the
mms solution and RP staying will be accepted by all when it only serves the mms, RP. I think its a risk to assume that. If
you want it to work and be able to govern credibly I think you need enhance message and outreach strategy w Haitian
surrogates. No one is countering the daily drumbeat against IC right now. I know KM did radio this am which was good
but think you need a more comprehensive strategy w IC support and Haitian surrogates. Just my thoughts. Thx for
listening. Lg Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778853 Date: 09/30/2015
