               UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779369 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART B6
WIST/112161r                                                    911101112111111P


From:                                  Anne-Marie Slaughter <                                                                  B6
Sent:                                  Thursday, March 17, 2011 2:02 PM
To:
Cc:                                    Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:                               a post from Amira Al Hussaini, a Bahraini blogger who is regularly on Twitter and has
                                       been ahead of the curve



I thought you should see this — it was just retweeted by the editor of Foreign Policy. It's important because she is a
liberal Bahraini who is coming out strongly against the fomenting of sectarian violence (I have put the parts I find
most compelling in bold). Her point about "just Bahraini" — e.g. that the mantra for change should be neither Sunni
nor Shia but Bahrainis standing for Bahrain seems to me to be a good way to argue against BOTH Iranian and Saudi
intervention — as well as a line that should appeal to ordinary Bahrainis (and Egyptians, Tunisians, etc.). NB the
following from her post: "we will need to step out of the noise, call out corruption and rise above all the mistrust and
work towards a common goal: A Bahrain we will all be proud to live in and work together for its progress and
prosperity." Your arguments about what ordinary people want all over the world — opportunity, a chance to improve
the lives of their children, etc are something you can and should fall back on here - -that this is not just something
that is happening in the Middle East — these are universal aspirations that different groups of young people in the
Middle East are finally claiming for their own.

Let the fun begin.
The "fun" started last night - and as expected there was a face-off, between protesters and the police force in the
village of Karzakan.
And as is the case, there are two versions of the story:
The Ministry of Interior surprisingly opened a Twitter account last night and tweeted:


Illegal rally in Karzakan 3 policemen attacked, Police had to fire 2 rubber buttons. 1st as warning shot 2nd bounced
& hit a demonstrator


I know, it reads like a cartoon script, but that is the problem with 140-character messages, particularly those written
by sci-fi writers.


The other side paints a story of horror and gore, the use of excessive police brutality, casualties, and loads of tear gas,
rubber bullets and shot guns - all documented with photographs being mass circulated on BBM, the Internet and
word of mouth.


Bint Battuta in Bahrain translates the demands from the protests, starting across the country today here. And while
most of them are legitimate, and something each decent Bahraini aspires to, a copy-cat revolution, with a Facebook
event, is not what a sectarian divided Bahrain needs today.
               UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779369 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779369 Date: 09/30/2015




These marches if anything will continue to fan the flames of sectarianism, pitting one neighbour against the other, in
a country where mistrust between the two sects is becoming the trademark of our existence. We all know that the
protests will be quashed. The riot police will not smile to the protesters and let them do their bit and go to their
homes. There will he a crackdown, and it will be excessive, hard and brutal - but then every protester taking the
streets already knows that.


Over the past few days I watched with horror as Bahrainis plummeted to the dark side, with new name tags on every
ungrateful soul not drooling at the government and the scraps it throws at us to play fetch with. Fetch because
whatever goes into one pocket, goes out the other. And play because even if one gesture or the other is genuine, the
big picture shows that there is some big flaw in a reform project we all welcomed with open arms but are now
becoming disillusioned with.


As you can see, I am not a huge fan of the government. I am also not a fan of stirring unrest in Bahrain. And I am
also totally against the way the security forces will clampdown on any dissent or opposition - the same opposition I
am not a fan of because of my liberal leanings, which don't mix well with the turban bearded mantra. But having
said all this, my sympathy is with my country men and women, with the poor and needy, with those
working hard to make ends meet, with those striving to have a roof on their heads, with those
studying hard and eager to join the job market - with the decent Bahrainis out there who want to live
in a land of equal opportunities and feel proud that they are Bahrainis - Just Bahraini, Not Sunni or
Shia. (By the way, Just Bahraini - a bloggers initiative to fight sectarianism is BLOCKED by the
Government of Bahrain!!!!)


What I am with is a civil dialogue and what I want to see today is the real Bahrainis standing up and
stopping any bloodshed, anger and correcting the wrongs of the past. I also want to see goodwill and
trust - trust from both the government and the people. I want us to believe and I want to be able to
dream of a better Bahrain for my children. I want us all to give each other the benefit of the doubt
and develop a capacity to listen to each other without calling each other unpatriotic, traitor or an
agent of the West or Iran.


As Bahrainis, we need to sit down with each other and address our long list of woes, and work together on solving
them. Sandwiched between Saudi Arabia and Iran, it would be foolish to demand a full democracy, with real
emancipation, freedoms and citizens rights. I understand and accept that as this is my country and this is my
destiny. What I do not accept and will never accept is the cesspit of sectarian bigotry we are drowning in.


The government needs to stop its games, the mental ones particularly, because all decent Bahrainis, Sunnis and
Shia, are aware. The hoarse crow's caw will continue to reverberate but we will need to step out of the noise, call out
corruption and rise above all the mistrust and work towards a common goal: A Bahrain we will all be proud to live in
and work together for its progress and prosperity.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779369 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779369 Date: 09/30/2015




My own family and network of friends include people from the full spectrum of Bahrainis - Sunnis and Shias, those
. who spend more time in the Matams and mosques than with their families and those who cannot go a day without
breaking one religious ruling or another - and we all live in peace, accepting each other and civil in the way we treat
one another.


Having said all this: I will not march in the streets. I will stay put, surrounded by my cats and loved ones, hoping for
peace in my restive country.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779369 Date: 09/30/2015
