      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782288 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Abed in, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, August 25, 2011 3:19 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fyi



Conclusions of the Libya Contact Group Meeting, Istanbul, 25 August 2011 as released by the MFA

1. The Libya Contact Group met at the level of political directors in Istanbul on 25 August 2011 under the Co-
Chairmanship of the Republic of Turkey and Norway. Representatives from 28 countries and 7 international
organizations, including the United Nations, European Union, NATO, the League of Arab States, the Organization of the
Islamic Cooperation, the Gulf Cooperation Council and, as an invitee, the African Union, held political consultations on
recent developments in Libya.

2. The participants welcomed the progress achieved by the Libyan people in determining their own destiny and building
a free, united and democratic Libya and commended the successful leadership role of the NTC. In view of the seizure of
Tripoli by the National Transitional Council (NTC) forces, they stressed the need for Qaddafi and his inner circle to turn
themselves in to justice immediately in order to prevent further bloodshed and destruction of the national
infrastructure.

3. The participants underlined the crucial role played by NATO and its partners in protecting the civilians. They expressed
their expectation that "Operation Unified Protector" will continue until the objectives envisioned in the UN Security
Council Resolutions 1970 and 1973 are fully realized.

4. The participants reiterated their countries' commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity of Libya. They appreciated the all-embracing approach of the NTC, which has committed itself to an
inclusive and broad-based political transition with the participation of representatives from all segments of the society.

5. The participants expressed appreciation of their respective countries of the consistent, cohesive, transparent and
constructive role that the NTC has been playing under the leadership of President Mustafa Abdulcelil in steering the
country away from oppression towards freedom, justice and democracy. Building on the Chair's Statement of the Fourth
Contact Group Meeting in Istanbul in which participants agreed to deal with the NTC as the legitimate governing
authority in Libya, they declared the NTC at this stage as the sole representative of the state and people of Libya. While
expressing satisfaction for the ever-widening international recognition of the NTC, they underlined the need to
empower the NTC with the legal, political and financial means necessary to form an interim government of Libya.

In this respect, the participants welcomed the conclusions of the Doha Political Directors Meeting on 24 August 2011,
where ways and means of urgently providing the NTC with the necessary financial support were discussed. In line with
these conclusions, they have decided to start a process to unfreeze the frozen Libyan assets in an expedited manner. In
that regard, participants urged the UN Security Council to pass the resolution currently under discussion.

6. The participants emphasized the importance of preservation of law and order and uninterrupted supply of public
services such as water, electricity, fuel, as well as food and medicine to all cities and regions. In this framework, they
offered their readiness to help the NTC in its efforts to restructure state institutions and to rebuild capacity as well as
physical infrastructure in Libya.

7. The participants were briefed by the NTC on the subsequent steps after forming an interim government, including
convening of a National Congress with representatives from all parts of Libya and drafting of a Constitution by a
Constitutional Committee to be set up by the National Congress.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782288 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782288 Date: 09/30/2015




8. In view of the essential requirement for any governing authority to enjoy popular legitimacy, the participants stressed
the need to expedite an orderly transition that would lead to constitutional democracy in Libya through holding free, fair
and transparent elections.

9. The participants attached utmost importance to the realization of national reconciliation in Libya. They agreed that
such a process should be based on principles of inclusiveness, avoidance of retribution and vengeance. They welcomed
the commitment of the NTC to win hearts and minds of the entire Libyan people and respect for human rights.

10. In view of the dire humanitarian situation in the country, the participants agreed on the need to take concerted
action to provide continuous humanitarian assistance to all cities and districts in Libya.

11. Libya's stabilization and reconstruction needs in the post-conflict stage have also been taken up. The participants
stressed once again that this process should be owned up and led by the Libyan people themselves.

12. The participants agreed that the United Nations should lead all international efforts aimed at helping Libya in the
post-conflict period.

13. The participants welcomed the perspective of the International Paris High Level meeting for new Libya on the 1st of
September and are convinced that the success of this meeting today will contribute greatly to the success of the Paris
summit.

14. The participants of the Contact Group expressed their thanks and appreciation to the Government of Turkey for
organizing and hosting this timely meeting.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782288 Date: 09/30/2015
