        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781832 Date: 09/30/2015

                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                     B6




From:                             Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS@state.gov>
Sent:                             Friday, August 19, 2011 6:20 PM
To:



I'm heading back from Mexico and wanted you to know I had a very positive trip with lots of folks asking about you and
sending good wishes. I focused on women and the economy especially with our trade relationship and Pathways, APEC
and Mexico hosting G20 next year. I got good receptivity both from govt officials. (As an aside, it's stunning that the
trade relationship between us amounts to about a billion a day in economic benefits for us and them. It's a shame that
this NAFTA achievement is not as well known as should be.) We will have several new collaborations coming out of this
and we're working on a significant commitment from Wal-Mart.

I had a good meeting with your friend the FM Espinosa, She said she was very happy when she learned from others that
in my speech to the top women in business, I noted that as a young diplomat at the UN, she was a key negotiator of the
Beijing Platform for Action. She said she doubted anyone in Mexico knew the role she had played. When I got to the
meeting with her she spent a lot of time talking about the importance of Beijing, your role and remembering lots of
experiences about how tough the negotiations were -- from the Iranians to the Vatican to her own delegation! She
really wants to get women and economy on G20 and wants us to help with Treasury. She also wants a greater emphasis
on women in climate change and asked if we would join on that.

She agrees that there are many positive things we can work together on besides the partnership on ending drug violence
and drug trafficking and that we should put an emphasis on those, particularly given the close ties we have, Also, the
elections ion both countries will only exacerbate the negative. Bill probably told you that the Mexican press thinks
we're somehow underemining Mexico's sovereignty with some of our anti drug efforts and their reading too much into
tony wayne's coming in as new amb from a posting in Afghanistan!

I also met with their AG who perhaps has the toughest job of anyone trying to build up their justice system. You gave her
the IWOC award when she was still prosecutor. So many mentioned what that award meant for Mexico and her and, she
especially wanted to be remembered to you,

Please give our good wishes to the birthday celebrant.
I'm confident he'll be laying off birthday cake.

I hope you get some vacation, despite the state of the world.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781832 Date: 09/30/2015
