      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782431 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                               RELEASE IN
                                                                                               FULL


From:                               Gordon, Philip H <GordonPH@state.gov>
Sent:                               Tuesday, March 29, 2011 12:40 PM
To:
Cc:                                 Burns, William J; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject:                            From TNC press conf.


  The INC is committed to civil society that recognises intellectual and political pluralism and allows for the peaceful
transition of power through legal institutions and ballot boxes; in accordance with a national constitution crafted by the
people and endorsed in a referendum". Every adult citizen would have the right to vote in "free and fair parliamentary
and presidential elections as well as the right to run for office." "The state will respect the sanctity of religious doctrine
and condemn Intolerance, extremism and violence...denounce violence, terrorism, intolerance and cultural
isolation". "The real aspirations of the Libyan people are to be free, to live under a constitutional democratic system,
where there is rule of law, all essential freedoms are guaranteed and people can fulfil their potential and realise their
aspirations. That is the hope. That is the vision." The TNC aims to "facilitate that process through a transition period until
we reach a permanent state where there is a constitution crafted by the Libyan people". "The constitution will produce a
framework for a new democratic civil government in Libya." "The Libyans said from the beginning that the ideal is to
hold Gaddafi accountable for his crimes with a fair trial in Libya. Nw he is also facing a potential trial by the International
Criminal Court. That is the ideal, because these crimes should not go unpunished. They should be punished in a proper
way, in a fair trial, which is something Gaddafi never offered his opponents in the last 42 years." "Tripoli - a city of two
million people - for the last five weeks has been living in sheer terror, fear, kidnapping of young women and young men.
Anyone suspected of being an activist or an organiser of demonstrations is kidnapped and taken away.We reckon there
are over 12,000 young people in Tripoli taken away and put in prisons and military camps.We are extremely worried
about their fate and what is happening to them. The thing is happening in Zawiya and in other cities.This is the hidden
side of the sheer terror that Gaddafi is using to prevent the Libyan population continuing the revolution and bringing
about change. We are very proud of these young Libyans but we are at the same time extremely worried about the fate
of those taken away by Gaddafi."We hold him responsible. We think the international community has a duty and a
responsibility to send missions to investigate where these people are kept, because there are well over 12,000 and we
think some of them may have been killed and their bodies used to pretend that these are victims of the international
community air attacks." "The TNC made it very clear that we are not asking any outside power to bring about regime
change in Libya. We are not asking for any non-Libyan to come and change the Gaddafi regime. That is the job of the
Libyan people and the Libyan people alone




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782431 Date: 09/30/2015
