      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782056 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL



From:                               Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                               Thursday, August 11,2011 9:35 PM
To:
Subject:                            FW: The congress is in session, it turns out. in Israel




From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Thursday, August 11, 2011 6:20 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob
Subject: The congress is In session, it turns out ... in Israel




The congress is in session, it turns out ... in Israel
Posted By David Rothkopf • Wednesday, August 10, 2011 - 11:44 AM
•
This week's reports that 20 percent of the U.S. Congress will be visiting Israel this month are stunning. Eighty-
one members of Congress -- two thirds of them Republicans, 47 of them freshmen -- apparently think it is more
important to be visiting Israel than it is to be at home dealing with the worst economic crisis in modern
memory. America's economy is in flames and these guys are taking lobbyist-funded trips to what, watch Israelis
take to the streets to protest the high-cost of living in that country?

This Jewish, Israel-supporting, foreign policy specialist says, "It's time to come home, ladies and gentlemen."
While such visits are important and there is certainly a place for them in the lives of American legislators, now
is not the time.

Indeed, I continue to be stupefied that in the midst of market turmoil that is directly associated with political
dysfunction in Washington that no one who works in a leadership role in this city has the conscience or the
awareness to recognize that this is not an August in which a recess should be taken. These folks should be back
at their desks and hard at work. The president ought to take to his podium and demand they return. He ought to
say he is going to provide one big new idea a day for helping to get the economy back on its feet until the
Congress finally starts to take yes for an answer.

The political objectives behind these Israel trips are clear and they reveal the opportunity costs to the American
people associated with campaign season. Every moment spent jumping through a hoop for a potential group of
supporters is a moment spent failing to address one of the many urgent issues confronting the United States.

When will these pretenders grow up or make way for serious, committed adults who have the appetite and the
spine to grapple with our current challenges? When will American voters demand better, or at least start paying
attention?




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782056 Date: 09/30/2015
