      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                       B6



From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Friday, February 4, 2011 7:04 AM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Cairo Update 1400 hrs February 4


Fyi


From: Rosenstock, Matthew S
To Rosenstock Matthew S. Cutrona Aimee. Shea Peter T. TILIPIIPr Matthew H: Walles. Jacob: Blame. Donald A;

                                       Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip Ji Catalano, Elise; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob 3; PeIton, Erin; TaskForce-1; McHale, Judith A; Hensman,
Chris D; NEA-PD-DL;                                                                 Adams, David S; Epping, Jerome N;
Randol h Lawrence QM        ,       v argaret es is la                                                 ; 'Chang, Benjamin'
                                    ; NEA-Egypt; Lenert, Adam 3; Mahoney, Haynes R
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Kennedy, David JR; Colton, Elizabeth 0; Newman,
Robert B; Singer, Theodore 3; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle, Robert F; Marrano, Mark F; Galliker, Andrew S;
Turner, India R; NEA-Staff-Assistants-DL; Wells, Alice G; Farbeann, Joseph R; Speaks, John T; Boland, Patrick T; Crocker,
John W; Williams, Eric C; Aguilo, Patricia M; Whitmire, Morgan G; Perry, Mark D; Randolph, Lawrence M (Algiers); Carl
Yoder, Samantha A; ECPODistribution; Cairo Consular Americans
Sent: Fri Feb 04 07:02:43 2011
Subject: Cairo Update 1400 hrs February 4

EAC
Ambassador chaired EAC at noon to discuss security situation and Embassy response. All agencies and
sections currently represented on the compound attended. The DCM will chair a virtual EAC at 1330 with
representatives in remote locations. The DCM will coordinate ongoing review of emergency personnel and
TDY presence at post to ensure our official footprint is appropriate and sustainable.

Political
Tahrir Square: Tens of thousands have gathered in the square, where the situation remains calm with no pro-
Mubarak protesters in the square as of 1330 hrs, but reports of pro-Mubarak protesters marching towards the
square with makeshift weapons (chains, etc). For the first time we saw all protesters praying in unison for
noon prayers. We noted no women were visible. There are reports of increased MB participation at Tahrir
today, and police and the military continue to prevent protesters from bringing supplies into Tahrir. MinDef
Tantawi reportedly visited Tahrir this morning, and Al Jazeera reported Arab League SYG Amr Moussa
attended today's protest. Media report the official spokesman for Sheikh al Azhar (an MFA Ambassador
seconded to Azhar) has resigned and joined protesters in Tahrir as well, and that Sheikh Hafez Salama, a
prominent salafist leader and symbolic leader of the recent Suez riots, is in Tahrir. State TV reported the
arrest of three foreigners in Tahrir Square, including an Iranian.

Noon Prayers: Sermons in some Cairo mosques reportedly called on people not to go to Tahrir to protest,
while an EmbOff reported the sermon in his neighborhood mosque (filled to capacity) was led by an injured
Cairo University student who urged people to go to Tahrir, suggesting they travel in groups and enter from the
north rather than the south (which may explain why we have seen fewer people passing by the Embassy to
enter the square).

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




Sinai: An RPG was fired at state security headquarters in El-Arish (North Sinai) at midday, setting the building
ablaze. A business contact in El-Arish says Bedouin are attacking the state security building, while 70-100
"bad" NDP people have gone to the governor's building (NFU. There is no military or police presence. Security
is dependent on neighborhood watch groups. Sharm al Sheikh remains quiet.

Alexandria: More than 50,000 anti-regime protesters had gather near Qaed Ibrahim Mosque by 1300 hrs,
despite calls by Imams for people not to join protests. EmbOff reports reduced army presence this morning
(there had been five tanks on her street — now there are none). All diplomatic missions in Alexandria continue
to report no state security presence to protect their facilities. There are reports of increased anti-foreigner
sentiment at checkpoints with verbal harassment while cars are searched. LES staff have heard increased anti-
American statements, including on V talk shows. The Italians report a convoy from Alexandria to the Cairo
Airport yesterday arrived without incident.

Sharkiya: Violent demonstrations yesterday were dominated by MBs who reportedly destroyed shops and
cars. No news yet today from the area.

National Dialogue: Opposition contact told us that a series of meetings between the VP and opposition forces
are scheduled for Saturday. He said that he had been told that at least one "youth" group would meet with
Soliman and that it would include representatives from the National Association for Change, April 6 and other
opposition parties. He added that a young member of the MB would reportedly also be in attendance. This
led him to believe a meeting between the MB and the VP was likely. He said he expected other parties like the
Ghad (Nour's faction), the Wafd and Taggamou would also meet with Soliman on Saturday. Separately, the
"group of wise men" unaffiliated with any political party that issued a statement on February 2 calling for
Mubarak to "delegate" his duties to the VP and remain the "ceremonial" president of Egypt met with Soliman
yesterday. We are reaching out to members of the group to better understand their outcome. An activist
contact told us that he did not believe protesters would accept this formula, nor would his organization try to
convince protesters to do so.

Security
Foreigners Arrested: Consular has received reports of foreigners on the streets are being rounded up by police
and military forces for deportation. RSO has received numerous calls from students, journalists, and
concerned people indicating police, military, and local checkpoints were stopping all types of foreigners and
turning them over to the police. Local checkpoints have been stopping foreigners claiming they were
instigators and turning them over to the military.     '

Security Problems on Roads to Embassy: We are working to reassess road conditions to allow for shuttles to
bring personnel from Maadi to the Embassy. Shuttles heading south were able to enter Maadi, however
shuttles coming to the Embassy from Maadi were stopped by civilian checkpoints. RSO investigator
intervened by phone and ultimately convinced the "watchstanders" to let the vehicle pass. Police stood by
and did not intervene. Mobile Patrol Unit was dispatched to make arrangements with the checkpoint but
were told "no more diplomatic vehicles will be allowed to pass". RSO office has since altered the route
through Giza and then north to avoid this area. At this time, all travel on the corniche is prohibited. Maadi
situation remains calm. Limited travel within Maadi (to the AID building, etc.) has been allowed on a case-by-
case basis. Airport reports no major problems.

Consular
The consular section was open for emergency ACS cases today, and served 11 people between the hours of 8-
10AM. ConOffs at the Cairo airport assisted approximately 30 AmCits who were evacuating on commercial


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




flights. A surge in travelers is anticipated tomorrow. The consular section has noted an increase in arrests of
AmCits, some re-arrested after being released.




SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Rosenstock, Matthew S
Sent: Thursday, February 03, 2011 8:16 PM
Tn. Rncsinctnrk Matthpw c• Clitmna AiMPP' Shea Peter T. Irma117, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A;
                                                                      ; Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa,
Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes, Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L;
Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley, Philip 3; Catalano, Elise; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob); Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1;
McHale, Judith A; Hensman, Chris D; NEA-PD-DL;                                        Adams, David S; Epping, Jerome N;
Randolph, Lawrence M (Algiers); 'Margaret.Keshishian                ; 'Chang, Benjamin'; NEA-Egypt; Lenert, Adam);
Mahoney, Haynes R
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Kennedy, David JR; Colton, Elizabeth 0; Newman,
Robert B; Singer, Theodore); Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle, Robert F; Marrano, Mark F; Galliker, Andrew S;
Turner, India R; NEA-Staff-Assistants-DL; Wells, Alice G; Farbeann, Joseph R; Speaks, John T; Boland, Patrick T; Crocker,
John W; Williams, Eric C; Aguilo, Patricia M; Whitmire, Morgan G; Perry, Mark D; Randolph, Lawrence M (Algiers); Carl
Yoder, Samantha A; ECPODistribution
Subject: Cairo Update 2020 hrs February 3

Political
Contacts say there are 20,000 people in Tahrir Square as of 1900 hrs. There are reports of gunfire, possibly from snipers
in surrounding buildings, with at least two dead and others wounded, and there is currently no live video feed from the
square. The Ministry of Health announced that 13 people were killed and 1200 injured in clashes overnight in Tahrir
Square. Demonstrators continue to call for massive demonstrations tomorrow, calling it the "day of departure." One
contact told us the plan is to march on Tahrir Square.

We are receiving multiple reports of human rights activists being detained in the Hisham Mubarak center by military
police. There are also reports of food and supplies that are en route to protesters in Tahrir are being seized by the
military and "community watch" groups near Tahrir. It is possible the raid on the Hisham Mubarak Center may be
directed against those involved in providing support to anti-Mubarak protesters.

The Prosecutor General announced the government has forbidden the following individuals from traveling out of Egypt:
former Minister of tourism Zoheir Garana, former Interior Minister Habib Al Adly, former Housing Minister Ahmed al
Maghreby, and Gamal Mubarak advisor and senior NDP official Ahmed Ezz. Assets of all four have been frozen. All are
viewed as having exploited their positions of power to accumulate wealth, and Adly is reportedly under investigation for
the police's handling of protests last week and the removal of police from the streets following last Friday's
demonstrations.

VP Soliman spoke to the nation via a televised interview by a famous news personality at 1900 hrs(an unusual format for
Egyptian leaders, probably aimed at giving increased credibility to his statements). He made the following key points:

    •   The government is committed to reform and has responded to all of the protesters demands. Return home and
        give us time to organize and implement these reforms. Urged youth not to demonstrate tomorrow but to give
        the government a chance to follow through on its commitments.
    •   Mubarak will not step down. This would be alien to our ideology. The people appreciate "the father and leader"
        and "his service to the homeland." The remainder of his term will be needed to organize and implement


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




         • reforms. He will not run again and neither will his son. Stated Shafik government will remain in place until end of
           Mubarak's term.
    •      Engaged in dialogue with many political parties and expect to talk with others (he named the MB, Taggamu, and
          Wafd) in the coming days. We are talking to representatives of the youth who started the protests. All agree to
          the outline proposed by Mubarak. (NOTE: one contact at the meeting described participants as 20
          representatives of small opposition groups known to be affiliated with the government and the meeting had
          no clear outcome. April 6 has denied negotiating with Soliman.) Soliman said the dialogue must be concluded
          in the next 5 to 10 days.
    •      He said all youth detained during protests will be released unless involved in criminal acts.
    •     Will investigate yesterday's violence. Unclear who started the clashes. Clearly a foreign agenda played a role
          which must be investigated. Complained of foreign interference in domestic affairs via statements and satellite
          TV coverage with "false reports and exaggeration." Said Egypt will listen to advice from foreign friends, but
           rejected instructions from other states. Suggested prison breaks pre-planned and organized.
    •     Will take months for police to fully redeploy. Defended role of military, including lack of intervention yesterday,
          saying they were caught by surprise and are playing role of police in their absence. Also said police had acted
          with "respect and integrity" on January 28 and acted in self defense when attacked by protesters. Retreated to
          avoid using live fire, per instructions, but should have later redeployed.
    •     Described enormity of economic losses, saying one million tourists have fled the country since January 25 at a
          cost of USD 1 billion.

PM Ahmed Sheik delivered televised remarks early in the day, saying dialogue would provide an exit from the crisis and
promising to investigate and hold accountable those behind yesterday's clashes at Tahrir as well as those responsible for
the removal of police from the streets after clashes with protesters last Friday.

40,000 people participated in pro-democracy demonstrations today in Alexandria. Clashes with pro-Mubarak
demonstrators were reported in the Qaed Ibrahim area. Protests are also occurring in Mansura and Sharkiya. Minya is
quiet today as is Sinai.

Press report a group of prominent businessmen and intellectual issued a statement suggesting they would be willing to
negotiate with the government on behalf of the protesters. They repeated many of the demands made on January 25,
but recommended Mubarak delegate his powers to the Vice President and remain in a "ceremonial role" until the end of
his term.

Security
Chancery took incoming fire at approximately 1651 with three rounds passing over the roof and at least one round
impacting the roof wall of Cairo 1. An Embassy vehicle encountered two checkpoints en route to Maadi, one civilian and
one by uniformed police. Police checked documents and allowed the vehicle to pass. The British Embassy is down to
core staff of around 17 people.

A private AmCit was detained this afternoon by pro-Mubarak protesters who handed the person over to the
military. The military later released him and he returned to Maadi. Another AmCit was detained at acheckpoint
between Sinai and Cairo because he had an Israeli visa. RSO staff have engaged and expect him to be released.

Consular
ACS has received numerous reports of Amcits detained in the area of Tahrir. According to a contact in Military
Intelligence, State Security wants to keep all journalist and foreigners out of the square. ACS reached out to prison
authorities to check the status of Amcit detainees. There are two AmCit prisoners who are still in detention at two
different prisons. In a third prison, we have been informed that approximately half of the inmates escaped. We do not
know whether the 2 Amcits at the prison have escaped. 43 emergency passports were issued today.

In Cairo, Approximately 231 passengers are departing to Frankfurt and another 70 should depart for Larnaca at 20:00.
ConOffs are able to accommodate passengers on flights as they arrive at the airport. It is likely that there will be no USG
charter flights tomorrow, February 4th. Charter flights will resume February 5th. Seats are available on commercial flights
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




departing Cairo. In Alexandria ConOffs have assisted in the evacuation of 303 people (251 American citizens -- not
including those who departed on commercial flights without assistance). AmCits are encouraged to use commercial
flights from Burg El Arab Airport. The conditions of the airport are secure, there are sufficient commercial flights
offered, and the road to the airport has been safe. The Luxor/Aswan airport is fully functioning. The warden reports
business as usual, with just one small peaceful protest today.

Management
We are transitioning from evacuation mode to support for remaining staff. Each evening at 2030 we are holding
interagency management meetings and working on normalizing operations, dealing with food and water supplies,
etc. The last scheduled charter flights are going out today, so management will no longer be sending employees to the
airport. GOE rules are still in force for importing goods through the airport, so it has been a challenge for us to clear
goods. Visa rules still apply, so any TDYers with diplomatic or official passports must have visas before arrival.

Public Affairs
All foreign journalists are being told by the military to leave Tahrir Square. There are numerous reports of journalists,
including AmCits, being detained throughout the city, including on the road to the airport.




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Rosenstock, Matthew S
Sent: Thursday, February 03, 2011 2:10 PM
To: Rosenstock, Matthew S; Cutrona, Aimee; Shea, Peter T; Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A;
                                                                     Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa,
Lauren 5; Parrs, Walter; Wittes, Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Schlicher, Ronald L;
Holt, Greta C (NEA); Crowley, Philip 3; Catalano, Elisa; Schreoel, Dawn M: Sullivan. acob 3; Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1;
McHale, Judith A; Hensman, Chris D; NEA-PD-DL;                                        Adams, David S; Epping, Jerome N;
Randolph, Lawrence M (Algiers); 'Chang, Benjamin'; NEA-Egypt
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Kennedy, David JR; Colton, Elizabeth 0; Newman,
Robert B; Singer, Theodore 3; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle, Robert F; Marrano, Mark F; Galliker, Andrew S;
Turner, India R; NEA-Staff-Assistants-DL; Wells, Alice G; Farbeann, Joseph R; Speaks, John T; Boland, Patrick T; Crocker,
John W; Williams, Eric C; Aguilo, Patricia M; Whitmire, Morgan G; Perry, Mark D; Randolph, Lawrence M (Algiers); Carl
Yoder, Samantha A; ECPODistribution
Subject: Cairo Update 1400 February 3

EAC
Ambassador chaired a session of the full EAC at noon on Thursday. All Country Team members were able to reach the
Embassy for the meeting except the chief of NAMRU-3 whose vehicle was impeded by a private roadblock. The EAC
reviewed and endorsed current security procedures and operating profile. Section and Agency heads will institute
procedures for accountability and tracking whereabouts of personnel.

Security
There have been four separate incidents of US diplomatic vehicles being stopped south of the Embassy (on Qasr al Ayni
Street and the Corniche) by groups armed with bats and knives and not allowed to pass, all between 10:15 and 11:35
AM today. In some cases there were men in police uniforms assisting the crowd. In all four cases the vehicles were able
to drive through or back out of the crowd and all passengers have proceeded to safe locations. In three instances the
crowd attacked the vehicle with bats and machetes and tried to pry open the doors. In one instance an Embassy driver
refused RSO instructions to drive through the crowd, resulting in the crowd climbing onto the roof of the
vehicle. EmbOffs in the vehicle pressed the gas and were able to escape. RSO advised EAC of the incidents and travel in
that area is now prohibited. In addition, RSO and Ambassador reminded section heads to maintain 100% personnel
accountability.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




Political
Clashes between pro- and anti-Mubarak protesters continued through the night in Tahrir Square and throughout the
city, resulting in at least five deaths and more than 800 injured. The situation in Tahrir Square was calm this morning,
but rock throwing has re-commenced between the two groups, despite the military having taken up positions between
them. There are reports of pro-Mubarak groups preventing food and water from being brought to Tahrir. Thousands of
anti-Mubarak demonstrators remain in the square.

PM Shafik issued an apology for yesterday's violence and promised to hold accountable those responsible. Shafik and
VP Soliman called on protesters to go home. Member of Parliament Mohamed Morshdy announced his resignation
following Mubarak's February 1 speech and called on other in parliament to follow suit in order to preserve
stability. Business contacts have expressed dismay at the lack of GOE intervention at Tahrir.

VP Soliman is reportedly meeting with a group of opposition leaders (including Anwar Sadat) this morning. Participants
are not known, but el Baradei is not/not among them. It is unclear whether this group has credibility with the anti-
Mubarak protesters. A group of well known independents (businessmen, diplomats, writers, etc) called on Mubarak to
delegate authority to Soliman and remain as "ceremonial" leader until the end of his term.

Alexandria experienced at least one serious confrontation between the military and an armed criminal group
overnight. LES staff report gunfire in their neighborhoods overnight as well related to looting. The city is quiet this
morning, but demonstrations are expected in the afternoon. We are hearing reports of demonstrations in other cities,
including Mansura. People in Alexandria say they are stunned by yesterday's events, unsure where this is all
heading. Alexandria contacts report shortages of bread and fuel and small numbers of people returning to work. Trains
are reportedly operating on an ad hoc schedule.

Consular
ACS is open for emergency services, and is printing emergency passports. The Italian embassy reports an AmCit
journalist, Paul Zieira, was arrested by State Security. No further details at this time.

Yesterday's departures: 8 AmCits left Luxor on an evacuation charter. 2 tourists took a commercial flight to Doha.
Approximately 60-80 AmCits were making arrangements to leave with their respective tour groups. We have not
confirmed these departures. 20 AmCit passengers departed Aswan for Amman. Also, there was word of 54 amcits in
Hurgada, and 31 in Sohag who were making arrangements to depart.

Scheduled charter flights for today (low dfemand may cause some to be canceled, and we estimate 25 AmCits waiting
for flights):

B767, SwiftAir, 235 pax, flight N250MY, departing CAI 10:00, arriving FRA 13:15
A320, Lotus, 177 pax, departing CAI 12:00, arriving Athens 14:00
A320, Lotus, 177 pax, departing CAI 17:00, arriving Athens 19:00
A320, Lotus, 177 pax, departing CAI 1830, arriving LCA 20:00
There are no military flights today.

Borg al-Arab and Al-Nozha airports in Alexandria are both operational. ConOffs are encouraging AmCits to use Borg al-
Arab, as it is more secure, has more flights, and is open 24 hours. Roads to the airport are clear at this time. 9 AmCits
were directed to commercial flights at Borg al-Arab today. Airports remain operational in Luxor and Aswan, and
commercial flights are operating. AmCits were evacuated to Cairo yesterday. Updated numbers will be provided by
Khartoum TDY support. The Sharm al Sheikh airport appears to be operating with flights arriving/departing regularly.

Public Affairs
Fox News reports two journalists in the hospital. They are told they may be handed to the military to confirm their
identity. The New York Times still has 2 journalists apparently detained in unknown location (last described as a


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




Sharabiya Military Base). NPR reporters and other international journalists report they were attacked by crowds in
Shobra but are ok and now being protected by the Military.

Econ
Exporters in Cairo tell us that many factories have been closed for over a week and are struggling to resume operations.
They fear that if the crisis doesn't blow over soon, they risk losing customers. Food and fuel availability remains mixed
around neighborhoods of Cairo. Deliveries of fuel to gas stations remain impacted by the lack of security for trucks,
which is also affecting port operations. The Deputy Governor of the Central Bank announced this morning that Egypt
would resume debt auctions next week.



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Rosenstock, Matthew S
Sent: Wednesday, February 02, 2011 9:01 PM
To: Cutrona, Aimee; Shea, Peter T; Tueller, Matthew 1-1: Wailes. Jacob; Biome, Donald A;
                                                                     Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa,           B6
Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes, Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltrnan, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L;
Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley, Philip J; Catalano, llc Schrenel Dawn M. Sullivan Jacob J; Felton, Erin; TaskForce-1;
McHale, Judith A; Hensman, Chris D; NEA-PD-DL;                                         Adams, David S; Epping, Jerome N;
Randolph, Lawrence M (Algiers); 'Chang, Benjamin'
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Kennedy, David JR; Colton, Elizabeth 0; Newman,
Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle, Robert F; Marrano, Mark F; Galliker, Andrew S;
Turner, India R; NEA-Staff-Assistants-DL; Wells, Alice G; Farbeann, Joseph R; Speaks, John T; Boland, Patrick T; Crocker,
John W; Williams, Eric C; Aguilo, Patricia M; Whitmire, Morgan G; Perry, Mark D; Randolph, Lawrence M (Algiers); Carl
Yoder, Samantha A; ECPODistribution
Subject: Cairo Update 2100 February 2

Political
Tahrir Clashes: Violent clashes erupted between pro and anti-Mubarak protesters this afternoon in Tahrir
Square. From the Embassy we could see what we presume to be pro-Mubarak thugs on the roof of a building
throwing debris (chairs, rocks, etc) and molotov cocktails into the crowd below. The army did not appear to
involve itself aside from some initial efforts to keep the two sides apart in the square. Fires appeared to break
out in several areas around the square, but seem to have been extinguished. While Tahrir has quieted down
somewhat, clashes continue on side streets. Contacts say some of the pro-government "attackers" were
members of the police. Activists in the square report hundreds injured and at least a handful killed, and many
called urging us to intervene to stop the violence. One contact reported difficulty evacuating injured people to
the hospital.

Local TV aired an interview this evening of a thug claiming to have been paid and trained by the U.S. and
Israel. Overall, local TV coverage of events in Tahrir Square has been provocative, calling today the beginning
of an Intifada," and warning protesters to evacuate Tahrir Square because of groups with molotov cocktails
descending on the area. The Army followed with a statement at 2030  .    urging protesters evacuate, warning of
"armed infiltrators." A prominent human rights activist   told us the "sit in" appears to be over, and violence
continues outside of Tahrir. He worries protests may now become increasingly violent.

Contacts have reported fewer violent clashes between pro and anti-government protesters in Sharkiya,
escalating violence between protesters in Suez (with police in civilian clothes reportedly marching in support
of Mubarak), and peaceful competing protests in Sinai. Pro-Mubarak protests were also held in Alexandria
and appear to have been peaceful.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




Sheikh el Azhar has called for calm and offered to host negotiations, while Grand Mufti, All Goma, asked
demonstrations to return home after President Mubarak answered their demands for reform.

Management
The evacuation of official personnel and family members went extremely smoothly today, with 125 family
members and 68 USDH departing. So far, we have 9 mission members slated to depart tomorrow.

We are now shifting from transporting people out of the country to planning logistics to support our
remaining staff. In the short term, we are focused on water and MREs, with more arriving from Frankfurt on
the flights scheduled for tomorrow.

Consular
The evacuation of official personnel and family members went smoothly today. 125 family members and 68
US direct hires departed. So far, we have 9 mission members slated to depart tomorrow.

A total of 4 evacuation flights departed Cairo with 319 evacuees departed to Frankfurt, Athens, and
Washington DC. 59 more departed Alexandria and ten from Luxor. 13 TDYers arrived to work at Cairo airport
along with Cairo Consular staff.

600 lbs of water, food, and supplies were received from Nicosia.

CONS estimates about 40 emergency passports have been issued over the past 3 days.

We informed foreign missions of possible space for foreign diplomats on USG evacuation flights. Embassies of
Italy and Japan showed interest. No formal requests yet.

Security
There is concern of a possible riot at Terminal 4 of the Cairo Airport by approximately 1,000 passengers
(nationalities unknown) whose flights are being canceled. While this is the terminal we are using for
evacuation flights, we do not have personnel there at this time, and the passengers in question are not part of
our evacuation efforts (we are using 2/3 of the terminal, they are in the other portion of the building). We do
have four TDY consular officers arriving at Terminal 4 momentarily. An A/RSO and armored vehicle are
standing by to pick them up

We have seen a slight lowering of the military profile in the Maadi area. Police have assumed some of their
previous static positions around the Maadi area. They were also re-established around the embassy, though
in smaller numbers, and then inexplicably removed less than a half of an hour later.

Economic Situation
Imported goods, including foodstuffs and fuel, are unable to leave major ports largely because of lack of
security for trucks. The port of Ain Sokhna has been shut down since Friday on the orders of the MOD. The
new Minister of Trade and Industry has formed an "Emergency Committee" to address transportation issues.
The Ministry of Trade is asking MOD to better secure trucks carrying food and fuel and is requesting •
permission from the MOD for food shipments to move after curfew hours. Many gas stations around Cairo
were closed today. The stations that were open saw long lines, and some stations limited the amount of fuel
drivers could purchase. Food supply has, however, reportedly improved today, with better-stocked shelves
and fewer incidents of hoarding. Prices have not risen drastically in most areas.

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




Citizens had better cash flow today as public sector workers were paid as promised by the Ministry of Finance,
and more ATM's operated, albeit with long lines to withdraw money and limits on how much could be
withdrawn. Retail banks are scheduled to re-open on Sunday (which would make Embassy operations easier),
and the stock market may re-open later next week.


The Suez Canal has operated normally; ships are passing without incident.


Public Affairs
Bloomberg News' reporter Ola Galal has been released from military detention late this afternoon. But now
there are other American/international news organizations reporting detentions of their journalists today:
NY Times' Nicholas Kulish (Amcit) & Souad Mekennet still being held by Military at Sharabaya
CBS News' Alex Ortiz (Amcit)
Fox News' 9 persons' team calling in distress and fearful at Egypt Knights' Hotel
Vanity Fair
Four Square Media




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Wednesday, February 02, 2011 5:31 PM
To: Rosenstock, Matthew S; Shea, Peter T; Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A;
                                                                       Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa,        B6
Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes, Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Schlicher, Ronald L;
Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley, Philip J., Catalano, Elise; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; PeIton, Erin; TaskForce-1;
McHale, Judith A; Hensman, Chris D; NEA-PD-DL;                                         Adams, David S; Epping, Jerome N;
Randolph, Lawrence M (Algiers); 'Chang, Benjamin'
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Kennedy, David JR; Colton, Elizabeth 0; Newman,
Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle, Robert F; Marrano, Mark F; Galliker, Andrew S;
Turner, India R; NEA-Staff-Assistants-DL; Wells, Alice G; Farbeann, Joseph R; Speaks, John T; Boland, Patrick T; Crocker,
John W; Williams, Eric C; Aguilo, Patricia M; Whitmire, Morgan G; Perry, Mark D
Subject: RESENDING: Cairo Update 1500 February 2

Resending the last SitRep as we missed some addressees. Aimee

Clashes in Tahrir: There are reports of several small pro-Mubarak protests have moved into the square and are clashing
with protesters. Clashes between the two have begun.

Protestors remain in Tahrir square although in much smaller numbers. Activist contacts tell us we should expect a
decline in numbers today and tomorrow as they focus on preparations for the march on Friday. Those contacts suggest
they hope the situation will be "resolved," meaning the departure of Mubarak, before Friday as they are concerned
about the security of protesters and the possibility that moving out of Tahrir will initiate a clash with military
forces. Efforts to coalesce the opposition around what should happen if Mubarak departs are proving difficult and we
are seeing no concrete proposals.

Security:

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




At 11:45, RSO has received reports of pro-Mubarak protestors, estimated at 5000, gathering in Mohandiseen. On
morning route helping evacuees, RSO saw only one gas station open on Cairo's Corniche Road, some banks open with
long lines and a number of trucks delivering flour and rice to stores. RSO received call from LGF who reports he received
a letter from his Reserve Army infantry Unit that he is being called to Suez.

Evacuation:
RSO confirms that mission personnel are at the airport.

Cairo Airport:
CONS is expecting about 7 flights to Athens and Frankfurt today. Additional food and supplies are expected to be
received from Nicosia. Delta will begin running daily flights from Terminal 1, departing at 12:15pm. At 10:00AM, there
were approximately 50 Amcits waiting for evacuation. Airport site officer expects there to be many unused seats today
even given departure of Mission dependents and staff. 8 ConOffs are on site and 2 CST TDYers expected today from
Frankfurt with satellite equipment, food, and water.

Alexandria:
48 Amcits are departing from El Nousa Airport to Rome and an additional flight departing from Borg El Arab Airport.


Luxor:
60 Amcits in Luxor airport will be transported on a later flight to Athens. The group is part of a tour group which has
another group of 54 Amcits in Hurghada.



Political:
Al Jazeera and BBC report statement by Egyptian Army spokesman calling on demonstrators to go home and return to
normal life.

Pro and Anti Mubarak Protests: Anti-Mubarak protests continue in Tahrir Square despite President Mubarak's promise
not to run in the upcoming presidential elections. A staffer in Tahrir spoke to demonstrators leaving the square who
estimate that 30% of demonstrators are happy with Mubarak's speech and his plan not to seek reelection. The
remaining demonstrators continue to call for Mubarak to leave immediately and call for changing Article 88 of the
Constitution to allow for judges to supervise elections.

Pro-Mubarak Protests have been reported across Cairo this morning. In Mohandiseen neighborhood, we received
differing reports of several hundred to several thousand pro-Mubarak demonstrators gathering at 11:00 at Mustapha
Mahmoud Mosque. Hearing rumors that AmCham leadership is involved in organizing pro-Mubarak rallies, we reached
out to them. AmCham members are engaged in pro-Mubarak activities but are not/not using any Chamber resources to
take a political position. Members are acting in their individual capacity. At 11:50 pro-Mubarak demonstrators in Talaat
Harb Square (two blocks from Tahrir Square) verbally clashed with anti-government protestors. Another small pro-
Mubarak protest was reported in front of a police station in Maadi. Similar pro-Mubarak demonstrations were reported
on in front of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ramsees Square in Downtown Cairo as well as in Haram neighborhood
near the pyramids. Celebrities, including famous football players and actors, are scheduled to demonstrate on 2/3 at
10:00 in support of President Mubarak's plan for transition.

Outside Cairo: According to a contact in Suez, a well-known NDP businessman is distributing weapons to "thugs" at his
factory. Consequently, there is a growing fear that NDP thugs will launch attacks, provoking a violent response from the
MB and leading to street clashes. There is a sense that Friday will be the "turning point." Either people will go home or
much more violence will break out. In Sharm el Sheikh, the security presence is reported to be limited and some tourists
are oblivious to situation in Egypt.

Economic:
Some foreign manufacturers are shutting down operations and we have. The official news agency reported that the
Central Bank decided banks will begin operations again on Sunday.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




Food and health services reports seem to vary by location. According to USAID contacts, there is the beginning of a food
shortage. Transport of food stuffs and the availability of open shops are the key issues driving their concerns. Although
some grocery stores are open, many shops are reportedly deciding to remain closed due to the risk of looting. Those
that are open have limited food items and subsidized "baladi" bread has been difficult to acquire. Hoarding is common,
exacerbating the shortages. Some public hospitals appear open and operational. Others are not operating at full
capacity. Most pharmacies are open.

Fuel shortages driven by security issues and transportation difficulties have been reported in almost all
governorates. There is a severe shortage of butane gas (cooking gas) and prices are going up. Lower octane gasoline
(cheaper prices) is scarce. However, natural gas supply to homes does not seem to be affected.

PA:
International and Egyptian journalists told us that there is increased harassment of journalists by security on the streets
since last night. Journalists report a more tense atmosphere on the streets today and crowds of people shouting
"hysterically" at reporters. The Semiramis Hotel in Tahrir Square is reportedly not letting reporters set up shop in the
hotel.


Atmee Cutrovo
Ear.°
x.32.52



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Rosenstock, Matthew S
Sent: Tuesday, February 01, 2011 7:26 PM
To: Rosenstock. Matthew S: Cutrona, Aimee; Shea, Peter T: Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A;
                                                                       Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa,
Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; WIttes, Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L;
Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley, Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1;
McHale, Judith A; Hensman, Chris D; NEA-PD-DL;                                         Adams, David S; Epping, Jerome N;
Randolph, Lawrence M (Algiers); 'Chang, Benjamin'
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Kennedy, David JR; Colton, Elizabeth 0; Newman,
Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle, Robert F; Marrano, Mark F; Galliker, Andrew S;
Turner, India R; NEA-Staff-Assistants-DL; Wells, Alice G; Farbeann, Joseph R; Speaks, John T; Boland, Patrick T; Crocker,
John W; Williams, Eric C; Aguilo, Patricia M; Whitmire, Morgan G; Perry, Mark D
Subject: Cairo Update 1920 hrs February 1

EAC
At 1500 DCM conducted a virtual EAC via conference call with all agency heads not located on the
chancery. All staff have been informed that the Department has placed the post on Ordered Departure and
preparations are underway for the evacuation of remaining family members and non-emergency personnel.

Consular
Emergency ACS services were offered at the embassy yesterday and today. The primary service was issuing
emergency passports.

Evacuation
    Cairo:
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




   • Today (2/1): So far, 3 flights have departed with between 250-300 passengers. 40 additional passengers
     will leave tonight before the airport shuts until 10AM tomorrow. ConOffs are currently drawing up the
     final flight manifest. At the moment there are no other American passengers in the terminal, and it
     appears that all of today's passengers will have been accommodated. 13 TDY personnel (12 CONS, 1
     MGT) arrived at the airport today.
   • Tomorrow (2/2): Mission personnel are expecting around 350 official AmCits, and between 750-850
     private Americans. Flight details are dependent on CA and NEA/EX.

Alexandria:
   • Today (2/1): 132 Booz Allen and Schutz American School employees deputed. The military blocked
      the roads to the airport as of 10AM, as the protesters had already started to block the roads.
   • Tomorrow (2/2): the transportation situation to the airport tomorrow remains unknown. APP is advising
      private Americans with scheduled flights to leave for the airport as early as possible, in order to avoid
      traffic delays, or the closure of airport roads.

Luxor:
   • Yesterday and Today (2/2, 2/3): commercial flights are departing, the airport seems to be open and
       running. TDY support from Khartoum is present in Luxor and Aswan.

Political
Some estimate the demonstration in Tahrir Square may exceed one million people. There has been an
increase in sectarian rumors, including pamphlets purportedly warning of an anti-Christian agenda on
the part of the MB. Nevertheless, contacts at Tahrir say the crowd is diverse and not divided along
political or sectarian lines. Estimates are the MB comprise 10% of the crowd. There are additional
reports of large demonstrations throughout the country including Port Said (70,000), Suez (50,000),
Mansura (50,000), Minya (40,000), and Aswan (10,000). UN World Food Program staff reported that
Sohag was calm, while Asuit was chaotic and violent with a number of deaths in recent demonstrations.

PM Ahmed Shafik will make a televised address at 2030 hrs.

Opposition groups continue to meet, but remain divided on the best way to proceed. Wafd Party head
Sayed El Badawi made a public statement calling for Mubarak to step down.

The military spokesman made a televised statement warning people to abide by the law and announcing
a ban on civilians wearing military uniforms. State TV reports a number of shops selling uniforms were
burglarized and there are reports of thugs and escaped inmates roving the streets in military uniform.

Minister of Antiquities Dr. Zahi Hawass told post 70 statues in the Egyptian museum were damaged, but
could be repaired. Other stolen artifacts had been returned to a storehousein Sinai, and citizens had
prevented the vandalism of phaoronic sites in upper Egypt.

Economic Update

The Ministry of Finance announced that salaries would be paid on February 2 and would be available via
ATM as banks remain closed. Banking contacts tell us there are serious security challenges to restock
empty ATMs. Bank Misr has reportedly refilled 420 ATMs and Banque du Caire has refilled 78, however
many are in bank branch lobbies, so are inaccessible until banks reopen. Security issues will preclude
refilling ATMs in certain high-risk areas. The central bank will meet with all banks tomorrow to
coordinate re-opening banks (unclear when) in a way that avoids panic, ensuring enough cash is on
hand. Despite branch closures, "backroom" operations continue unaffected.

       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




Many businesses and factories in Cairo remain closed. The Finance Ministry has announced a LE 5 billion
fund for businesses affected by the current situation, including unemployment benefits.



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Rosenstock, Matthew S
Sent: Tuesday, February 01, 2011 3:14 PM
        •1•                                                           b; Biome, Donald A;
                                                                      Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa,
Lauren , Parrs, Wa ter; Wittes, Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L;
Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley, Philip J; Catalano, Elise; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; PeIton, Erin; TaskForce-1;
McHale, Judith A; Hensman, Chris D; NEA-PD-DL; '
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Kennedy, David JR; Colton, Elizabeth 0; Newman,
Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle, Robert F; Marrano, Mark F; Galliker, Andrew S;
Turner, India R; NEA-Staff-Assistants-DL; Wells, Alice G; Farbeann, Joseph R; Speaks, John T; Boland, Patrick T; Crocker,
John W; Williams, Eric C
Subject: Cairo Update 1510 February 1

EAC
Ambassador convened a meeting of the core EAC at noon and discussed ongoing evacuation operations and
potential for imminent decision to request ordered departure. Section and Agency heads are advising all
remaining family members and non-emergency personnel to be prepared to evacuate at short notice. The EAC
reviewed the implications for security of the growing mass of demonstrators at Tahrir. The crowd is largely
peaceful and military units at access points to the square are not impeding the gathering. The military is
performing inspections of those passing through the checkpoints. No vehicles are being allowed past the
checkpoints into the square.

Security
Rumors continue to swirl through various contacts about an Embassy plated vehicle being involved in a hit and
run accident on the Comiche. This is, to our knowledge, untrue. It is possible that one of the vehicles stolen
from the Motor Pool was involved in a hit and run accident. We have been informed that on the night of the
28th, when the vehicles were originally stolen from one of the mission's motor pool lots, one of the vans ran
over and killed several police officers. Additionally, there have been several credible reports of the vehicles
being used in shooting incidents around Cairo. In one other event, it is possible that a caller informing the RSO
of having found one of the vehicles was actually attempting to lure personnel out of the mission.

At approximately 1445, the Marine FAST reported that they observed a two man camera crew, located on an
upper story of the Semi Ramis Hotel, apparently filming the Embassy Compound. The two men were located
on an upper floor balcony on the east side of the hotel. There was also a camera mounted on a tripod and
connected to a laptop computer immediately beside the camera. The Marines observed the camera through their
binoculars and the camera was pointed directly at the Embassy compound. The RSO is attempting to acquire
more information about the film crew.

Consular
Cairo:
   • Yesterday: 9 planes, over 1200 passengers departed Cairo international, including 400 mission
       members.
   • Today:

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




           o First plane is full, loading luggage, 177 pax to Istanbul. All of the people who did not get on last
             night were given priority.
           o There are 6 confirmed flights today (160-170 pax), with the possibility of 2 more. Flights for the
             rest of the week are not yet known.
           o There is space for all mission personnel on the confirmed flights.
           o AUC students left, except for one. 9 AFS high school students are priority for second flights.
             USAID contractors from the conference departed.
           o We are authorized space for British, Australian, and Canadian TCNs among others; some
             Canadians boarded today.
           o ACS was open for emergency operations, primarily for passports. People with passports locked
             in Cons for NIV/IV processing were also able to recover their passports.

Alexandria:
   • Yesterday: Middlebury, EFSA, and flagship students all departed yesterday. Rowan drilling employees
      evacuated yesterday.
   • Today:
          o 174 Booze Allen with 14 American School teachers departing today; their pax are already at the
             airport.
          o Military is blocking the roads to the airport, as the protesters had already started to block the
             roads.

Luxor:
   • Commercial flights are departing, the airport seems to be open and running.
   • There are reports of bribery on the part of Egyptian officials: AmCits are reportedly being asked pay a
       bribe in order to enter the terminal. This has not been confirmed by our contacts on the ground.

Political
People are streaming into Tahrir Square in huge numbers from all over Cairo. One activist contact told us he
believed that there were one million in Tahrir noting that there was a solid mass of people up to the bridges out
of the square. Contacts from Sharkiya to Arish tell us they are trying to come as well, but road closures are
preventing many. TV reports protesters being searched by military, and in some instances civilians, to avoid
weapons being brought into Tahrir Square. One contact expressed concern that the returning security services
would infiltrate the crown with plainclothed police that sought to make trouble. Army helicopters are making
regular passes over the crowds. Some Cairo neighborhoods have organized a system to allow people to
participate in the protest downtown while others stay back to protect people's homes. Some contacts believe
the crowd will march on the Presidential palace in Heliopolis (approximately a two hour walcl), saying the
military's statement last night gave them a "green light." Many opposition contacts say they prefer to keep the
demonstration in Tahrir Square, but it is unclear what will happen given the absence of clear leaders among the
demonstrators. National train service has been canceled since midday yesterday and roads from Suez, Arish,
and Sharkiya to Cairo are reportedly blocked to prevent people from joining the demonstration. There is a
rumor that planes or helicopters over Tahrir Aquare have dropped papers calling for people to "preserve
security."

State TV is calling on people not to participate in today's demonstrations, saying they should not listen to
incitement from pan-Arab TV channels. Former MB Supreme Guide Mehdi Akef in a midday interview on Al
Arabiya today said the Muslim Brotherhood goal for today is to "remove the ruler." While this is the position
of most opposition groups, including Baradei, he added that the MB would not cooperate with Mubarak or
anyone who had cooperated with Mubarak. He said the constitution would "fill the gap" when Mubarak steps
down, calling for the head of the constitutional court to play that role (he called Speaker of Parliament Fathi
Sorour too controversial). He claimed the MB does not seek any senior leadership positions in the new


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




government. Another Muslim Brother official appeared on al-Hayat TV last night saying Tuesday would be
"the big jihad."

The head of the Wafd party will reportedly deliver a speech shortly, and Democratic Front Party head Osama al
Ghazali Harb rejected the call for dialogue with the government, saying dialogue cannot occur until Mubarak
leaves.

Outside of Cairo large demonstrations are occurring throughout Egypt including in Aswan, Minya, Suez,
Mahala, Mansura, Alexandria, Assiut, and Ismailiya. In Alexandria there are reports of 75,000 protestors at the
Qaed Ibrahim Mosque, with thousands more marching towards the mosque. Contacts report no military
presence near the mosque or the train station in Alexandria. Reuters reports 100,000 protestors in Mansura, and
contacts report 20,000 people in the main square of el-Arish. Sinai contacts tell us they were prevented from
coming to Cairo, and that this is the largest demonstration so far in North Sinai. In Arish police have
disappeared and local people are protecting their neighborhoods, while looting occurs downtown. The police
station was reportedly attacked and weapons were stolen. Roads are closed off to Central Sinai. Construction
equipment for a USAID funded desalination plants appears to be undamaged so far.

Arab League SYG Amr Moussa made a statement calling for democratic transition, saying it would be
impossible to return to the pre-January 25 situation. He expressed support for dialogue and urged that the
transition of power take place in a prestigious way that reflects well on the protesters.

A handful of pro-Mubarak demonstrations have begun in Giza and near the State TV offices downtown, with
demonstrators numbering in the hundreds.

Police have returned to streets in many places, but have been prevented from doing so in areas that experienced
serious violence. For instance, we hear police re-deployed in Ismailiya and Suez but were pulled back after
threats from protestors. In Sharkiya police redeployed without any problems. The MOI has announced on state
TV the arrest of 4,054 thugs, looters, and escaped inmates.

Economic/Food Security
Price for foods are generally up 20% from last week. Supermarkets and grocery stores appear to be undertaking
some self-imposed rationing, so that they can share available supplies until their stocks are replenished.

The Ministry of Social Solidarity (MSS) received special permits to operate their delivery trucks during curfew
and the bakeries producing balady bread in Cairo, at least, are operating. Our FAS LES report that in rural
areas and smaller towns, it does not appear that flour deliveries are being made. Some of the balady bread flour
supply may be "leaking" into the private sector as evidenced by the poor quality of bread coming from private
sector bakeries. GASC Chairman Noumani Noumani told us today that GASC has 150 days supply of wheat
and that most flour mills are operating normally. The MSS trucks are moving some flour, but cannot handle all
the demand and, of course, little or no flour is moving to private sector flour users, which accounts for 1/3 of
Egypt's wheat demand. New Minister of Trade and Industry Dr. Samiha Fawzy will take the issues concerning
food distribution to the Prime Minister (diesel supply, curfew movement permits for delivery trucks). The GOE
has setup a 24 hour a day Task Force to deal with food supply logistic issues with military, government and
private sector participation

One of the key issues is that people do not have money. For the poor, this is the end of the month and they were
expecting to cash their pay check. For those with funds in the bank, ATMs have not been restocked and banks
are closed. Banks will remain closed tomorrow. Some ATM's in Zamalek were reportedly restocked with
cash.

The ports are operating with customs clearance on a manual basis, but without diesel to run discharge
equipment, this will continue to be a bottleneck. Our Plant Quarantine contacts say that they are not yet back at
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




work to clear shipments. The military has ordered the opening of Exxon/Mobil's fuel depot in Port Suez and is
also trying to get open depots in Cairo and Alexandria. At least one government-owned depot is also
open. This is a key to making diesel fuel available to the trucks owned by the food processing companies as
well as to private sector truckers, who carry the burden of moving food around the country.

The Suez Canal Authority has reportedly told journalists that operations at the canal are unaffected by the
ongoing political standoff. Press quote Ahmed al-Manakhi, a member of the Suez Canal Authority's board of
directors, as saying, "Traffic has been running normally, with 45 to 50 ships passing through the canal per day."

Al Jazeera reports that Egypt Air has announced it is canceling all flights between 3pm and 8am to abide by the
curfew.

Coca-Cola reports (unofficially) that they have all their expats out of the country and have shut down operations
(no production or distribution). They're monitoring from Ops center in Turkey. They are making cash and water
(if needed) available to their 200+ local employees.




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Tuesday, February 01, 2011 1:24 AM
To: Cutrona, Aimee; Shea, Peter T; Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A;
                                                                      Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa,         B6
Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes, Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L;
Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley, Philip 3; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1;
McHale, Judith A; Hensman, Chris D; NEA-PD-DL;
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; terns, uavia ti; Kenneay, uavid JR; Colton, Elizabeth 0;
Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle, Robert F;
Marrano, Mark F; Galliker, Andrew S; Turner, India R; NEA-Staff-Assistants-DL
Subject: Cairo Update 0100 February lAllen, Katherine E

Evacuation: All family members wishing to leave have been evacuated.

Security: At 0045 local guard force reported that 3 to 5 Central Security police reported for duty at the Embassy
entrance closest to the Ambassador's residence. They arrived in uniform and were armed.

Political:
Soliman Speaks: In his first televised speech, and the first effort by the GOE to address protester demands, VP Omar
Soliman said Mubarak had assigned him to engage in dialogue with political parties to discuss constitutional and
legislative reform. He committed to implement decisions made by the court of cassation regarding parliamentary
elections, and said new elections in those areas where claims had been submitted. Soliman said Mubarak also asked for
a government statement to be issued in the coming days outlining new policies to implement reforms (mostly economic
although he did note anti-corruption efforts) and committed that this would happen within a specific timeframe. One
young activist told us that the viewed this first statement as another effort by the regime to delay the inevitable and
said anything short of an end to the current regime and the creation of a transitional government with new elections
would not be accepted. An senior opposition party leader agreed on both points noting that "Mubarak is playing with
time" and that the protestors would accept nothing less than his ouster. He went on to say he understood Soliman
would reach out only to "some legal parties" including the Wafd (which he reported as having asked for the meeting)



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




and Tagammu. He expected this would further damage the credibility of both parties and said other parties and activist
groups would refuse to meet, believing it ran counter to the popular mandate.

Army Promises Not to Fire on Protesters: The army spokesman issued another statement this evening, moving beyond
previous messages requesting citizens defend their property and this time promising to guarantee freedom of
expression for all peaceful protestors. Striking a new tone, the military called itself "your armed forces," saying it was on
the streets to protect people and would not fire on protestors, while warning people not to engage in looting or
"terrorizing citizens." A key human rights contact stressed the "tremendous importance" of the statement that the
army will not use violence against demonstrators.

Protestors remain in the square tonight. Estimates from our contacts were that tens of thousands were there during
the day to day, believing it to be the largest turnout yet. Demonstrations tomorrow will mit be a march as reported by
the media, but an in-place demo at Tahrir and surrounding. He thinks numbers will "dwarf" even recent days. He
believed that Mubarak was counting on being able to wait out the protestors and said the only way to bring an end to
Mubarak was to "stick through to the end." Another contact in the square reported that he saw the same "mixed
crowd" and did not report a large or growing MB presence. Crowds are still very animated, but one contact told us
there is "some, growing frustration among protesters" with stubbornness of government and lack of any genuine
concessions.

PA: News organizations (large and small) continue to arrive here in Cairo as well as in Alexandria and around Egypt.



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Monday, January 31, 2011 7:41 PM
To: Shea, Peter T; Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A;
                                    Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip J; Catalano, Ella: Schreoel. Dawn M: Sullivan. Jacob J; Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1; McHale, Judith A; Hensman,
Chris D; NEA-PD-DL;
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Kennedy, David JR; Colton, Elizabeth 0;
Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore 3; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle, Robert F;
Marrano, Mark F; Galliker, Andrew S; Turner, India R; NEA-Staff-Assistants-DL
Subject: Cairo Update 1930 January 31

There is rising concern in Cairo as food supplies dwindle and money is inaccessible. Our contacts in Cairo,
Alexandria, and Tanta report the police have not returned to their posts in most areas and the military is
deployed to the main streets only. People feel safe during day but at night rely on armed "neighborhood
watch" committees, some of which employ speakers atop mosque minarets to organize defenses. Grocery
stores are open, but many are short on stock, with suppliers unable or unwilling to bring in replacement
stock. Pharmacies are closed in some Cairo neighborhoods and reportedly running out of basic medicines in a
few others. Many gas stations are closed and there are long lines at those that are open and reports of
rationing. Bread is in short supply in many areas with long lines at state run bread stores. People are running
short of cash with banks closed and many ATMs down. Some report a 30-100% increase in the price of food at
smaller markets.

Evacuation Update: Staff report delays in evacuating personnel at the airport. Although we have
capacity/number of seats to get everyone out tonight, we are facing problems getting people through



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




.Egyptian customs who have only two people reviewing/stamping passports. We have asked for additional
 resources.

Security: RSO and his deputy are at the airport assisting in evacuation efforts. The three Mobile Security
Deployment teams arrived today as did three of the four TDY A/RSO's. The fourth will arrive tomorrow.

Political:
Protest Update: Contacts who have been in Tahrir Square multiple days confirm that today's crowd is the
largest since the start. The military presence remains significant, however members of the crowd appear to
be organizing among themselves to provide food and water and have even reportedly organized their own
check points going into the square. One contact told us they are checking IDs and for weapons, in part to keep
police out. One opposition contact estimated that at 1630 local time that 30,000 had gathered in Tahrir.

We continue to hear from those in the square that participants are "average Egyptians." Contacts tell us of
modestly increasing anti-US sentiment in the demonstrations, with many blaming each new move by the GOE
on perceived U.S. machinations. April 6 has called for 1 million to demonstrate on Tuesday around the
country and several contacts tell us they think many new protestors will heed the call. A general strike is also
planned, but impact may be muted since many are not going to work due to shrinking curfews and nighttime
neighborhood watch duty.

New Cabinet a disappointment: An MFA contact told us he believes Mubarak moves are totally inadequate in
the eyes of the protesters. Several opposition contacts complained about members of the new cabinet
announced today. One senior judicial contact said that this was Mubarak's last card and "he played it
badly." Of the 25 members of the cabinet announced 16 ministers held onto their positions. Many of the
Ministers that were removed were prominent businessmen (Minister of Trade Rachid, Minister of Transport
Abaza). Many have complained about the GOE's ties to big business. Those that remain appear to be
Mubarak's closest allies (Minister of Defense Tantawi, now also a Deputy PM (a new position), most
prominent among them). Of note is the continued presence of Ministers dealing with issues of concern to
protestors including Minister for Parliamentary Affairs Moufid Shehab, Minister of Justice Mamdouh Marei,
Minister of Information Anas Al Feqi, Minister of Social Solidarity, Ali Meselhi and Minister of Manpower
Aisha Abdel Hadi.

•Rafah Closed: A Palestinian diplomat told us the Rafah crossing is closed due to the unstable security situation
 in Sinai. He believed GOE security forces remained at their posts at the crossing and complained that
 numerous Gazans were stranded in Egypt where they had sought medical treatment. We have yet to receive
 confirmation of this report from either the GOI or GOE.

Role of MB: We have received mixed reporting on the role of the MB in these protests. One contact said that
efforts to "politicize" the crowd in Tahrir are being rejected and that even attempts to raise signs endorsing El
Baradei have led to scuffles. Others note the MBs have played an increased role in getting people to Tahrir,
speculating they feel freer to participate after playing a role in organizing neighborhood committees. Another
contact, and former MB, told us the opposite. The MB continues to play a secondary role, believing their open
participation too sensitive. A third contact, an opposition leader, reported that MB are "taking advantage" of
the gathering to recruit new members among what he called a politically naïve group. He said that he was
advocating within his party to do the same.

Opposition Coalition Fracturing: Opposition contact we reached out to today have reported that efforts to
come together around El Baradei may be falling apart. They report clashes of egos as well as some ideological
differences, including concerns expressed by one Wafd contact about his willingness to work with the
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




MB. While another contact reports that they have already begun to try to reach out to some mid-level
military officers in an effort to meet with military leaders, there are no ongoing discussions. One oppositionist
reported that some will seek to meet with prominent Egyptian scientist Ahmed Zuwail when he arrives in
Cairo tomorrow in order to see if he might be able to broker talks with VP Omar Suleiman or PM Ahmed
Shafik.


This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Shea, Peter T
Sent: Monday, January 31, 2011 2:14 PM
To: Shea, Peter T; Cutrona, Aimee; Tueller, Matthew H: Wailes. Ja7b; Biome, Donald A;
                                                                      Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa,
Lauren 5; Parrs, Walter; Wittes, Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Schlicher, Ronald L;
Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley, Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; PeIton, Erin; TaskForce-1;
McHale, Judith A; Hensman, Chris D; NEA-PD-DL;
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Kennedy, David JR; Colton, Elizabeth 0;
Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore J,. Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle, Robert F;
Marrano, Mark F; Galliker, Andrew S; Turner, India R; NEA-Staff-Assistants-DL
Subject: Cairo Update 1410 January 31

The Ambassador faxed a letter to new Vice President Omar Suleiman detailing the problems we are experiencing due to
the Internet shutdown and asking if he could assist in allowing bulk SMS messages to get through, which would help the
Embassy reach out to American citizens in Egypt.

The Ambassador continues trying to reach out to new Prime Minister designate Ahmed Shafik.

Police have returned to their normal duties in central Cairo, making an immediate improvement in traffic. One
policeman said that the police should be returning everywhere except to Tahrir Square.

Management:

Non-official AmCits are being de-planed from the milair flight to Bahrain and being put on mil air to Cyprus. Two flights
are filled, half-way through the third.

Six buses of official AmCits left ESSA complex for the airport at 1255. Most will go on the mil air plane bound for
Bahrain.

Consular:

Four Consular officials are at airport now, as well as a TDYer and Embassy's CBP attaché (who is assisting with consular
work). Three more Consular officials en-route to airport.

Security:

Increased Egyptian military presence overnight with a more visible number of armor, to include strategically placed M-1
Abrams tanks, some near the Embassy. Army has also installed numerous concrete barriers to funnel traffic and has
reinforced sandbagged fighting positions.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




As Embassy transported a large number of family members to Cairo airport for authorized departure, RSO working
closely with other sections, agencies and airport security officials has established orderly processing of evacuees (EFMs
as well as AmCits), greatly enhancing screening and security.

RSO reports efficient screening and security procedures in place by Egyptian authorities at the airport

A U.S. Marine Corps Fleet Antiterrorism Support Team (FAST) arrived safely at post and are in the process of establishing
operations within the perimeter of the Chancery compound

Likewise, a team of Diplomatic Security's Mobile Security Deployments (MSD) Special Agents along with additional
ARSOs have arrived in country

Curfew starts today at 3:00PM local.

Political:

Mubarak has started announcing ministers. Mahmoud Wagdy was tapped new Interior Minister. He is former head
of prisons, a former head of investigations at MOI, and reportedly has a reputation for fighting corruption. International
press note that he was not close with former MOI Al-Adly.

We are expecting a big announcement around 1430 local time regarding other ministerial appointments.

Demonstrations continue in Tahrir Square and other locations. Numbers appear similar to yesterday so far. MB called
a demo in Shubra neighborhood that is reportedly now heading toward Tahrir. Other large groups of demonstrators are
reportedly converging on downtown from Mohandeseen.

At least parts of the up-scale neighborhood of Heliopolis have reportedly lost water. There are rumors that
government will.soon cut water and power in other areas; a prominent international NGO told us they finally decided to
evacuate staff for this reason.

Older, more experienced activists say that Suleiman, "if he steps up," he could win support from the "everyman" who
wants to restore security and economic activity. Younger activists, who believe they have the street's support, will have
none of it, demanding that all current regime depart.

An HR activist with close ties to the opposition told us today that lack of Internet is no longer impacting gathering
crowds, but worry that it will make it difficult to "calm students activists" if negotiations of government transition do not
meet street expectations.

Egyptian pro-government newspapers today focused on army and President Mubarak's activities. They emphasize
national unity and praise people for uniting to provide for their own security. Independent newspapers focused on
demos, as well as "terror" in the neighborhoods, reporting that 40,000 prisoners have escaped nation-wide.




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Shea, Peter T
Sent: Monday, January 31, 2011 9:58 AM
To: Cutrona, Aimee; Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A;

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




                                     Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; PeIton, Erin; TaskForce-1; McHale, Judith A; Hensman,
Chris D; NEA-PD-DL;                                       Shea, Peter T
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Kennedy, David JR; Colton, Elizabeth 0;
Rosenstock, Matthew 5; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle, Robert F;
Marrano, Mark F
Subject: Cairo Update 0955 January 31

Management:

We have confirmed clearances for all landings/take-offs for today's flights. E have requested Airline info for tomorrow's
flights.

Pick-ups began this morning at 8:00AM local for embassy family members being evacuated.

MGMT team stayed overnight at Cairo Int'l Airport, Terminal 4. Hundreds of Amcits already there.

Consular:

CONS team en-route to airport. Continuous reports that Amcits are heading to airport.

Exploring the possibility of a flight from Khartoum to Luxor, possibly in next few hours.

Security:

Overnight there were at least two shooting incidents by the "11/11" Embassy residential building in Maadi. During one
of the incidents a mission member saw a bound and gagged person in the back of the vehicle involved. We are
monitoring the situation closely with MOD contacts.

Two embassy armored vehicles that were stolen on Friday night were involved in shooting incidents the night of January
30-31 in Cairo neighborhoods of Maadi and Giza.

Political:

Cairo is relatively calm this morning, as has become the pattern. A few hundred stayed in Tahrir overnight. We expect
demonstrations in Tahrir Square and elsewhere to continue today. Protesters continue to say they'll stay out in streets
until Mubarak leaves office.

Demonstrators have spontaneously called for a general strike today or possibly tomorrow. Major opposition groups
have not yet endorsed. With curfew, lack of internet, and security situation in neighborhoods many seem to be staying
home anyway, though a general strike could further disrupt transportation, public services, etc. and increase the
number of demonstrators.

We will carefully track efforts by the Parallel Parliament negotiation committee to approach the government today.

Speaker of Parliament announced probe into the Nov/Dec 2010 Parliamentary elections.




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




From: Shea, Peter T
Sent: Monday, January 31, 2011 12:55 AM
To: Shea. Peter T; Cutrona. Aimee. Tueller Matthew H. WallPc larob; Biome, Donald A;
                                                                      Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa,
Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes, Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L;
Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley, Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; PeIton, Erin; TaskForce-1;
McHale, Judith A; Hensman, Chris D; NEA-PD-DL;
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Kennedy, David JR; Colton, Elizabeth 0;
Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle, Robert F;
Marrano, Mark F
Subject: Cairo Update 0055 January 31

Management:

Nothing additional

Consular:

CONS/RSO/CBP/GSO were at airport today making preliminary arrangements for evacuation. CONS staff will be at
airport starting tomorrow AM to help private Americans. If Internet access is reestablished, we expect many more
Americans will seek to enroll for evacuation.

TDY ConOffs scheduled to begin to arrive January 1. Embassy Amaan has also offered remote assistance.

Security:

Military protection of USG facilities remains steadfast. Police now supplementing military in Maadi residential
area. Sporadic automatic weapons fire continues. "Neighborhood watch" groups present and now coordinating more
with military units.

Military announcing ever longer curfews. On January 31 the curfew will begin at 3:00PM local and I;ast until 8:00AM the
next day.

No mission casualties. All mission personnel accounted for.

Political:

Mubarak issued an "assignment letter" to new PM Shafik. The eight tasks include "re-arranging priorities," defending
stability and returning military to their barracks, controlling inflation and prices, countering corruption, and
reestablishing confidence in the economy.

A party leader involved in the process explained to us this evening that the Parallel Parliament today created a
negotiating committee to approach the regime tomorrow about negotiating a transitional government. Members of
the committee include Mohamed El Baradei, Osama Al Ghazali Harb, Ayman Nour, Abdel Gileel Mustafa (NAC Chair),
Hamdeen Sabai, Mohamed Beltagi (MB member of NAC), George Is'haq, and Judge Khodeiri. The MB Supreme Guide
addressed the Parallel Parliament briefly before they formed the committee.

A member of the committee told us that "tomorrow we win or we don't." He said that an interim government must
include all elements, and could include the military, so long as Mubarak goes. Another contact involved in the
committee formation said that a technocrat transitional government may be best, and that this could include the
military though civilians must outnumber them 2-1 and the transition must have a clear end. This contact voiced
concern that the people in the street are "more advanced," that is less willing to allow any element of the existing
regime to remain in the transition.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




More reaction to S remarks: An opposition party leader said that S sent "the right message" this morning.



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Shea, Peter T
Sent: Sunday, January 30, 2011 9:55 PM
To: Cutrona, Aimee; Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A;
                                     Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip J; Catalano, Elise: Schrepel. Dawn 14: Sullivan. llcob J; Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1; McHale, Judith A; Hensman,
Chris D; NEA-PD-DL;
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Kennedy, David JR; Colton, Elizabeth 0;
Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore 3; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle, Robert F;
Marrano, Mark F
Subject: Cairo Update 2150 January 30

Ambassador Scobey chaired a virtual EAC via conference call this evening. All sections and agencies were represented
and briefed by the Ambassador, RSO, MGT Counselor, and ECPO Counselor on ongoing work by the Mission to address
all aspects of the situation. EAC Members offered a number of helpful suggestions that will be pursued. Section and
Agency heads will brief their employees and dependents on the material covered in the EAC with particular attention to
ensuring that all Mission members understand fully the gravity of the security threats that prompted the Department's
approval of Authorized Departure.

Management:

Management at Semiramis Hotel near Embassy and Tahrir Square is very concerned about a shortage of supplies. They
are offering to help their guests make reservations at their sister hotel in City Stars. They are not closing however.

Consular:

Nothing additional

Security:

Nothing additional

Political:

We have seen a positive reaction to today's S statement. One political opposition leader told us that S remarks this
morning were "received very well" and "more neutral." An human rights activist told us that Egyptians appreciate
"improved" U.S. statements. Now, he told us, there is a "struggle between the Egyptian military and what the United
States wants."

Demonstrations in Tahrir Square tonight appear to be the largest yet this week. Media estimates range from 50,000-
100,000. The lower end of that range looks correct to us.

At approximately 1900 local time El Baradei went to Tahrir Square. He spoke immediately after Mohamed Beltagi, one
of a handful of MB members of the NAC. Baradei said that people have one key demand: "the regime to step down and
start a new era" and that "what we have begun cannot be reversed." Multiple LES contacts at Tahrir said Baradei drew


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




  the crowd's attention. However, an LES contact at the square said some groups of demonstrators later started chanting
  against Baradei.

  Egyptian State TV has not covered El Baradei's speech. They focused instead on Mubarak's visit to the "situation room"
  and calls to Mubarak by Pope Shenouda and Sheikh AI-Azhar.

  At Tahrir Square Baradei's associates distributed an "instructions manifesto" on: 1) peaceful expression, 2) necessity of
  protecting property, public and private, 3) importance of regular people delivering public services even when
  government fails, 4) condemnation of "thuggery," 5) demand a National Reconciliation Gov't including all political
  trends. Fourteen groups signed the manifesto, including: El Baradei Campaign, Nat'l Front for Change, MBs, Wafd,
  Ghad, Gabha, Karama, Kifaya, April 6, March 9, Copt Youth Org, etc.

  On various media Baradei said he has a "popular and political authorization" to negotiate for forming the national
  unity government. Our contacts confirm this. On CNN he added that he "hopes to be in contact soon with the army
  and we need to work together. The Army is a part of Egypt." An opposition activist told us that Baradie's remarks were'
  "very smart" and well timed because they show there is another choice, though others expressed concern to us that he
  "arrived after the success."

  Muslim Brotherhood issued further statements in support of demonstrations and transition to a unity
  government. "Al Arabiya" has said that the Muslim Brotherhood has authorized El Baradei to negotiate in their
  name. International media reported that MBs announced support for a transitional government led by El Baradei.

  According to Ikhwan Web this afternoon, Dr. Mahmoud Ezzat the Deputy MB Supreme Guide said that the MB requests
  that the Egyptian people protect public and private possessions and protect themselves from the militias that conduct
  organized theft. Ezzat said the MBs formed popular committees along with the remaining national forces and citizens to
  protect their private and public properties and return of life to normal.

  There are indications this afternoon that police may be returning, though away from demonstrators at Tahrir
  Square. Egyptian TV is saying "police are back to work" and LES have seen some police cars and repairs to police
  stations. An AUC Professor with security contacts confirmed that police will be back tomorrow but not dealing with
  demonstrators.

' Former Defense Minister and Information Minister made public appearances today on Egyptian State TV in support of
   the troops.

  The ongoing large demonstration in Alexandria has reportedly seen more women, more English signs, more self-
  identified MBs than in prior nights.




  This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




  From: Shea, Peter T
  Sent: Sunday, January 30, 2011 5:47 PM
  To: Cutrona, Aimee; Tueller. Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A;
                                      Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
  Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
  Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schreoel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; PeIton, Erin; TaskForce-1; McHale, Judith A; Hensman,
  Chris D; NEA-PD-DL;
  Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Kennedy, David JR; Colton, Elizabeth 0;
  Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle, Robert F;
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015



Marrano, Mark F
Subject: Cairo Update 1730 January 30



Ambassador spoke with Major General Al-Assar requesting additional security for residential areas, authorization for
entry of the FAST team, and protection for the Al-Adly street synagogue. Ambassador also contacted Antiquities
Minister Zahi Hawass about the Al-Adly street synagogue. Hawass said he would try to help. He noted that in addition
to damage at the National Museum, there had been vandalism of some of the tomb paintings at Saqqara.

Management:

Finalizing lists of Embassy members wishing to depart on Authorized Departure.

Making final preparations for flights arriving tomorrow for departing embassy members.

Italian Embassy informed us that Italian Mission dependents were evacuated yesterday.

Consular:

Consular transmitted the latest travel warning. This has resulted in a flood of calls from anxious Amcits desperate to get
out of the country. We are trying to utilize Task Force 2 as much as possible to handle the influx of calls.

Security:

We have heard that police are being called back to their posts or to nearest post in cases where police stations have
been damaged.

Small-scale demonstrations have commenced in the area of Tahrir Square.

We have been advised that the Military will expand deployments from holding strong points to patrolling.

Political:

Opposition has "not yet reached consensus" according to one contact who was present at a gathering of opposition
groups at mid-day. Meetings will continue. He said that the majority are behind a transitional government led by Al-
Baradei, while some could accept a transitional government led by Suleiman. Contact said that his associates would not
find the latter acceptable. Another opposition contact at the same meeting said it "didn't get too far." He did say that
the group agreed to send a delegation to new VP or PM, but didn't decide on composition of the delegation. They will
reportedly demand a unity government. The contact was pessimistic about Mubarak leaving, saying the President could
probably survive in power if he has the Army's backing. He said that the most recent US statements are better — "more
neutral."

Online independent Egyptian news source reports calls for "one million person demonstration" starting 1600 today in
Tahrir, as well as a general strike on Tuesday. Statement was unsigned, but praised popular protection groups that
have been working to stop looters. Same source also said that judges joined demos today in Tahrir. Various media and
twitter reports that military is searching people entering Tahrir Square and reportedly detaining any members of police
or security forces found trying to enter the area. There are also unconfirmed reports that 500k plan to spent tonight at
Alexandria University.

Shortly before 1300 local time Ministry of Information has issued an order to close Al Jazeera and confiscate its offices
and equipment. We are not seeing Al Jazeera Arabic on satellite TV, but do get Al Jazeera English.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




According to international media Egyptian military has taken control of the Ministry of Interior Headquarters building
close to Tahrir Square. Al Jazeera is reporting — but otherwise unconfirmed that former MOI Al-Adly and Ahmed Ezz
have been arrested by the military and will be tried. In an interview with Al Arabiya, Maguid Sherbeeny said he is the
replacement for Ahmed Ezz at the NDP.

Staten/ announced two new governors: North Sinai — Abdel Wahab Mabrouk --and "New Valley" -- Gamal Ahmed
lmbabi Salman (more details at next update).

April 6 demands remain maximalist. Suleiman is not suitable and police must be brought to justice, though would be
welcome back if part of a democratic transition. Prominent AUC professor with political connections said that Suleiman
would be okay if "purely transitional." He also though Suleiman could win a free and fare election. In the near-term, he
said every day Mubarak stays things will get worse on the streets in terms of law and order. A street activist with the
Egyptian Democratic Academy said that Suleiman is a good first step, but not the end result. Also said young activists
"getting tired."

Egyptian State 1V is continuously showing one peaceful image of downtown. There are contradictory messages — 1)
"life is back to normal," you can leave your houses, 2) there are still reasons to be concerned about chaos and
looting (lots of interviews of women crying about "out of control" areas — highlighting looting in 6 October, sacking of
Carrefour shopping mall, etc.), 3) military is the hero and doing its utmost to maintain order.

Al Mehwar TV — private station — reporting phone calls from people in Sinai claiming that GOE has sent tanks and troops
into Sinai. Speakers speculate that these increases fall outside of Camp David.


Two LES reported that groups of vigilantes in their neighborhoods last night caught looters who had police weapons and
police IDs on them.

Unconfirmed reports from LES that that young men are being called up into Army Reserve.

Armed forces announcing death toll at 150.

Central Bank announced that banks will remain closed Monday.

Late afternoon mil fighter aircraft and helicopters "buzzed" Tahrir Square. Crowd defiantly yelled back.

PA:

PA is fielding non-stop calls from media regarding authorized departure.

Both international and Egyptian media news teams are now setting up more robust operations in several large hotels in
order to have access to communications systems/servers not affected by the internet blackout.

Alexandria:

Both Al Nozha Airport (downtown) and Borg El Arab Airport (45 mins outside Alex) are open; however, unable to
confirm the frequency of incoming and outgoing flights. At least two student groups have chartered flights from
Alexandria and are currently at the airport awaiting them. Trains are operating with high usage rate. Today's regularly
scheduled 12:00 train stopped at each train station and was subject to some military checkpoints which are not
considered routine. Military were present at each train station.

Schools and Universities remain closed. Businesses not uniformly closed. Mostly smaller neighborhood businesses
which remain open. Some government operated stores are showing increase in food prices. Bead shops have greater
demand than supply; however, remain orderly.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




Security: Greater military presence today then yesterday. Four Season's Hotel being surrounded by two tanks/people
movers. Reports from APP local staff of looting and formation of vigilante groups throughout the city last night. Today,
general sense of calm; however, not "business as usual" given heavy military presence and damage from previous days'
protests. General sense also that military is the only authority, given lack of police, state security, and governor's
presence (governor has not been seen/heard from in recent days). Local security reports that Alex Desert Road and
Agriculture Road are not safe for travel. Unconfirmed reports of car jackings and bandits along these roads.




Peter Shea
ECPO
X2367




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.



      -- --
From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Sunday, January 30, 2011 10:46 AM
To: Cutrona, Aimee: Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A;
                                   Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1; McHale, Judith A; Hensman,
Chris D; NEA-PD-DL;
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,
Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore 3; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle,
Robert F
Subject: Cairo Update 1030 January 30

Protesters are expected to return to Tahrir again today. The military has now blocked key roads to downtown and is
turning around cars seeking to come downtown. Protesters interviewed by Al Jazeera in Cairo report they will continue
to protest until Mubarak leaves office. Internet access remains blocked. Egypt TV reports that 1,400 prisoners escaped
from a prison in Fayoum and 8,000 in Wadi Natrun and are on their way to nearby cities of Cairo and Alexandria as well
as towns in the Delta province of Beheira. They report that prisoners overpowered prison guards and are now armed.

Management:
We are currently compiling lists for post's authorized departure. No other updates since conference call.

Consular:
No updates

Security:
Consular support to the airport will depart at 10:35am.

Political:
No senior government officials have made any announcements about the new government or the future of the
country. An opposition contact told us that a broad coalition of opposition leaders would be meeting at approx 1100
local time to discuss the way forward. He said he would advocate for a transitional government under the leadership of
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015



the current VP and PM, believing military men were needed in order to regain control over security in the country. A
military spokesman issued two statements (one in the name of now former MOD Tantawi) calling on Egyptians to
protect their homes, noting the military is going after looters and affirming some have been arrested by military
forces. There continue to be rumors about the whereabouts of members of the former government. A contact
reported that Former Finance Minister Yousef Boutros Ghali is staying at a friend's house. Not clear if he is trapped
there or avoiding returning to his home. We had previously received word from another contact that Boutros-Ghali had
fled the country. Prominent Coptic businessman Naguib Sawiris called into an Egyptian state TV talk show this morning
to confirm that he did not leave the country as alleged on Al Jazeera.

The theme of the official news here is that there is an outside agenda to promote chaos in Egypt. Egypt TV hosts told
viewers that the satellite networks had an agenda in Egypt. They urged viewers to get their news from official
sources. The call-in show also noted efforts by citizens to defend the country including video of young men defending
the National Museum and sweeping the streets of Tahrir square. ETV 1 is playing patriotic music videos during
commercial breaks. The same channel had another guest that told viewers that violence when defending ones home
and family is permitted in Islam.

MB Arabic Website Ikwanonline's front page banner reports its editor was attacked by an "organized gang" in Cairo,
posts the free emergency number established by the military to report problems, and reiterates an earlier call by the MB
Supreme Guide that calls on the "youth" and the "Egyptian people" to protect public and private property. January 29
MB Guide Badie issued a statement posted early afternoon on Ikhwanweb that explicitly endorsed the protests, noted
MB participation. It called for an end to the state of Emergency, dissolution of parliament, new elections, release of
political prisoners, a transitional national unity government, a national committee to investigate violence against
demonstrators; all "demands" that track with earlier statements from other opposition groups including the National
Association for Change which has some MB members. This is the first formal statement we've seen from the MB leader
both endorsing the protests and affirming MB participation.

ALwiee cutrovta
ECP0
)(3852




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Sunday, January 30, 2011 1:51 AM
To: Cutrona, Aimee; Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A;
                                    Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Fetman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; PeIton, Erin; TaskForce-1; McHale, Judith A; Hensman,
Chris D; NEA-PD-DL
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,
Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S
Subject: Cairo Update 0145 January 30

Sorry time correction.



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Sunday, January 30, 2011 1:49 AM
To: Cutrona. Aimee: Tueller. Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A;
                                   Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip 3; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob 3; PeIton, Erin; TaskForce-1; McHale, Judith A; Hensman,
Chris D; NEA-PD-DL
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,
Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore 3; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S
Subject: RE: Cairo Update 2330 January 29

This will be the last SitRep for a few hours. We'll resume in the morning Cairo time.

Staff reporting to us on events in Tahrir has now gone home. Protestors remain in Tahrir but numbers appear to be
dwindling due to the late hour and cold weather.

Consular:
Although consular staff continued to receive many calls from Amcits worried about potential violence near their homes
in various Cairo neighborhoods, thus far we have no reports of Amcits injured. Routine consular services are suspended
for Sunday January 30. Although there are some reports of chaotic conditions at Cairo Airport, we confirmed that
Amcits and other travelers departed safely on the Air France flight to Paris on Saturday afternoon. Consular staff will
attempt to visit the airport Sunday morning with RSO assistance.

Security:
The neighborhood around the Embassy is quiet. Looting is still going on around the city. The Military has taken control
of Maadi. There are reports of gunfire in Maadi, most of it appears to be coming from the Military whom we assume are
going after looters.

Political:
Mona Suef of the Hisham Mubarak Center appearing on Al Jazeera Intl reported that today there were tens of
thousands of "all types" of Egyptians in Tahrir square including families and children. She added that in clashes between
police and protestors in front of the Ministry of the Interior, the Army acted only as "bystanders." She reported that one
protestor died in those clashes. The Army, she said, was not intervening on behalf of protestors or the police. Al Ahram
analyst Di'a Rashwan told Al Jazeera viewers that the new government might survive if they took advantage of the
historic opportunity to implement reform. This includes constitutional changes and new parliamentary
elections. Rashwan added that Mubarak might even remain at the helm if the new government implemented real
changes. Press is reporting that more than a dozen Egyptian businessmen fled to the UAE.



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Saturday, January 29, 2011 11:43 PM
To: Cutrona, Aimee; Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A;
                                    Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip 3; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1; McHale, Judith A; Hensman,
Chris D; NEA-PD-DL
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,
Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore 3; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S
Subject: Cairo Update 2330 January 29


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




Protests in Tahrir Square continue but the crowd has dwindled noticeably. Media reports that the crowd continues to
chant anti-Mubarak slogans. One staff reports that he witnessed an uptick in anti-American sentiment in Tahrir, with
more chanting slogans against the U.S. After the swearing in of Vice President Suleiman was carried live on Egyptian TV
there have been no additional announcements by Mubarak or members of the new government.

Consular:
Consular staff continue to receive a high volume of calls from Amcits around the city seeking assistance in returning to
the U.S. For most of the afternoon it was a mix of calls from tourists and residents. After dark the majority of calls have
been from dual national Amcits in areas where looters are prevalent in the neighborhoods. Amcits are reporting no
police or military presence and no answer when they try to phone police stations.

Security:
Earlier this evening, the building adjacent to our 100% USG residential building, Boulas Hanna, was looted. The 10 family
members in Boulas Hanna sought refuge in the safe haven of the top most apartment. A neighborhood watch
eventually ran the looters out of the area as they began to target our building. A second apartment building, this time in
Maadi, was attacked by looters at approx 2000. The embassy maintains two of the eight residences. The looters
departed as a tank approached the building at the request of the Embassy. We have requested the assistance of the
military in securing our residences, Since approximately 2200 we have received a series of reports that military units,
supported by armored vehicles, tanks, and troop trucks, have arrived at our residential compounds in Maadi and
Zamalek. RSO now has direct contact with senior Army commander who has been responsive to requests for emergency
response at several standalone residences where occupants were under siege by looters.

Police are still absent from streets in Cairo. The stand-off between protestors and police at the MOI quieted for some
time, but media reports sporadic but very heavy gunfire from in front of the Ministry of Interior. Two APCs block the
street between Tahrir and the MOI building and several hundred protestors reportedly are milling around.

Press and staff report that some military (and 'civilian militias') were checking ID's randomly to prevent people going
into areas where they do not reside. Numerous reports that civilian militias arrested plain-clothed MOI officers, many of
whom were driving around on motorbikes and were possibly involved in looting.

Political:
Reports are circulating on twitter that Mubarak sons Gamal and Alaa Mubarak have landed in London. The tweets
include what is alleged to be the family's address in London. One contact reports to us that former PM Ahmed Nazif has
departed his home with a "large entourage." An NDP contact tells us that he is frustrated with the current chaos noting
"we" (party reformers) had been warning "them" of this scenario for a long time. He felt that the NDP itself was
moribund, but believed it could return to the political scene if "faces change." He added that the Ahmed Ezz resignation
should have come right after the failed elections. Now it was meaningless. He added, once again we told a "closed
party committee" you can't have "boys" dealing with these issues, but they did not act. The contact said he believed
that people were looking for more than what Mubarak had offered. He added that while some reform measures might
calm people down for a time, they will not be happy unless he goes. Finally, he applauded President Obama's remarks
which he viewed as endorsing the will of the Egyptian people.




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Saturday, January 29, 2011 7:53 PM
To: Cutrona, Aimee; Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A;
                                  Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015



Philip J., Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; PeIton, Erin; TaskForce-1; McHale, Judith A; Hensman,
Chris D; NEA-PD-DL
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,
Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S
Subject: Cairo Update 1930 January 29

Violence is escalating in Cairo. There is widespread looting and Embassy staff in Maadi, Mohandiseen and Giza report
gunfire. Press reported an attempt to break into the Central Bank Printing office was thwarted by the Egyptian
Army. Contacts and LES staff report that organized gangs of thugs roam the city and that they believe them to be
affiliated with the security services. Shops in most neighborhoods are closing. We have several reports that citizens are
forming committees to defend their neighborhoods. An Army general appeared on State TV asking Egyptians to defend
their homes and deal with looters "harshly." He also said the Army would fire on looters.

Protestors continue to arrive in Tahrir square and contacts tell us the atmosphere is peaceful and festive. One contact
told us the crowd is treating the military like "rock stars." Al Hurra TV showed one soldier with a bull horn telling
protestors you may protest as much as you like, but no violence. And, leave the looters to us.

As of 19:10 Egypt Air New York Flight Manager Mr. Tarek Gabr advised that the airport is open and Egypt Air flights are
operational with minor delay.

While several of our contacts see Omar Suleiman as a popular figure with broad support, they see his appointment as
Vice President as too little too late. Contacts report crowds in Tahrir booed the announcement. Many in Tahrir
continue to shout "People and Army, one hand!," but others have shifted from "No Mubarak" to "No Suleiman" or
"Civilian not Military." Staff in Tahrir report some anti-U.S. sentiment, with protestors suggesting that the new Vice
President was hand-picked by the U.S.

Opposition and activist contacts tell us the Soliman announcement, as well as the naming of former military officer and
Civil Aviation Minister Ahmed Shafik as Prime Minister, is "not enough" to satisfy protestors. Some suggest an
immediate end to the Emergency Law or an announcement of the dissolution of parliament and new elections as
needed additional steps. Others say that only Mubarak's departure would be enough to calm the crowds. One contact
told us protestors are now also chanting "Trial for Mubarak." A leader from Baradei's National Association for Change
(NAC) told us that this appointment is "is more of the same," the Mubarak regime with "new faces" and not the change
we are looking for.




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Saturday, January 29, 2011 5:28 PM
To: Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A;
                                     Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,
Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore 3; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S
Subject: Cairo Update 1700 January 29

At approximately 1715 Egyptian TV announced EGIS director Omar Suleiman as Vice President. This was following the
mid-day announcement that that the government had formally resigned and later reports in the afternoon that
President Mubarak was meeting with his new cabinet. Mubarak is expected to make an announcement "shortly."


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




People continue to flow into Tahrir square. As of 1300, crowds are again swelling in the Maadi and Tahrir Square
areas. Military units have taken up positions throughout the area, many staffed by M60 tanks and a variety of other
types of armored personnel carriers.

We have been able to resume contact with a wide range of activist contacts. All of them tell us that they still believe
protests must continue and that President Mubarak should step down. Several senior activist contacts report that they
are participating in protests. One activist contact told us that he had been shot with a rubber bullet by security outside
the Ministry of the Interior building a block behind the parliament. Protestors have been attempting to reach the MOI
all day.

At 1330 local time the military announced an expanded curfew which began at 1600 and will end one hour later at
0800. We are watching closely the military's interaction with protestors. Al Jazeera has issued a series reports that
appear contradictory, and suggest a disagreement between the Military and the presidency on how to deal with
protestors. NDP SYG Safwat Sherif announced that party organizational secretary Ahmed Ezz, charged with organizing
recent elections, had submitted his resignation. He did not elaborate on the reasons behind the resignation. An NDP
contact told us he believes the police will return to the street "shortly."

Demonstrations continued through the evening of January 28 in Cairo. Finally wearing down in the early morning hours,
only small bands of demonstrators roamed throughout the area of the Embassy by 0600. The Army's Republican Guard
took up positions around the Embassy perimeter beginning at approx 2300. The Colonel who was tasked with our
security was also given the unenviable job of coordinating with the local police. Police were exhausted and demoralized
after having been on duty since Monday.

The battles throughout the day were devastating and the police appeared leaderless and without motivation. The police
have established weak checkpoints adjacent to the bollard lined perimeter of the streets surrounding the US and British
Embassies. The police are not equipped for less than lethal force, carrying sniper rifles, RPGs, machine guns, and AK-
47s. We have varying reports on the numbers of casualties resulting from clashes yesterday between police and
protestors. The highest estimate we've seen is 150.

We have accounted for 18 of the 23 vehicles taken from our "Polish Parking Lot", approximately 100 meters north of the
embassy. According to local security sources one of the armored vehicles was involved in an accident in which between
3-6 police officers were killed. While attempting to recover the diplomatic plates from one of the vehicles which was
found on the Corniche, approximately 2 miles south of the embassy, one of the ARSOs was chased by a sword and knife
wielding crowd who appeared to be waiting for someone to stop at the vehicle.

Police in Maadi, a residential area, were involved in numerous live fire gun fights throughout the night, adjacent to the
embassy residential compound known as 11/11. The embassy continues to advertise the stand fast instruction via the
radio network and the mission phone tree.

Member of El Baradei's National Association for Change (NAC) affirmed to us at 1345 that Baradei had never been under
house arrest, but had remained at his home overnight. Contacts told us the NAC had understood Baradei would go out
today but that he changed his plans this morning and will remain at home. NAC members said they had planned to
protest today but needed to consider the new curfew. The NAC, which includes several opposition parties and protest
movements as well as some members of the MB met this afternoon issued a set of demands that includes replacing
Mubarak, establishing an interim government, drafting a new constitution, an end to the Emergency Law, release of
political prisoners, and a series of economic demands (full text attached). The NAC has also called for the formation of
local popular committees to secure neighborhoods. Egyptian TV is reporting that the Muslim Brotherhood is also
forming its own neighborhood committees. We have been told that the parallel parliament will meet tomorrow to issue
its own statement.

Activist and opposition contacts report that they are disappointed with President Mubarak's speech. They are looking
for more and believe that protests must continue in order to demonstrate that they are serious about change. Several
expected the new Prime Minister would be from the military. Contacts with close contact with the Muslim Brotherhood

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




affirm the MB played a role in yesterday's protests but believes them "very cautious," suggesting they were never more
than 20 percent of the crowd.

Many newsstands closed today, but newspapers did get published late and were out in some places. Pro Government
papers (Al Ahram, Akhbar, and Gomhouria) all ran similar front page stories re
"Mubarak asks Govt to resign and warns against plots to shake stability & violate legitimacy." Independent and
opposition papers Al Wafd, AMAY, and Al Shorouk were all on the newsstands.




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Tueller, Matthew H
Sent: Saturday, January 29, 2011 12:51 AM
To: Wailes, Jacob. Biome, Donald A; Cutrona, Aimee;
                                    Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; PeIton, Erin
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,
Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S
Subject: Cairo Update midnight Friday

All personnel at the Embassy compound are accounted for and will remain through the night in safe haven
area. Egyptian military have established checkpoints outside the compound perimeter. In coordination with
RSO, DATT, and Ministry of Interior officials the military units appear to be making progress on restoring
control of the roads adjacent to the Embassy. Preliminary assessment is that 23 USG vehicles have been taken
from the Polish parking. We are unable to assess other physical damage to facilities. One Embassy vehicle can
be seen on its side burning on a side street. Guard booth at the north parking lot has been gutted by fire, booth
at one drop arm has been damaged. There are a number of burned police vehicles in the area. Police remaining
around the Embassy are demoralized and extremely tired. Some appear to be under pursuit by protestors.

The number of protestors moving into the main square of the city is increasing notwithstanding the curfew and
deployment of military forces. Sound of gunfire is ongoing.

We have been able to contact and account for all but 9 U.S. Direct Hire employees via landline phone calls or
checking on residences. Efforts to ascertain the whereabouts of those we have been unable to contact are
ongoing.

RSO reports seeing protestors armed with AK-47's and there is gunfire being exchanged between military and
protestors. We also have credible reports of gunfire from Embassy residents in Maadi. Looters have been
observed in Maadi as well as burning of stores and vehicles. Earlier in the evening a large group of protestors
were trying to get to the Israeli Ambassador's residence near the main Maadi police station.

Senior Mission staff in our residential neighborhoods spent time before nightfall contacting families and
checking on mood which appears to run the gamut. Many are understandably jittery giving sound of gunfire
and sighting from balconies of fires and looters. As circumstances permit on Saturday we will explore other
ways of convening mission employees and family members to convey information and assess morale.

One consular officer at the Embassy and seven from their homes are fielding calls from concerned U.S.
citizens. We are advising U.S. citizens to remain safely in their homes or hotels. Most U.S. citizen concerns
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015




center around lack of internet access and potential airport closures. We are not aware yet of any Amcits injured
in today's events.

Five private Amcits have taken refuge on the Embassy compound and are in the safe haven area.

Due to communication limitations we are unable to provide any reaction to President Mubarak's speech. Once
mobile phone and interne access is restored, post will make every effort to reach out to wide range of contacts
for an assessment.




Matthew H. Tueller
Deputy Chief of Mission
U.S. Embassy Cairo
Office Tel: +202-2-797-2307


SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778562 Date: 09/30/2015
