       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783191 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Tuesday, September 20, 2011 6:32 AM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: China says supports Palestinians' UN aspirations (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Tuesday, September 20, 2011 05:57 AM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: China says supports Palestinians' UN aspirations (Reuters)



BEIJING, Sept 20 (Reuters) - China's Foreign Ministry said on Tuesday it understood and supported Palestinian
aspirations to seek full U.N. membership, but stopped short of saying how it would vote on the matter.

   China "believes that establishing a state is a legal right the Palestinian people cannot be denied and is the
basis and precondition for peaceful coexistence between Palestine and Israel", ministry spokesman Hong Lei
said.

  "As for the matter of the Palestinians independently establishing a state and applying to the United Nations,
we express understanding, respect and support," he told a regular news briefing.

   "At the same time, we believe that the international community should also step up efforts to ensure an early
return to talks between the Palestinians and Israel."

    China has traditionally had close relations with the Palestinians, but also has good ties with Israel, especially
in the field of defence.

   The United States and Israel say a Palestinian state should emerge from peace talks between the Palestinians
and Israel, which would be impossible if the Palestinians declare a state on their own. Washington has pledged
to veto such a Palestinian request at the U.N. Security Council.

   Palestinians say U.S.-brokered peace talks have foundered, in part because of continued Jewish settlement-
building in the occupied West Bank, leaving them no choice but to request recognition without waiting for
Israel to agree.

   Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas told U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on Monday he would
press ahead with plans to ask for a Security Council vote on Friday on Palestinian membership.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783191 Date: 09/30/2015
