        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782760 Date: 09/30/2015


                                                                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                        Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                        Saturday, September 10, 2011 1:59 PM
To:
Subject:                                     Fw: Search under way for 10 oil workers in Gulf of Mexico (CNN)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Saturday, September 10, 2011 01:34 PM
To: NEWS-Mahogany; NEWS-H; NEWS-CA; NEWS-WHA
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Search under way for 10 oil workers in Gulf of Mexico (CNN)


Colleagues:
Senator Mary Landrieu (D-LA) has been in contact with Charge Feeley, Mexico, regarding the status of the
missing oil workers. She has also sought to confer with the Mexican Ambassador to the U.S. The press below
indicates at least four of the workers are American citizens.
(CNN) -- Mexico's state-owned oil company searched in rough seas Friday for 10 workers missing from a U.S.-
owned oil vessel in the tropical-storm-roiled Gulf of Mexico.
The workers, contracted by Texas-based Geokinetics, abandoned ship Thursday afternoon after Tropical Storm
Nate caused their liftboat to take on water in the Bay of Campeche, according to Brenda Taquino,
spokeswoman for Geokinetics.
The crew of a ship several miles away saw the workers board a life raft, but conditions were too dangerous for
them to assist, Taquino said.
The life raft does not have a radio aboard, but it is stocked with enough food, water and supplies for several
days, as well as flares for the nighttime, she said.
The company has contacted the workers' families, Taquino said.
Four of the workers were identified as employees of Louisiana-based Trinity Liftboat Services. They are Jeremy
Parfait of Houma, Louisiana, and Craig Myers, Ted Dense Jr. and Nick Reed, all of New Iberia, Louisiana,
according to Heather Lanie, an administrative assistant at Trinity.
Reed is the son of Trinity's president, Randy Reed, Larne said. She described the mood of the company as "very
somber."
Mexico's Pemex, the marine authority in charge of the rescue operation, said two chartered rescue boats were
searching for the missing workers. Geokinetics also has a helicopter assisting with the search.
 Two additional boats were monitoring the damaged liftboat, which was slowly drifting to the northeast and
couldn't be secured because of the high seas, Taquino said.
 A liftboat is a self-propelled vessel that looks like a miniature oil platform. It is often used to perform
 maintenance on oil and gas platforms.
 Nate, 150 miles west of Campeche, Mexico, on Friday afternoon, was drifting west-southwestward with
 maximum sustained winds of 50 miles per hour.


News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782760 Date: 09/30/2015
