    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775913 Date: 09/30/2015

                                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                       B6




From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                             Tuesday, November 2, 2010 7:40 PM
To:                               'sbwhoeop
Subject:                          Re: H: election day memo on post-midterms. Sid



Thx, as always, for your insights. I'm on a plane on the way to Papua New Guinea for the next 6 hours so pis email me
results as you get them. Needless to say, I'm so distressed over all of this. All the best, H

     Original Messa e
From: sbwhoeo               sbwhoeop
To: H
Sent: Tue Nov 02 16:55:51 2010
Subject: H: election day memo on post-midterms. Sid




                                  CONFIDENTIAL




                                         November 2, 2010




For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Post mid-terms strategy



What I hear from Republican sources and elsewhere and what it means for Republican strategy:

1.    Rove is telling his donors that the ticket in 2012 is Romney/Barbour. Haley Barbour is Rove's ally. Together they
constitute the heart of the GOP establishment. In a potential Republican administration Barbour would be a new kind of
Cheney, but more politically skillful.
2.    Rove is at war with Palin. He has told his donors she must be stopped. Palin is well aware. The Politico story filled
with anonymous quotes about a murky establishment vs. Palin is about the Death Star of Rove/Barbour. Ironies: Rove
doubled down on a base strategy for Bush, galvanizing the right wing, now spun out of his control to Palin. The GOP used
the far right and Palin in the mid-terms and now have to kill them in presidential nomination politics. Attacking Palin
only builds her stature with the right. She plays instinctively to the base, but can she play a long game against the big
boys determined to destroy her?
3.    Palin has already aligned Glenn Beck and Rush Limbaugh on her side. Fox News is being split. Murdoch gave his big
donation to the Republican Governors Association, headed by Barbour.
4.    Malcolm Hoenlein has been raising money hand over fist for the Republicans through Eric Cantor, now his vehicle.
The donors are many of the same US donors to Bibi and Likud. Implications obvious.
5.    The House Republicans have already planned to primary all Senate Republican moderates in the next cycle.
Olympia Snowe is a particular target.

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775913 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775913 Date: 09/30/2015




6.  In the Senate, Jim DeMint continues to be a Fifth Column of the right, allied to the House Republicans, against
remaining Senate GOP moderates. He will be reinforced after this election with Rand Paul, et al. Paul, of course, hates
Mitch McConnell, and vice versa.
7.    McConnell's statement the day before the mid-terms that the goal of the GOP is to make Obama a one term
president is, in fact, their agenda. Everything in the House and Senate will be bent to that end.
8.    Can the House Republicans and Senate Republicans restrain themselves in their own interest and McConnell's
stated aim? Boehner is despised by the younger, more conservative members of the House Republican Conference.
They are repelled by his personal behavior. He is louche, alcoholic, lazy, and without any commitment to any principle.
Boehner has already tried to buy the members with campaign contributions and committee assignments, which he has
already promised to potentially difficult members. His hold is insecure. He is not Gingrich, the natural leader of a
"revolution," riding the crest into power. He is careworn and threadbare, banal and hollow, holding nobody's enduring
loyalty. Boehner is beholden and somewhat scared of his base. He twitches when they make gestures that might
undermine his position. His impulse is to hand out money. His aim is to recreate DeLay, Inc, with Jerry Lewis, who will be
the new chairman of Appropriations. But Boehner is neither feared nor loved. He's a would-be DeLay without the whip.
He's the one at the end of the lash. Which means he will be under great pressure and find it hard to sustain a moderate,
reasonable strategy of restraint. McConnell is relatively in the same position in the Senate. On the other hand, the
Congressional Republicans are vulnerable to a strategy that takes advantage of their internal divisions. Policies/tactics
should be calculated to locate GOP fissures, find political space by widening schisms, and ultimately break them apart.
This is, emphatically, not a strategy of bipartisanship as Obama has pursued it so far. It is a different and more informed
approach.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775913 Date: 09/30/2015
