       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779732 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                        Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                                        Friday, February 25, 201111:23 AM
To:
Subject:                                     FW: French foreign minister to quit at weekend-sources (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker@state.gov [mailto:OpsNewsTicker@state.gov]
Sent: Friday, February 25, 2011 10:07 AM
To: NEWS-EUR; NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-O_Shift-II; SES-0_05; SES-O_SWO
Subject: French foreign minister to quit at weekend-sources (Reuters)

PARIS (Reuters) - French Foreign Minister Michele Alliot-Marie is expected to resign over the weekend after a
series of gaffes over Tunisia that have tarnished President Nicolas Sarkozy's government, official sources said
on Friday.
Defence Minister Alain Juppe, a veteran conservative who was both prime minister and foreign minister in the
1990s, will replace her, the sources said.

   The switch comes as France is struggling to come to terms with a fast-spreading pro-democracy revolt across
North African states, several of which are former French colonies. The French political elite has had close ties
with their authoritarian rulers.

   "This can't go on," one government source said of a furore over disclosures that Alliot-Marie holidayed in
Tunisia as protests raged there and accepted private plane rides from a Tunisian businessman close to ousted
president Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali.

    "She has to go, and for it to be dignified, she has to stand down herself," the source said.

   Alliot-Marie has been unable to visit the region since the fall of Ben Ali, and Tunisia's first post-revolution
foreign minister was forced to resign after saying he had been honoured to meet her in Paris.

   The government at first supported Alliot-Marie against a media outcry and opposition calls for her head, but
polls showed the debacle was hurting Sarkozy's already rock-bottom ratings.

    "Alliot-Marie's departure is a done deal," a second source told Reuters. "Juppe is down to take over from her
straight away, with a lot of pressure coming from the president."

   Sarkozy's office declined comment. Alliot-Marie told French radio she "was not interested in rumours". The
daily Le Monde quoted sources as saying she would be gone by next week.


NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779732 Date: 09/30/2015
