      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782140 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                              B5,B6


From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Monday, August 22, 201112:37 PM
To:
Subject:                         FW: tick tock on libya



Here is Draft


From: Jake Sullivan
Sent: Sunday, August 21, 2011 7:40 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Nuland, Victoria.)
Subject: tick tock on libya

this is basically off the top of my head, with a few consultations of my notes. but it shows S'
leadership/ownership/stewardship of this country's libya policy from start to finish, let me know what you
think. toria, who else might be able to add to this?

Secretary Clinton's leadership on Libya

HRC has been a critical voice on Libya in administration deliberations, at NATO, and in contact group
meetings — as well as the public face of the U.S. effort in Libya. She was instrumental in securing the
authorization, building the coalition, and tightening the noose around Qadhafi and his regime.

February 25 — HRC announces the suspension of operations of the Libyan embassy in Washington.

February 26 — HRC directs efforts to evacuate all U.S. embassy personnel from Tripoli and orders the closing of
the embassy.

February 26 -- HRC made a series of calls to her counterparts to help secure passage of UNSC 1970, which
imposes sanctions on Gaddafi and his family and refers Qadhafi and his cronies to the ICC

February 28— HRC travels to Geneva, Switzerland for consultations with European partners on Libya. She
gives a major address in which she says: "Colonel Qadhafi and those around him must be held accountable for
these acts, which violate international legal obligations and common decency. Through their actions, they have
lost the legitimacy to govern. And the people of Libya have made themselves clear: It is time for Qadhafi to go
— now, without further violence or delay." She also works to secure the suspension of Libya from membership
in the Human Rights Council.

Early March — HRC appoints Special Envoy Chris Stevens to be the U.S. representative to Benghazi

March 14 — HRC travels to Paris for the G8 foreign minister's meeting. She meets with TNC representative
Jibril and consults with her colleagues on further UN Security Council action. She notes that a no-fly zone will
not be adequate.

March 14-16 — HRC participates in a series of high-level video- and teleconferences
                                      She is a leading voice for strong UNSC action and a NATO civilian
protection mission.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782140 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782140 Date: 09/30/2015




March 17— HRC secures Russian abstention and Portuguese and African support for UNSC 1973, ensuring that
it passes. 1973 authorizes a no-fly zone over Libya and "all necessary measures" - code for military action - to
protect civilians against Gaddafi's army.

March 24 — HRC engages with allies and secures the transition of command and control of the civilian
protection mission to NATO. She announces the transition in a statement.

March 18-30— HRC engages with UAE, Qatar, and Jordan to seek their participation in coalition
operations. Over the course of several days, all three devote aircraft to the mission.

March 19 — HRC travels to Paris to meet with European and Arab leaders to prepare for military action to
protect civilians. That night, the first U.S. air strikes halt the advance of Gaddafi's forces on Benghazi and
target Libya's air defenses.

March 29 — HRC travels to London for a conference on Libya, where she is a driving force behind the creation
of a Contact Group comprising 20-plus countries to coordinate efforts to protect civilians and plan for a post-
Qadhafi Libya. She is instrumental in setting up a rotating chair system to ensure regional buy-in.

April 14 — HRC travels to Berlin for NATO meetings. She is the driving force behind NATO adopting a
communiqué that calls for Qadhafi's departure as a political objective, and lays out three clear military
objectives: end of attacks and threat of attacks on civilians; the removal of Qadhafi forces from cities they
forcibly entered; and the unfettered provision of humanitarian access.

May 5 — HRC travels to Rome for a Contact Group meeting. The Contact Group establishes a coordination
system and a temporary financial mechanism to funnel money to the TNC.

June 8 — HRC travels to Abu Dhabi for another Contact Group meeting and holds a series of intense discussions
with rebel leaders.

June 12 — HRC travels to Addis for consultations and a speech before the African Union, pressing the case for a
democratic transition in Libya.

July 15 — HRC travels to Istanbul and announces that the U.S. recognizes the TNC as the legitimate government
of Libya. She also secures recognition from the other members of the Contact Group.

Late June — HRC meets with House Democrats and Senate Republicans to persuade them not to de-fund the
Libya operation.

July 16 — HRC sends Feltman, Cretz, and Chollet to Tunis to meet with Qadhafi envoys "to deliver a clear and
firm message that the only way to move forward, is for Qadhafi to step down".

Early August — HRC works to construct a $1.5 billion assets package to be approved by the Security Council
and sent to the TNC. That package is working through its last hurdles.

Early August -- After military chief Abdel Fattah Younes is killed, S sends a personal message to TNC head
Jalil to press for a responsible investigation and a careful and inclusive approach to creating a new executive
council.

Early August -- HRC secures written pledges from the TNC to an inclusive, pluralistic democratic
transition. She continues to consult with European and Arab colleagues on the evolving situation.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782140 Date: 09/30/2015
