    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782657 Date: 09/30/2015


                                            OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL




                                             Special Report
                                    Secretary Clinton at APEC
                               Saturday, September 17, 2011 900 EDT



International outlets are extensively focusing on Secretary Clinton's remarks about the importance of
woman's role in the economy, while reporting on APEC meetings. Several papers carried reprints of wire
coverage summarized here for reference.

Wires

APF headlines "Clinton declares 'Participation Age' for women," and reports Clinton, who has made
women's rights a top priority throughout her career, made an impassioned call as she led a special meeting of
the 21-member APEC Asia-Pacific bloc dedicated to the role of women in the economy. Pointing to the
anemic growth and debt woes afflicting many major economies, Clinton described women as a great
untapped resource. Women, she said, tend to save better and can provide new markets when they are
empowered.
Full Article

AP headlines: "Clinton: Women the key to economic growth," and says Clinton and diplomats from 20 Asia-
Pacific nations pledged to try to improve women's economic participation, a task Clinton said will take a
generation and will mark one of the most profound transformations of the world economy. The agreement is
a run-up to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting in Hawaii later this year, which President
Barack Obama will attend. "With economic models straining in every corner of the world, none of us can
afford to perpetuate the barriers facing women in the workforce," Clinton said.
Full Article

Reuters headlines: "Clinton pushes free, fair trade agenda for APEC." It reports the United States will step
up efforts for free, open and transparent trade across the Asia Pacific region as it seeks to double U.S.
exports in five years, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said on Wednesday. It explains Clinton did not
mention the China trade dispute specifically but did outline a set of U.S. priorities for the region that
underscore Washington's concerns over unfair treatment. "The United States is looking for a level playing
field, an environment in which businesses rise and fall based on honest competition, rather than government
manipulation," Clinton said.
Full article

East Asia and the Pacific:

China
China Daily highlights: "Women Entrepreneurs play Big Role in the Economy," and reports
Meng Xiaosi, vice president of the All-China Women's Federation, made the remarks at a major Asia-
Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) conference focusing on finding ways to increase
women's economic participation in the region.
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782657 Date: 09/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782657 Date: 09/30/2015


                                            OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Xinhua headlines "Clinton unveils major steps to boost women's participation in economic growth." It says
Clinton, who chaired the meeting, made the evidence-based case for the inclusion of women as a vital source
of economic growth. The outlet also notes that Clinton articulated important steps in a path toward the
Participation Age -- where every individual has the opportunity to be a contributing and valued member of
the global marketplace -- including strategies to remove barriers that have prevented women from being full
participants in the economy and unlock their potential as drivers of economic growth.

Indonesia
Kompas reports Trade Minister Mari Elka Pangestu is currently undertaking a visit to the United States to
attend the meeting of APEC Women and the Economy Summit (WES) in the city of San Francisco. The
meeting which took place on September 13 to 16 was chaired by Hillary Clinton.

Japan
Japan News carries the AP article.


The Philippines
Inquirer says Clinton, who has made women's rights a top priority throughout her career, made an
impassioned call as she led a special meeting of the 21-member APEC Asia-Pacific bloc dedicated to the role
of women in the economy. Pointing to the anemic growth and debt woes afflicting many major economies,
Clinton described women as a great untapped resource. Women, she said, tend to save better and can provide
new markets when they are empowered.

Taiwan
Taiwan News carries the AP article.

South Central Asia:

India
India Times carries the Reuters article

WHA

Canada
The Chronicle Herald carries an AP article under the headline: "Clinton: Tear down barriers to women." It
reports Clinton and diplomats from 20 Asia-Pacific nations pledged to try to improve women's economic
participation, a task Clinton said will take a generation and will mark one of the most profound
transformations of the world economy. The agreement is a run-up to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
meeting in Hawaii.




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782657 Date: 09/30/2015
