      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778515 Date: 09/30/2015


                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                             B6




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Wednesday, February 2, 201111:07 AM
To:
Subject:                           FW: THANK YOU.




    Original Message
From: St. Fleur, Marie
Sent: Wednesday, February 02, 2011 10:11 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Adams, Thomas C;
Subject: THANK YOU.

Dear Cheryl,

It has been a while since I've contacted you directly. Happy New Year to you and your family.
I've been pleased to communicate directly with Ambassador Thomas Adams. His approach and willingness to work with
unusual suspects in the Haitian diaspora is refreshing.

 Please extend my deep appreciation to Secretary Clinton for filling the vacuum in leadership that exists in resolving the
haiti election debacle. Her leadership is moving Haiti from the self imposed paralysis imposed by the first round of
elections.

Her clear public message endorsing the findings of the OAS Report gave Haitians/ Haitian Americans here and abroad
confidence that a rational resolution was at hand.

The Secretary's personal visit to Haiti, this week in the midst of the crises now unfolding across the globe told many of
us that Haiti remains important to her and this Administration.

The Secretary's leadership and personal attention to Haiti sent a message a dozen policy statements could not have
conveyed. Building a new Haiti requires all our intellect and labor.

Along the way we will have many points of disagreement. However, decisive, positive leadership and direction in Haiti is
welcome. Thank you and your team for making it happen.



Warm Regards,

Marie St. Fleur
Chief, Advocacy &Strategic Investment, City of Boston



The substance of this message, including any attachments, may be confidential, legally privileged and/or exempt from
disclosure pursuant to Massachusetts law. It is intended solely for the addressee. If you received this in error, please
contact the sender and delete the material from any computer.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778515 Date: 09/30/2015
