      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779225 Date: 09/30/2015

                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                   B6




From:                            Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                            Monday, January 31, 2011 3:03 PM
To:
Subject:                         FW: WSJ: Syria Strongman: Time for 'Reform'


Interesting.

From: Shapiro, Daniel B.
Sent: Monday, January 31, 2011 1:31 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob); Ross, Dennis B.; Hof, Frederic C
Subject: FW: WSJ: *la Strongman: Time for 'Reform'



http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704832704576114340735033236.html?mod=WSJ hp LEFT
TopStories



Syria Strongman: Time for 'Reform'

By JAY SOLOMON And BILL SPINDLE

DAMASCUS—Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, who inherited a regime that has held power for four decades,
said he will push for more political reforms in his country, in a sign of how Egypt's violent revolt is forcing
leaders across the region to rethink their approaches.

In a rare interview, Mr. Assad told The Wall Street Journal that the protests in Egypt, Tunisia and Yemen are
ushering in a "new era" in the Middle East, and that Arab rulers would need to do more to accommodate their
people's rising political and economic aspirations.

"If you didn't see the need of reform before what happened in Egypt and Tunisia, it's too late to do any reform,"
Mr. Assad said in Damascus, as Egyptian protesters swarmed the streets of Cairo pressing for the resignation of
longtime President Hosni Mubarak.

The Syrian strongman, who succeeded his father, has always kept a tight leash on his country and tolerated little
protest. His regime has also maintained a close partnership with Iran and militant groups such as Hezbollah in
Lebanon and Hamas in the Palestinian territories.

While much of the region's unrest has hit countries that have developed alliances with Washington, his remarks
indicate that the ripple effects of the Egyptian unrest will reach out to Middle Eastern leaders who are both
friend and foe of the U.S.

Syria's response is particularly important because, while Mr. Assad's ties with the U.S. are strained, the Obama
administration has been trying to pull his allegiances away from Tehran toward Washington.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779225 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779225 Date: 09/30/2015



But his remarks in the interview suggest that maybe harder in the wake of the Egyptian unrest. Mr. Assad said
he will have more time to make changes than Mr. Mubarak did, because his anti-American positions and
confrontation with Israel have left him in better shape with the grassroots in his nation.

"Syria is stable. Why?" Mr. Assad said. "Because you have to be very closely linked to the beliefs of the people.
This is the core issue. When there is divergence...you will have this vacuum that creates disturbances."

Mr. Assad said he would push through political reforms this year aimed at initiating municipal elections,
granting more power to nongovernmental organizations and establishing a new media law.

His government already made adjustments to ease the kind of economic pressures that have helped fuel unrest
in Tunisia and Algeria: Damascus this month raised heating oil allowances for public workers—a step back
from an earlier plan to withdraw subsidies that keep the cost of living down for Syrians but drain the national
budget. Tunisia, Algeria and Jordan have also tried to assuage protesters by lowering food prices.

Mr. Assad's government, and that of his late father Hafez al-Assad, have been criticized as among the region's
most repressive, detaining opponents without charges. This has stoked speculation in Western capitals over
whether Syria could also face unrest. Syria's one-party political system and government-controlled media,
meanwhile, are seen by many as more rigid than Egypt's or Tunisia's.

Mr. Assad acknowledged in the interview that the pace of political reform inside Syria hasn't progressed as
quickly as he'd envisioned after taking power following his father's death in 1999.

Still, Mr. Assad indicated he is unlikely.to embrace the sort of rapid and sweeping reforms being called for on
the streets of Cairo and Tunis. He said his country needed time to build institutions and improve education
before decisively opening Syria's political system. The rising demands for rapid political reforms could turn out
to be counter-productive if Arab societies aren't ready for them, he said.

"Is it going to be a new era toward more chaos or more institutionalization? That is the question," Mr. Assad
said. "The end is not clear yet."

Many diplomats and analysts believe Syria could serve as a barometer for the direction of the broader Middle
East. Damascus's influence has grown in recent years as its alliance with Iran and the militant Islamist
organizations Hamas and Hezbollah has opened the door to its renewed influence in Lebanon, the Palestinian
territories and Iraq.

Still, Mr. Assad's rigid rule could leave him vulnerable to rising calls for democracy.

Damascus emerged this month largely victorious after a nearly eight-year struggle against the U.S. for influence
inside Lebanon. The standoff was sparked by the 2005 murder of Lebanon's former Prime Minister Rafik
Hariri, which some Western officials believed was ordered by Mr. Assad's government. Mr. Assad has
repeatedly denied any involvement.

"What pleases me is that this transition between the two [Lebanese] governments happened smoothly, because
we were worried," said Mr. Assad. "It was very easy to have a conflict of some kind that could evolve into a
fully blown civil war."

This month, the U.S. returned an ambassador, Robert Ford, to Damascus for the first time since Mr. Hariri's
murder.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779225 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779225 Date: 09/30/2015




Mr. Assad said that while he sought closer ties to Washington, he didn't see this coming at the expense of his
alliance with Iran. The Syrian leader said that he shares the U.S. goals to target Al Qaeda and other extremist
groups, but that Tehran remains a crucial ally to Syria.

"Nobody can overlook Iran, whether you like it or not," Mr. Assad said.

On the Mideast peace process, Mr. Assad stressed that Damascus remained open to a dialogue with Israel to
reclaim the Golan Heights region that the Jewish state occupied in 1967. But he said he didn't think Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu would engage in the same way as his predecessor, Ehud Olmert. Mr.
Assad insisted he and Mr. Olmert were close to forging a peace deal in 2008.

"No, [the peace process] is not dead, because you do not have any other option," Mr. Assad said. "If you talk
about a 'dead' peace process, this means everybody should prepare for the next war."

The Syrian leader acknowledged his government is likely to continue to be at odds with the U.S. on key
strategic issues.

Successive U.S. administrations have charged Damascus with smuggling increasingly sophisticated weapons
systems to Hezbollah, including long-range missiles that could reach most of Israel. The U.S. has subsequently
put in place economic sanctions against Syria.

Mr. Assad denied charges that his government directly arms Hezbollah.

He also indicated that his government was unlikely to give the United Nations' nuclear watchdog, the
International Atomic Energy Agency, wide access to investigate claims that Syria had covertly been developing
nuclear technology.

"It will definitely be misused," said Mr. Assad, who denies Syria has been seeking atomic weapons.

Write to Jay Solomon atjay.solomon@wsj.com and Bill Spindle at bill.spindle@wsj.com




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779225 Date: 09/30/2015
