UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778743 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                           RELEASE IN FULL


  To: S
  From: Anne-Marie
  Date: Feb. 8, 2011
  Re: Egypt, State-Society Relations, China, and Middle East Peace

 As I look at Egypt and related protests around the region, I think we are focusing on the wrong
 things and missing a big opportunity. We are focusing on "who" and "when" — Mubarak v.
 someone else, transition now v September. We should instead be focusing on the "what" — what
 any government must deliver to be acceptable. POTUS set the stage for this position in his
 emphasis on open government in his UNGA address: "As I said last year, each country will
 pursue a path rooted in the culture of its own people. Yet experience shows us that history is on
 the side of liberty; that the strongest foundation for human progress lies in open economies, open
 societies, and open governments." The WH is now pursuing an open government initiative
 (which Samantha would really like State to own, as we should, since the basic ideas came from
 Alec and me) that defines open government in terms of transparency, accountability, and
 citizen participation. That fits very well with what the Egyptian protesters are demanding. Our
 position should be that regardless who is in power, Mubarak, Suleiman, or anyone else,
 they have to deliver on these three principles. We will hold them to it, measure it, and
 respond accordingly. The protesters believe Mubarak won't do it, so they want him out. We
 (and the EU and any other governments we can get to support this position) should say that our
 support for any government is based on its actual record of delivering on these commitments. If
 Mubarak can deliver and then leave with dignity in September, so much the better. If he can't,
 then we are making it known that this is the yardstick by which he and anyone in his position
 must measure our support. That means we will review assistance, arms sales, political support,
 etc.

 This position is completely consistent with your consistent focus both on the people and on
 their relationship with their governments. It's not about the government or the people, but
 rather about the relationship between them. That is exactly what you said in Doha: "I believe that
 the leaders of this region, in partnership with their people, have the capacity to build that stronger
 foundation. There are enough models and examples in the region to point to, to make the
 economic and social reforms that will create jobs, respect the right of diversity to exist, create
 more economic opportunity, encourage entrepreneurship, give citizens the skills they need to
 succeed, to make the political reforms that will create the space young people are demanding, to
 participate in public affairs and have a meaningful role in the decisions that shape their lives."
 Indeed, I think it's time to enunciate a "Clinton Doctrine," which brings together the world of
 states and the world of societies that I was talking about in my farewell remarks — your emphasis
 on development, women, Internet freedom, 21 century statecraft, and public-private
 partnerships are all about a relationships between governments and their citizens that deliver for
 their people (I'd be happy to write that up in a separate memo       -)). If this is the tide of history,
 then you are perfectly positioned to ride the wave.

  This position has a number of advantages. First, it can remain constant across all the countries of
  the region, whereas the "who" and the "when" will vary country by country. Second, we can
  start getting very concrete, looking at things that governments have done successfully in the



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778743 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778743 Date: 09/30/2015




   region to empower their people, fight corruption, expand opportunity, etc and emphasizing those
   as evidence that governments can deliver. Third, we can emphasize that a transparent,
   accountable, and participatory government is the best bulwark against extremism, thereby
   putting the onus of blocking violent extremism on what governments actually deliver. Fourth,
   taking this position puts us in the best strategic position vis-à-vis China, which will become
   increasingly relevant as these protests spread to African countries (already happening in Sudan).
   We want to frame the debate as "who stands with the people in terms of their right to connect,
   right to basic services from their government, transparency, and accountability versus the
   Chinese position of "assistance with no strings attached." What they portray as a violation of
   sovereignty or interference in domestic affairs" is in fact insisting on a relationship between a
   government and its people based on universal rules and rights.

  Now is also the time to play up the many things we are doing to fight corruption. Your
  OECD speech in May was already going to focus on anti-corruption and domestic finance for•
  development, but it's time to start owning this agenda more now, talking about the percentage of
  taxes the Egyptian elite pay, for instance, just as you did in Pakistan, and celebrating specific
  anti-corruption measures (like putting civic licensing-obtaining records and permissions of
  various kinds—on line) that governments in various Indian provinces have taken. Peter Harrell
  has been pushing an anti-corruption fund with Tom Nides and doing a lot of work on this issue
  with Jeremy Weinstein at the White House. Great opportunity to put a major collaborative
  network together with both NGOs and American corporations who chafe at the restrictions they
  are under versus the much looser restrictions on their foreign competitors.

  Finally, and I know that I am ever the optimist, I think this is the time to change the game on
  Middle East Peace. We should come out and say that Israel and Palestine now have the
  opportunity to be an island of prosperity and stability in a turbulent sea, and an example of open
  societies, open economies, and open governments for others in the region. Now is the time to go
  for broke – we are not going to be able to hold back these massive floods of political, economic,
  and social aspirations which have been dammed up for decades. We need to get ahead of them,
  creating channels for to guide their path. If we stick to endless incrementalism, we're done. It's
  ironic that you should be the one pushing POTUS on this, but it's the right thing to do (and not a
  bad story). That's what leadership means – shaping, influencing, making our own luck. Making
  that push will also help us with protesters/societies around the region as we would be removing
  one of the standard ways their governments deflect attention from their own bad performance.
  Given how turbulent everything is, everyone's instincts are to hunker down rather than
  introducing yet another variable into the equation. But we can turn all this turbulence to our
  advantage, particularly with both Israeli and Palestinian leaders who think their days in office are
  numbered. Netanyahu may be riding high, but the pictures of young secular Arabs demanding
  basic rights and freedoms is going to undermine the Likud narrative of fear pretty quickly.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778743 Date: 09/30/2015
