    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778249 Date: 09/30/2015


                                                                                          RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                          B6




From:                         sbwhoeop
Sent:                         Monday, January 24, 2011 9:32 AM
To:
Subject:                      H: "Palestine Papers" & SOTU. Sid
Attachments:                  hrc palestine & sotu 012411.docx; hrc palestine & sotu 012411.docx




                                    CONFIDENTIAL



                                           January 24, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: "The Palestine Papers" and SOTU


   I.      "The Palestine Papers"

          So far this morning not a single word has been published or broadcast in the US press on the most
          extensive disclosure of internal documents on the Middle East peace process by Al Jazeera and The
          Guardian, a more significant cache than from Wikileaks. And already the Middle East is consumed
          with the revelations. I've enclosed below, just in case you haven't seen asap, the initial Guardian
          report and the Guardian column by Jonathan Freedland, the chief columnist on the subject in that
          newspaper, the Tom Friedman of Britain, a friend of mine, who also writes a column in the Jewish
          Chronicle, the leading Jewish newspaper in London. It all speaks for itself

   II.     SOTU

          For what it's worth (with a full sense of duty and futility), the Democrats should respond to the
          Republican response to the SOTU in the following manner: The Republicans have designated Rep.
          Paul Ryan (R-Weird) to give their formal televised response, but La Pasionaria of the Tea Party,
          Rep. Michelle Bachmann (R-Fringe) is also giving a response at the same time. Therefore, the
          Democratic talking points should be to characterize the President's SOTU as the program to meet
          the challenges the nation is facing while characterizing the GOP response as politically divisive cond
          confused. In other words, the President is proposing policies, substance, solutions; the Republicans
          are embroiled in their own political mess and thus overshadowing whatever confusing policy
          prescriptions they might have. The way to do this: The Republicans are a politically divided party
          delivering two responses. The Republicans are divided and can't agree on a position. Speaker
          Boehner can't control his Republican members to deliver a single response. After Tucson, the
          Republicans have become even more divided and unable to control their extreme elements. Etc.

http://www.guardian.co.uldworld/2011/jan/23/palestine-papers-expose-peace-concession?intcmp=23

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778249 Date: 09/30/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778249 Date: 09/30/2015




Secret papers reveal slow death of Middle East
peace process
• Massive new leak lifts lid on negotiations
• PLO offered up key settlements in East Jerusalem
• Concessions made on refugees and Holy sites

   • Seumas Milne and Ian Black, Middle East editor
   • guardian.co.uk, Sunday 23 January 2011 20.08 GMT
   •

The biggest leak of confidential documents in the history of the Middle East conflict has revealed that
Palestinian negotiators secretly agreed to accept Israel's annexation of all but one of the settlements built
illegally in occupied East Jerusalem. This unprecedented proposal was one of a string of concessions that will
cause shockwaves among Palestinians and in the wider Arab world.
A cache of thousands of pages of confidential Palestinian records covering more than a decade of negotiations
with Israel and the US has been obtained by al-Jazeera TV and shared exclusively with the Guardian. The
papers provide an extraordinary and vivid insight into the disintegration of the 20-year peace process, which is
now regarded as all but dead.
The documents — many of which will be published by the Guardian over the coming days — also reveal:
• The scale of confidential concessions offered by Palestinian negotiators, including on the highly sensitive
issue of the right of return of Palestinian refugees.
• How Israeli leaders privately.asked for some Arab citizens to be transferred to a new Palestinian state.
• The intimate level of covert co-operation between Israeli security forces and the Palestinian Authority.
• The central role of British intelligence in drawing up a secret plan to crush Hamas in the Palestinian territories.
• How Palestinian Authority (PA) leaders were privately tipped off about Israel's 2008-9 war in Gaza.
As well as the annexation of all East Jerusalem settlements except Har Homa, the Palestine papers show PLO
leaders privately suggested swapping part of the flashpoint East Jerusalem Arab neighbourhood of Sheikh
Jarrah for land elsewhere.
Most controversially, they also proposed a joint committee to take over the Haram al-Sharif/Temple Mount holy
sites in Jerusalem's Old City — the neuralgic issue that helped sink the Camp David talks in 2000 after Yasser
Arafat refused to concede sovereignty around the Dome of the Rock and al-Aqsa mosques.
The offers were made in 2008-9, in the wake of George Bush's Annapolis conference, and were privately hailed
by the chief Palestinian negotiator, Saeb Erekat, as giving Israel "the biggest Yerushalayim [the Hebrew name
for Jerusalem] in history" in order to resolve the world's most intractable conflict. Israeli leaders, backed by the
US government, said the offers were inadequate.
Intensive efforts to revive talks by the Obama administration foundered last year over Israel's refusal to extend a
10-month partial freeze on settlement construction. Prospects are now uncertain amid increasing speculation
that a negotiated two-state solution to the conflict is no longer attainable — and fears of a new war.
 Many of the 1,600 leaked documents — drawn up by PA officials and lawyers working for the British-funded
 PLO negotiations support unit and include extensive verbatim transcripts of private meetings — have been
 independently authenticated by the Guardian and corroborated by former participants in the talks and
 intelligence and diplomatic sources. The Guardian's coverage is supplemented by WikiLeaks cables, emanating
 from the US consulate in Jerusalem and embassy in Tel Aviv. Israeli officials also kept their own records of the
 talks, which may differ from the confidential Palestinian accounts.
 The concession in May 2008 by Palestinian leaders to allow Israel to annex the settlements in East Jerusalem —
 including Gilo, a focus of controversy after Israel gave the go-ahead for 1,400 new homes — has never been
 made public.
 All settlements built on territory occupied by Israel in the 1967 war are illegal under international law, but the
 Jerusalem homes are routinely described, and perceived, by Israel as municipal "neighbourhoods". Israeli
     http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2011/jan/23/palestine-papers-israel-peace-partner?intcmp=239

         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778249 Date: 09/30/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778249 Date: 09/30/2015




gov                            steohypodtg(!                     ariheTsestilMs.prtsoileat e ditnAcpeecaE e
to d                    pKvif
Erekit tptIclIirzAi,lvders in 2008: "This is the first time in Palestinian-Israeli history in which such a
suggPtWii,Milly made." No such concession had been made at Camp David.
But ffibcoifassifaedvjecturleentt efihuntidiFslimiedibediling AD* tholeirtektriale lehighsittlidrienteeiird ficit3fiNhili1te on
Aduritngeaueetteal Har Homa and several others deeper in the West Bank, including Ariel. "We do not like this
suggestion because it does not meet our demands," Israel's then foreign minister, Tzipi Livni, told the
Palestinians, "aid plohaliirittceasy for you to think about it, but I really appreciate it".
The overall imptes*in1thathernarkeffno±423dbzunaqnN1ythleh1itiettlilfrom 1999 to 2010, is of the weakness
and growing desperation of PA leaders as failure to reach agreement or even halt all settlement temporarily
undermines their credibility in relation to their Hamas rivals; the papers also reveal the unyielding confidence of
IsraeWhegaiiii 0: mast &elateddbi■firdii3Eimmagbitalidetrififfirmslitinierthtowahly13fithdihiatich9Paitostitaitimqseace
Last io 0,1 4; sElkitenthitiiil the firittlessuafttfievitiebtiiktleatinidhubnimint)flidtpthkiralfithoilist Qtreiefolitttifythat
"mantylwatityibtidlydsicanneket lssetheff:layierackaalieshaar* incitement against the ... Palestinian leadership".
HowbiceqoktibinlitticestiniennegattisataillOaanal thittuKtalitglentlieedatidessieignacilinsiibg theirevpketientatTiewb-
muststtetitfpwithuolkifitddingsultthovillpar4affsastthalusajustsbtilvd)bydftreletIatarci -tuhteipthedatigiaagthin which
negotthaterTenr,essbasaiVere made.
PalegfinheauathbIsthriefaftfig*tlatbOlSpelinlEraktatbtelittlaephsitelis thatetatlittilestiniasubjeetrindliretvdoniplietIlthe
"not it, ikli2est*eaelhaitlitivrenyibimiglithigmd'"-andeficaingdlie hiehlidwoiAluddloritbemittyclaiwilldstalke many as an act
      of humiliation.
      Referring to Ariel Sharon as a "friend" will offend those Palestinians who still revile the former prime minister
      as the "Butcher of Beirut" for his role in the 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon.
      Telling Tzipi Livni, Israel's then foreign minister, on the eve of national elections "I would vote for you" will
      strike many Palestinians as grovelling of a shameful kind.
      It is this tone which will stick in the throat just as much as the substantive concessions on land or, as the
      Guardian will reveal in coming days, the intimate level of secret co-operation with Israeli security forces or
      readiness of Palestinian negotiators to give way on the highly charged question of the right of return for
      Palestinian refugees.
      Of course it should be said that this cache of papers is not exhaustive and may have been leaked selectively;
      other documents might provide a rather different impression. Nevertheless, these texts will do enormous
      damage to the standing of the Palestinian Authority and to the Fatah party that leads it. Erekat himself may
      never recover his credibility.
      But something even more profound is at stake: these documents could discredit among Palestinians the very
      notion of negotiation with Israel and the two-state solution that underpins it.
      And yet there might also be an unexpected boost here for the Palestinian cause. Surely international opinion will
      see concrete proof of how far the Palestinians have been willing to go, ready to move up to and beyond their
       "red lines", conceding ground that would once have been unthinkable — none more so than on Jerusalem.
       In the blame game that has long attended Middle East diplomacy, this could see a shift in the Palestinians'
       favour.
       The effect of these papers on Israel will be the reverse.
       They will cause little trouble inside the country. There are no exposés of hypocrisy or double talk; on the
       contrary, the Israelis' statements inside the negotiating room echo what they have consistently said outside it.
       Livni in particular — now leader of the Israeli opposition — will be heartened that no words are recorded here to
       suggest she was ever a soft touch.
       Still, in the eyes of world opinion that very consistency will look much less admirable. These papers show that
       the Israelis were intransigent in public — and intransigent in private.
       What's more, the documents blow apart what has been a staple of Israeli public diplomacy: the claim that there
       is no Palestinian partner. That theme, a refrain of Israeli spokesmen on and off for years, is undone by
       transcripts which show that there is not only a Palestinian partner but one more accommodating than will surely
       ever appear again.
       Where does this leave the peace process itself? The pessimistic view is that what little life remained in it has
       now been punched out. On the Palestinian side these revelations are bound to strengthen Hamas, who have long
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778249 Date: 09/30/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778249 Date: 09/30/2015




rejected Fatah's strategy of negotiation, arguing that armed resistance is the only way to secure Palestinian
statehood. Hamas will now be able to claim that diplomacy not only fails to bring results, it brings national
humiliation.
But the despair will not be confined to the Palestinians. Others may well conclude that if a two-state solution is
not possible even under these circumstances — when the Palestinians go as far as they can but still fail, in Livni's
words, to "meet our demands" — then it can never be achieved. This is the view that sees Israelis and
Palestinians as two acrobats who, even when they bend over backwards, just cannot touch: the Palestinian
maximum always falls short of the Israeli minimum.
The optimistic view will hope these papers act as a wake-up call, jolting the US — exposed here as far from the
even-handed, honest broker it claims to be — into pressing reset on its Middle East effort, beginning with a
determination to exert proper pressure on Israel, pushing it to budge.
It goes without saying that in any wager between optimists and pessimists in the Middle East, the smart money
is usually on the latter.




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778249 Date: 09/30/2015
