     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780551 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                        Strobe Talbott <
Sent:                        Sunday, April 10, 2011 7:31 PM
To:
Subject:                     RE: a grace note



What I sent along was pretty much the nub of what Kissinger said, though he also quoted
something Bill to the effect that Dick attended every conference on foreign policy there ever
was, including some he was even invited to. Yes, I shared it with Kati and David (the one son I
have an e-mail for). But that little bit of (justifiable) mischief aside, it was really quite
sweet. The Trilateral meeting, by the way, was here in DC, at the Mandarin—where you'll be
on Tuesday (and of course I'll be there too—wouldn't miss it).
   Still on the subject of Henry, he presided over the Commission session today on Afpak and
he, along with the Indian panelist (a very smart guy named Raja Mohan), had quite a bit to say
about the need for a more coherent, bold regional diplomatic strategy. I sent e-mails to Jake and
Derek (Chollet!, I hasten to add). I'll past that message.below—I've heard back from both of
them. I should add that I'd heard you were going to be seeing Henry and asked him, privately,
if he'd relay to you, and discuss, what he said to the group today, and he replied, "Only if she
asks my view." So I sent Jake a follow-up message urging that you get some private time with
him and definitely discuss Afpak.
  Safe travels, Hillary. I sure am proud to know you — and can't tell you how admiring I am of
what you're doing and how you're doing it.
  Here's the message I sent to the guys....

       The Sunday morning session of the Trilateral was chaired by Henry Kissinger focused on
       Afpak. I was struck by two themes in the conversation, both on the panel and in the room
       generally: 1) confusion/frustration/criticism with regard to a widely perceived lack of a
       REAL regional diplomatic/political strategy (as opposed to talk about same combined
       with emphasis on exit strategies and timetables), and 2) -- more constructively -- some
       quite bold ideas put forward by Raja Mohan and cautiously endorsed by Kissinger (we'll
       leave Bob Blackwill's well known prescription aside). The idea involves the exceedingly
       difficult question of border changes with regard to "Pashtunistan" and addressing
       Kashmir, with other CBMs etc. I don't know if there's anyone from the Administration in
       the room to report to State/NSC. I can't do so at length because I've got to get to another
       event, but I'll try to get from Raja something in writing that you can look at. Regardless
       of the particular merits of and obvious problems with the proposal, I had the feeling that I
       was listening to a discussion quite a bit more imaginative and robust than I've heard in a
       long time--and it's the kind of bigger thinking that's required. Admiral Di Paola, the
       only official on the panel, did a yeoman's job of reiterating current strategic thinking but,
       to be blunt, it barely qualifies as strategic and did nothing to ally concerns in the
       room. By contrast, General Guthrie -- now from the luxury of retirement -- was pushing
       in somewhat the same direction as Kissinger and Mohan.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780551 Date: 09/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780551 Date: 09/30/2015




    Original Message
From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Sunday, April 10, 2011 7:10 PM
To: Strobe Talbott
Subject: Re: a grace note

Thanks for telling me and I hope Henry's comments will be shared w Kati and the family. I'm
speaking on Friday in Berlin at their remembrance w Kati and others. At the end of the month,
Charlie Rose is interviewing Henry and me on the 8th floor as part of our efforts to raise $ for
the Dip Rooms endowment. So this is good to know. I'd like to know what else Henry said so
I'm prepared for the interview. Where was the mtg? Are you now back? Will I see you on Tues
night at your big dinner?

    Original Message
From: Strobe Talbott [mailto:
Sent: Sunday, April 10, 201110:28 AM
To: Kati Marton <                        >; David Holbrooke <
Cc: Samantha Power                               >; Derek Chollet (NSS)
                       >; Dan Feldman <FeldmanDF@state.gov>; Frank Wisner

Subject: a grace note

Henry Kissinger just ended the Afpak panel at the Trilateral Commission this morning with a
quite lovely extemp eulogy to RCH -- "a great idealist who will be admired and loved and who
would have made a tremendous contribution on [Afpak] had fate allowed him to continue.... We
should ask our Chairman to write a letter to his wife expressing the pride and gratitude we all
feel for his service."




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780551 Date: 09/30/2015
