     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781844 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                 B6


From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Sunday, June 26, 2011 3:16 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: Africa Wrap Up Story




    Original Message
From: Sanders, Trooper [maitto:
Sent: Sunday, June 26, 2011 02:47 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob
Subject: Africa Wrap Up Story

Subject: AP: Analysis: Mrs. Obama hits her stride as first lady

http://hosted.ap.oredynamic/stories/A/AF_MICHELLE_OBAMA_AFRICA_ANALYSIS?SITE=TXDAM&SECTION=HOME&TE
MPIATE=DEFAULT



Jun 26, 9:30 AM EDT



Analysis: Mrs. Obama hits her stride as first lady

By DARLENE SUPERVILLE
Associated Press

GABORONE, Botswana (AP) -- After more than two years as America's first lady, Michelle Obama won't say she's hit her
stride.

Her performance on a good will mission to Africa, including an emotionally rousing speech about youth leadership and a
packed itinerary that rivaled her husband's traveling schedules, said otherwise.

On her second overseas business trip without the president, and to the black motherland, America's first black first lady
was warmly received everywhere she went, often with song and to the point of almost being moved to tears.

She spoke passionately about her causes, tickled and danced with some of the youngest Africans, and sat with
presidents and first ladies, including Nelson Mandela, South Africa's former president and a hero of the anti-apartheid
movement.

She held 20 public events in five days, landed on newspaper front pages and was fashionably dressed, as usual, including
outfits with an African connection.

(See: Michelle Obama, family, meets with Nelson Mandela)

In between all that, Mrs. Obama squeezed in dinner with gal-pal Oprah Winfrey, who was in South Africa for unrelated
business.

It was the first lady's biggest moment on the world stage.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781844 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781844 Date: 09/30/2015




She was reluctant to grade herself, telling reporters that it embarrasses her to "talk about my stride and being on my
game." But she does realize her power as first lady and says it's a time-stamped opportunity that she doesn't want to
waste.


"I have the advantage of really being able to set my own agenda and not having to deal with the day-to-day challenges
that ... just keep coming at you," she said, speaking of President Barack Obama. "That's a privilege and there is real
opportunity there."


Her signature issue - both in the states and around the world - is encouraging young people to become the next
generation of leaders and problem-solvers. It's a major reason why she spent a week visiting the model democracies of
South Africa and Botswana, her first visits to those countries. In Africa alone, nearly two-thirds of its population is
younger than 25.


(See: Mullen sees risk in Obama's Afghanistan withdrawal)

Mrs. Obama also promoted education and uses the story of her upbringing by working-class parents in Chicago to
Inspire high school students to dream big.


She lately has taken to arranging for groups of students, particularly those who aren't from the best backgrounds but
who have shown academic promise, to spend a day at a top university. She held such as session at the University of Cape
Town for 50 South African high school students, following up on one last month at the University of Oxford in London.


"I want to make sure that you all see the promise in yourselves," the first lady told the youngsters. "It's so clear to me
and so many others. The challenge is to make sure you see it in yourselves."
Mrs. Obama's message resonated with women in Africa.


"She gives hope not just to women of color, but to women everywhere," said Kini Maponya, a member of one of
Soweto's leading families who now lives in the U.S. The first lady spent Wednesday in Soweto, a black township in
Johannesburg that was at the center of the uprisings against apartheid, the now-abolished system of racial separation.

(See: Michelle Obama aiming to inspire African youth)


Before the youth leadership speech, Mandela's wife, Graca Machel, gave Mrs. Obama a rousing introduction that nearly
moved the first lady to tears.


"We welcome you as a daughter of African heritage and we can call you the queen of our world," Machel said.

Mrs. Obama said she doesn't understand why some things, such as that speech, go really well, and why other things just
go OK.

"I just want to be useful," she said.


There's no question that she is useful and will continue to be because, as she often says, there is much more work to do.

For one thing, the presidential campaign season is revving up in the U.S. and her husband wants another four years in
office. While also shies away from the idea that she's the president's "secret weapon," as she came to be known during
the 2008 campaign, Mrs. Obama is helping him raise money this coming week at three fundraisers in Boston and
Burlington, Vt




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781844 Date: 09/30/2015
