     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777746 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Friday, January 21, 2011 3:26 PM
To:
Subject:                           FW: CoM Conference/CVE Session



FYI on why Steve is so good.


From: Mull, Stephen D
Sent: Friday, January 21, 2011 3:07 PM
To: Benjamin, Daniel S
Cc: Sullivan, Jacob 3; Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: RE: CoM Conference/CVE Session

Hi Dan,
Thanks for laying all this out, and of course you're right that there's absolutely no question that S/CT is the Department's
lead on CVE issues. Your e-mail beat me to the punch in laying out to you and the other Assistant Secretaries the
Secretary's rationale for structuring the breakout sessions at the conference and explaining the role she'd like you to
play — apologies for that.

One of the common complaints we've heard from past participants in regional chiefs of mission conferences is that they
tend to be a one-way transmission of "the view from Washington" from a series of Department officials, with insufficient
opportunities for Ambassadors to provide input. The Secretary very much wanted to avoid that dynamic at this
conference, so asked us to use these breakout sessions to maximize the opportunity for the Ambassadors to provide
their insights — i.e. get them to do all the talking. To promote that dynamic, we largely (and purposely) selected
facilitators for these sessions who are not the action office or substantive experts on the topic; otherwise there's a risk
Ambassadors would tend to defer more to the facilitators instead of the other way around.

That said, the Secretary very much expects the relevant Assistant Secretary/equivalent to be in these sessions to hear
the ideas from the field as a resource for their management of the policy question, and also to serve as a resource for
any questions that may arise in the course of discussions. To that end, she hopes that you will attend the CVE sessions
as the Department's CVE lead to play those roles. To make sure that things stay on track, we'll also strongly encourage
the facilitators to be in touch with you and your team ahead of time to make sure that they will ask the right questions
and manage the sessions in a way that will be most helpful to you.

I admit this is a break from past tradition on these things, and it may turn out not to work, in which case, I have every
confidence we'll ask you to run the session the next time we do one of these (and there's no doubt that this will be an
important issue at every such conference for the foreseeable future). I hope that this makes sense and that you can live
with this approach.

Many thanks,
Steve


From: Benjamin, Daniel S
Sent: Friday, January 21, 2011 12:29 PM
To: Mull, Stephen D
Cc: Sullivan, Jacob
Subject: CoM Conference/CVE Session




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777746 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777746 Date: 09/30/2015



Steve—

I understand that plans are afoot to have EUR (Gordon) and SRMC (Pandith) lead the session on CVE at the Chiefs of
Mission conference. We find this deeply problematic. S/CT has both the Department and interagency acknowledged
lead on CVE. We have by far the most CVE activity going on at State, including a wide range of analytic and
programmatic work. When it came to briefing the President on the Secretary's plan for Strategic Counterterrorism, a
central component of which involves CVE, she asked me to do the presentation. We represent the Department regularly
at the Tuesday WHSR meetings with the President, where we update him on, among other things, CVE; I am slated to be
the deputy chair of the C.SCC, which is perhaps the Department's foremost major CVE initiative this year.

S/CT has also spearheaded the effort to create a Department-wide CVE community of interest and convened the
Administration's first interagency summit on the subject. In the context of our RSI meetings with posts in key regions,
we have been working to motivate our ambassadors to innovate in this area. We have run three major international
conferences in little more than a year on the subject. We are creating the Global Counterterrorism Forum, one of whose
key working groups will be on CVE. Moreover, as I've discussed with both Cheryl and Jake, the transformation of 5/CT
from its current state to a full-fledged bureau, as envisioned in the QDDR, will center on the role we are developing in
CVE and capacity building.

In short, I feel it essential that we lead this session. EUR is involved in putting CVE officers in some of its embassies, an
initiative we have strongly supported in line with our goal of doing the same in all regional bureaus. Moreover, Farah's
CVE role is a subordinate to her outreach activity, and her mandate specifies that she coordinate with us on CVE, on
which, again, we have the lead. So the plan, as it exists now, does not make sense and would do real damage to what
we are seeking to achieve in this area. I hope you understand and can rearrange accordingly.

Dan

Daniel Benjamin
Ambassador-at-Large
Coordinator for Counterterrorism
U.S Department of State
202-647-9892




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777746 Date: 09/30/2015
