        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785097 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, September 29, 2011 8:49 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: SWT Updates, Sept. 29



Fyi

• CIEE Employer Forum: Rick Ruth spoke today to around 40 SWT employers and 5 industry associations on the state of
SWT. He emphasized the benefits of the program, outlined current scrutiny, and warned employers to follow rules
scrupulously. Several employers, including two Six Flags parks and businesses in Mt. Rushmore and the Grand Canyon,
emphasized their need of SWT participants to remain in business. They argued SWT helped preserve American jobs since
American college students typically can't work before June or after mid-August. Other SWT employers are in low
unemployment areas or remote areas where they have trouble finding American workers.



      Original Message
From: Noyes, Julieta Valls
Sent: Thursday, September 29, 2011 06:53 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Mull, Stephen D; Klevorick, Caitlin B
Subject: SWT Updates, Sept. 29


Hi Cheryl, Here are today's updates.


• Palmyra Investigation: ECA is reviewing newly-received information from Palmyra and will make preliminary findings at
the end of next week. The report will include a list of regulatory violations already identified. (ECA is currently reviewing
the job offers of the participants, the issue of rent, contracts with foreign agents, program costs, participant screening
and selection, and reports of threats and harassment of participants by CETUSA staff.)


• Sponsor Sanction Letter: Tomorrow, ECA will circulate for clearance by C staff, L, and M its draft letters to impose
penalties on 43 of 50 sponsors. .


• CIEE Employer Forum: Rick Ruth spoke today to around 40 SWT employers and 5 industry associations on the state of
SWT. He emphasized the benefits of the program, outlined current scrutiny, and warned employers to follow rules
scrupulously. Several employers, including two Six Flags parks and businesses in Mt. Rushmore and the Grand Canyon,
emphasized their need of SWT participants to remain in business. They argued SWT helped preserve American jobs since
American college students typically can't work before June or after mid-August. Other SWT employers are in low
unemployment areas or remote areas where they have trouble finding American workers.


• NY Times Interview: Mike Hammer provided a detailed readout separately.


Thanks. Julieta




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785097 Date: 09/30/2015
