     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781128 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL


From:                            Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                            Friday, July 22, 201111:46 PM
To:
Subject:                         Fw: Norway Gun Attack Kills 80 People, Police Arrest Man (Bloomberg)



Shocking and horrendous



From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Friday, July 22, 2011 11:40 PM
To: NEWS-EUR; NEWS-Mahogany; NEWS-SC
Cc: SES-O_Shift-I; SES-0_0S; SES-O_CMS
Subject: Norway Gun Attack Kills 80 People, Police Arrest Man (Bloomberg)



A gunmen    killed at least 80 people at a youth camp on an island near Oslo after a bomb attack in the center of
the capital killed seven people, police said.

A 32-year-old Norwegian man was arrested on the island of Utoeya, about 40 kilometers (25 miles) from Oslo,
Acting Police Chief Sveinung Sponheim said at a news conference in Oslo yesterday. The same person may be
behind the bombing and the shootings on the island, Sponheim said.

The death toll on the island "could be higher," Trine Dyngeland, a police official, said by telephone from Oslo
early today. "Search operations are still ongoing, both on land and sea."

The blast in central Oslo killed seven people and shattered windows at the office of Prime Minister Jens
Stoltenberg. The attacks are the deadliest in Europe since bomb blasts at Moscow's Domodedovo Airport in
January left at least 37 people dead.

Hundreds of youths were attending the camp organized by the youth wing of Stoltenberg's Labor Party.

"The search may take a while as the island has a number of buildings and forested areas," Anders Frydenberg, a
spokesman for Oslo police, said by telephone today. He declined to say whether police believe the shooting was
carried out by a single gunman or multiple people and declined to comment on the identity or motives for the
attack. Police will hold a news conference in Oslo at 8 a.m. local time today.

Stoltenberg, called the attack on his office "cowardly" and said it wouldn't interrupt government functioning.
Stoltenberg was due to appear today at the youth gathering on Utoeya, Sponheim said. The suspected shooter,
who wore a police uniform, wasn't a police officer, he said.

Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt said he contacted Stoltenberg to convey his condolences. "From a
Swedish perspective, we're following the ongoing development," he said. "There is still a lot that is unclear
about what has happened."

Neighboring Sweden had a brush with what police treated as a possible terrorist attack in December when a
suicide bomber injured two people in central Stockholm.

Danish Prime Minister Lars Loekke Rasmussen sent a statement conveying his "deepest sympathy and
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781128 Date: 09/30/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781128 Date: 09/30/2015




solidarity" with the Norwegian people. U.K. Foreign Secretary William Hague described the bombing in a press
release as "horrific."

Before the explosion, a car drove into the government quarter, the police said in a statement. No government
ministers were hurt, Stoltenberg told broadcaster NRK.

Eirik Borg, a back office worker at stockbrokerage Fearnley Fonds based near the scene, said he saw smoke
billowing from the government quarter after hearing the blast.

"We felt the impact very hard throughout the building," Borg said in a phone interview. "All the windows were
breaking and we actually thought lightning hit our roof. From our terrace, we saw white smoke."

The bombing initially sent Norway's currency and stocks lower. The hone weakened as much as 1 percent
against the dollar and was trading 0.4 percent lower at 8:30 p.m. local time yesterday. Against the euro, the
krone was little changed at 7.7851 after losing as much as 0.4 percent. The benchmark OBX stock index fell as
much as 0.4 percent before closing little changed.

"Large sections of the center of Oslo have been evacuated and the police are urging people to stay away from
the center of the city and limit their use of mobile phones," police said in a statement. Sponheim said police
don't expect further blasts.

The country's Ministry of Petroleum suffered "massive damage" as a consequence of the blast, spokesman
Haakon Smith- Isaksen said by phone. Norway is the world's seventh-largest oil exporter.

"There was a huge explosion, the windows just blew out," Smith-Isaken said. "There is much debris, people are
injured."

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781128 Date: 09/30/2015
