      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785407 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL


From:                             Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
Sent:                             Monday, May 30, 2011 8:14 AM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Feud in Kazakh President's Family Spills Into U.S. (NYT)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Monday, May 30, 2011 08:05 AM
To: NEWS-Mahogany; NEWS-SCA; NEWS-WlkiLealcs
Cc: SES-O_Shift-II; SES-0 OS; SES-O_CMS; SES-O_SWO
Subject: Feud in Kazakh 'resident's Family Spills Into U.S. (NYT)

WASHINGTON — Four years ago, Kazakhstan's foreign minister summoned the United States ambassador to
a meeting in Astana, the capital of his oil-rich nation, to warn that a family squabble between the country's
president and his son-in-law — two of the country's most powerful men — had boiled over.
Government authorities had charged Rakhat Aliyev, the son-in-law, with kidnapping executives from a
prominent bank. Mr. Aliyev, in turn, had accused President Nursultan Nazarbayev of rolling back the clock to
the country's dictatorial Soviet days. "Mr. President for life," he labeled his father-in-law.
That call to the United States Embassy was the start of what has become an extraordinary lobbying and public
relations war here in Washington, a still-unfolding fight that one State Department official has called a "blood
feud to the death."
With billions of dollars at stake, plenty of people here have been willing to play bit roles in the Nazarbayev
family drama, including teams of corporate lawyers, Capitol Hill lobbyists, a former American ambassador to
Kazakhstan and the sister of a lawmaker. The dueling lobbyists have appealed to more than three dozen
members of Congress, either to condemn the Kazakh government or help form pro-Kazakhstan caucuses. (One
congressman even nominated the president for the Nobel Peace Prize.)
Prominent Washington research institutes have issued glowing reports about the country — after being paid by
the government. And there have been charges and countercharges of illegal payments to unidentified members
of Congress.
The bitter fight shows how the United States can be drawn into other nations' domestic squabbles, which
seemingly have nothing to do with American foreign policy, and how these disputes can threaten important ties:
Kazakhstan is a major oil supplier and a critical supply route for the United States military in Afghanistan.
In taking his case to Washington, Mr. Aliyev has variously sought safe passage to the United States, help in
recovering $2 billion that relatives claimed they lost from seized businesses, or at least the satisfaction of
embarrassing Mr. Nazarbayev. For his part, the Kazakh leader wants to make sure that the Americans stay out
of the dispute, and not allow it to affect their alliance with his government.
The Obama administration has done just that. Through comments in secret diplomatic cables, the former
ambassador to Kazakhstan made clear his wariness of being drawn in.
"Both sides — the government and Aliyev — seek to manipulate us to their own advantage," Richard E.
Hoagland, who ended his term as United States ambassador early this year, wrote in February 2009 in one of
more than a dozen State Department cables obtained by the antisecrecy group WikiLeaks that mentioned the
dispute.
Mr. Nazarbayev, 70, a former steel worker and Soviet-era Communist Party leader, has been in power for two
decades, presiding over Central Asia's most vibrant economy. Human rights activists, however, have long
accused him of persecuting dissidents and political opponents.
Mr. Aliyev, 48, has served as chief of the tax police, deputy foreign affairs minister and head of the Kazakh
equivalent of the K.G.B. But critics say he used his clout to secretly take over private companies for financial

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785407 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785407 Date: 09/30/2015



gain, often by threatening violence.
Now hiding somewhere in Europe, he has been convicted back home on what he claims are trumped-up
criminal charges, including a coup attempt. His wife divorced him in June 2007, and the Kazakh government
has taken businesses owned by him and members of his extended family.
No longer powerful at home, Mr. Aliyev turned to Washington, knowing that his former father-in-law cared
greatly about his reputation there.
Early in 2008 he hired RJI Government Strategies, a small Washington lobbying group whose consultants
included Tanya Rahall, sister of Representative Nick J. Rahall II, a West Virginia Democrat; and a friend of
Representative Darrell Issa, Republican of California. Both congressmen were booked on a trip to Kazakhstan
to discuss energy policy with Mr. Nazarbayev.
Before their departure, members of RJI met with Mr. Issa to urge him to express strong concerns about the harm
done to a relative of Mr. Aliyev named Devincci Hourani, whose oil-company assets in Kazakhstan were
seized, according to a letter to Mr. Issa from RJI.
Mr. Issa, who had developed a rapport with the Kazakh president on an earlier visit; nonetheless agreed to take
up the plight of Mr. Hourani. Though he stepped into the fight, he still maintained a close connection to the
president, nominating him that summer for the Nobel Prize, a move that drew ridicule from human rights
activists.
Ms. Rahall worked on behalf of Mr. Aliyev and later for Mr. Hourani through 2010, contacting the offices of at
least two dozen members of Congress. They included Representative Howard L. Berman, Democrat of
California, then chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, whose office said he discussed the dispute
with the State Department.
Ms. Rahall also pursued a second strategy. "The alternative is to embarrass the existing regime," she wrote in a
July 2008 e-mail to her boss.
She pressed House members to criticize the Kazakh government's human rights record. At her request, at least
five statements were published in the Congressional Record, one citing Mr. Aliyev as a victim of his
government. Separately, Mr. Aliyev offered to provide the Justice Department with documents that he claimed
could prove that his former father-in-law accepted bribes from a businessman representing American oil
companies that were seeking drilling rights in Kazakhstan.
The offensive worried Kazakh officials.
"I need you to look me in the eye and tell me once again that your government has no official contact of any
kind with Ralchat Aliyev," Foreign Minister Kanat Saudabayev told Ambassador Hoagland in August 2009.
"We know that he has 'offered himself to you."
Mr. Hoagland reassured the minister, according to a diplomatic cable. "We do not want any contact with him,
and we would not want to see him in the United States because we understand clearly that would be a disaster
for the bilateral relationship," the ambassador replied.
In Washington, Mr. Nazarbayev's government bolstered its own defenses. Officials at the Kazakh Embassy
signed new lobbying contracts — three in the last three years totaling $3.7 million, though the officials said the
contracts were unrelated to Mr. Aliyev's attacks.
Still, the government lobbyists and consultants frequently responded to criticism by Mr. Aliyev's team. APCO
Worldwide, a lobbying and public relations firm whose team included A. Elizabeth Jones, a former United
States ambassador to Kazakhstan, issued a statement in 2008 rejecting the suggestion that Mr. Nazarbayev was
trying to become "president for life."
Lobbying records show that a "Friends of Kazakhstan" caucus was created in March 2008, just after APCO
lobbyists met with seven lawmakers or their staffs, including an aide to Mr. Issa, who then joined the group. A
small Washington firm named Policy Impact Communications helped create a similar group, the Central Asia
Caucus, in late 2009.
Kazakhstan paid institutes affiliated with Johns Hopkins University and the Center for Strategic and
International Studies more than $350,000 in the three years to subsidize research, resulting in largely favorable
reports on the nation. "I call it enlightened authoritarianism," Margarita Assenova, the director of the Institute
for New Democracies, an affiliate of C.S.I.S. that issued several of the reports, said in an interview, referring to
the Nazarbayev government.
The newest front in the fight is the United States District Court in Washington. A lawsuit filed there late last
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785407 Date: 09/30/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785407 Date: 09/30/2015




year by relatives of Mr. Aliyev — who are seeking $2 billion in damages from two American consulting firms
— claims that the Kazakh government has been funneling money to members of Congress to make sure they do
not side with Mr. Aliyev or his relatives, Mr. Hourani and his brother Issam, whose oil company assets were
seized. Issam Hourani is married to Mr. Aliyev's sister.
If the allegation were true, such an effort would violate federal law. But the Kazakh Embassy and lawyers
representing the consulting firms say that the letter Mr. Aliyev has entered into the court record as evidence —
supposedly written by the Kazakh ambassador — is a forgery, just the latest in a string of what they called dirty
tricks by Mr. Aliyev and his paid advocates here.
"Aliyev has been trying to bring down the president of Kazakhstan for a long time," said Morton S. Taubman, a
lawyer for one defendant. "This is another step in his long effort to try to do just that."


NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785407 Date: 09/30/2015
