         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782788 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                                                    RELEASE IN
                                                                                                                                    FULL


 From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
 Sent:                                         Sunday, October 9, 2011 9:10 PM
 To:
 Subject:                                      Fw: EU asks Israel, Palestinians to meet soon (Reuters)




• From: OpsNewsTicker
  Sent: Sunday, October 09, 2011 06:49 PM
  To: NEWS-Mahogany
  Cc: SES-0
  Subject: EU asks Israel, Palestinians to meet soon (Reuters)


 BRUSSELS, Oct 9 (Reuters) - The European Union said on Sunday it plans to invite Israeli and Palestinian
 representatives to meet "in the coming days" to discuss resuming peace negotiations.

    The announcement by Catherine Ashton, High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
 Policy, was made after a meeting of the Middle East Quartet - the EU, the United States, Russia and the United
 Nations.

    The Quartet discussed what to do next to encourage the two sides to resume "substantive" negotiations as
 soon as possible.

   Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas has demanded that Israel halt all settlement building in the occupied
 West Bank before Palestinians will restart talks. But Israel has made clear it is not ready to do that.

   Last month, Abbas formally asked the United Nations to recognise a Palestinian state in the West Bank and
 Gaza Strip, a move opposed by Israel and the United States. They say only a negotiated peace can end the
 Middle East conflict and create a Palestinian state alongside Israel.

    In Jerusalem, an Israeli official contacted by Reuters would not comment on the planned invitation, but
 suggested Israel would be ready to attend.

    Israel has "repeatedly expressed its willingness to start direct peace talks with the Palestinians face to face
 without any preconditions whatsoever," the official said. He added: "We hope the Palestinians will be ready,
 too."



 News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
 by Department sources.




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782788 Date: 09/30/2015
