UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781053 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                  B6



                                     UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE
                                      FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY
                                        AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS
                                              WASHINGTON




                                                                                          July, 1, 2011

   Dear President Museveni,

         As you are both a personal friend and an important partner for my government, I wanted
   to communicate directly with you about my decision to return to the private sector.

           After two years in service to the Administration of President Obama and my friend
   Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, I have decided it is time for me to return to the activities I
   know best -- finding opportunities for investment and business that help build strong economies
   and promote development. Working for President Obama and Secretary Clinton has been an
   honor, but it is time for me to return to the city -- New York — and the work that I most enjoy. I
   look forward to joining my son Brian. who you met on my last visit to Uganda. and finding new
   opportunities for investment in Africa and other regions of the world.

          As a friend and a potential investor in Africa, I must tell you that I am concerned about
   recent events in Uganda that have tarnished Uganda's image and raised questions about the
   country's commitment to respect the rights of all its citizens. The reaction to recent "walk to
   work" protests. efforts to rein in the free press, and the security forces' treatment of Dr. Kizza
   Besigye are the most visible signs of an overreaction to what appears to be a peaceful political
   protest. As you and I have discussed, I am also concerned about the protection of gay and
   lesbian citizens, whose rights have been challenged by parliamentarians seeking to criminalize
   their status. Tolerance for dissent and political dialogue seems to be decreasing, which hurts
   Uganda's hard-won reputation as a just society and good place to invest and do business.

           I am also concerned on a personal level about how you are perceived in handling these
   events. You know from our work together when I was at Discovery that I have been a great fan
   and admirer of your many accomplishments. From your fight against the tyranny of your
   predecessors to your invitation to Asians to return to Uganda, your leadership on the HIV/AIDS
   issue, and your work to build strong democratic institutions have marked you as one of the great
   leaders of modem Africa. I do not want to see that proud record of accomplishment tarnished.

   I urge you to think of your legacy and to dedicate the remainder of your time in government to
   strengthening democracy in Uganda, putting in place a transparent and credible transition
   process, and preparing a strong democratic foundation, based on law, for the generations of
   Ugandan leaders that follow. In doing so, you will provide a model of 21st century leadership
   not only for the citizens of Uganda but for young people across Africa and around the world.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781053 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781053 Date: 09/30/2015




            Perhaps the greatest gift George Washington 'gave the American people was the
    precedent of regular peaceful transfers of power. Great African leaders like Nelson Mandela,
    Julius Nyerere, Leopold Senghor, and Quett Masire have also acted in the same manner and have
    in the process strengthened the democratic traditions in their countries. By offering the people of
    Uganda that same gift., you will help solidify your own long-term legacy and Uganda's success as
    a modern state.

            You have struggled long and hard my friend and now, once again you have the
    opportunity to demonstrate your strength and wisdom as a great leader. I and your friends around
    the world stand ready to support you as you move forward along the path to true democracy that
    will ensure peace and prosperity for the people of your beloved Uganda, the great Pearl of
    Africa.

           As always, I think of you with great respect and trust you will always feel free to call on
    me for anything at any time My private number and e-mail address are below.

                                                  With best wishes,




                                                 Judith A. McHale




   Email: ,

   Mobile:




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781053 Date: 09/30/2015
