      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783301 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL


From:                             Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                             Saturday, September 24, 201110:57 AM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Bahrain holds vote to fill seats vacated during unrest (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Saturday, September 24, 2011 10:23 AM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Bahrain holds vote to fill seats vacated during unrest (Reuters)



MANAMA, Sept 24 (Reuters) - The main opposition boycotted elections in Bahrain on Saturday held to fill
parliamentary seats that were vacated by its members during a crackdown on a mostly Muslim Shi'ite protest
movement in the Sunni-ruled monarchy.

    The low turn-out of voters would appear to favour pro-government candidates in the Gulf island state, home
to the U.S. Navy's Fifth Fleet.

   Jalil al-Alli, one of two candidates running for a seat in the Shitite town of Saar, said he was standing
because it was "better to work with the system than not".

   "I felt that running would be in the interests of the people," Alli said. "We need to monitor ministers and
tackle issues like unemployment."

   Shi'ites, who form Bahrain's majority community, took to the streets in February to demand more
representation and access to jobs and benefits.

   At least 30 people were killed, hundreds wounded and more than 1,000 detained in a government crackdOwn
backed by troops brought in from Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.

   The Wefaq opposition reacted by quitting 18 of the 20 seats in parliament and was boycotting Saturday's
election to fill them, saying that government efforts at reconciliation failed to
address the Shi'ites' grievances.

  Four candidates out of the 18 were uncontested so Saturday's vote is for 14 seats in a parliament with limited
powers.

  "I don't think Bahrain is ready for a stronger parliament," said candidate Jamal Saleh, a Sunni Muslim, who
was at a polling station in a shopping mall in a pro-opposition district.

    The presiding judge at the polling station, Amal Ahmed Abdul, said voter turnout was lower than usual but
 those who had turned out were enthusiastic.

    "People are insisting on their right to vote even if they don't find their name on the list," Abdul said. "They
 are going back to officials and investigating to make sure there is a place they can vote."
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783301 Date: 09/30/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783301 Date: 09/30/2015




   Despite its Shi'ite majority, Bahrain is governed by the Sunni al-Khalifa dynasty, which allies Saudi Arabia
and the United States see as a bulwark against the regional influence of Shi'ite power Iran. °

   On the eve of the election, police blocked protesters trying to march to the capital Manama, witnesses
said.

   More radical elements of the opposition have tried several times to march back into the city in recent weeks
and Friday's attempt appeared to be the largest since the crackdown.

   But police barred their way, including roads to the Sanabis area and Bahrain Financial Harbour, which flank
the central roundabout that was the centre of the protests seven months ago.




    ARAB SPRING LINKS

   At one polling station, graffiti had been painted over and posters of King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa and
banners encouraging people to vote, with slogans such as 'With your vote we complete the picture', adorned the
walls.

   A short distance away, the graffiti had more provocative slogans -- 'Down with Hamad' and 'The people want
to bring down the regime'.

  In a speech on Friday, Wefaq leader Sheikh Ali Salman likened the protest movement to those that have
swept other Arab countries this year.

   "The conflict in Bahrain is between those who want freedom and democracy and those who support
dictatorship, as is the case in Egypt, Tunisia, Yemen, Libya and Syria," he said.

  "Our demands are for freedom and justice, and if we achieve that, it will be for the better of citizens --
Sunnis and Shia."

   Since the height of the unrest the government has struggled to restore its image as a business-friendly Gulf
hub, launching a national dialogue in July to discuss reforms.

   Wefaq also pulled out of that forum, calling it a charade after the opposition bloc was accorded only 35 seats
out of 300 at the table.

   Based on the talks, King Hamad agreedto expand the elected lower house's powers of scrutiny. But the
appointed upper council, the Shura, was left untouched.


News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783301 Date: 09/30/2015
