      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780659 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                            RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
Sent:                              Wednesday, July 20, 2011 7:27 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: AP (Matt): Clinton urges India to expand influence



This is Matt Lee's take on your speech



    Original Message
From: Adler, Caroline E
Sent: Wednesday, July 20, 2011 07:20 AM
To: stratcomm; Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma; Fuchs, Michael H; Rooney, Megan
Subject: AP (Matt): Clinton urges India to expand influence

AP: Clinton urges India to expand influence

By MATTHEW LEE,
07.20.11, 06:46 AM EDT

CHENNAI, India -- U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton on Wednesday challenged India to expand its traditional
sphere of interest from South Asia to neighboring regions to compete with increasing Chinese assertiveness.

Clinton sought to nudge India to project its influence eastward, toward China's backyard in Southeast Asia and the
Pacific Rim, as well as boost engagement in Central Asia, on China's western flank. She said the U.S. and India shared
values that made them powerful partners in promoting security, democracy and development in these areas.

She reassured India that the United States would not abandon Afghanistan or allow it to become a haven for terrorism
again, and made clear that the U.S. has a vital ongoing stake in ensuring stability in India's archrival, Pakistan. But India
should play a constructive role, too, she said.

"Our interests align and our values converge," she said in a speech in India's southeastern port of Chennai.

Clinton, the first U.S. secretary of state to visit India's fourth largest city, a growing manufacturing hub, chose the venue
because U.S. officials believe it is a natural jumping-off point for a greater Indian role in East Asia. As a major export
center, Chennai will be key to creating "a new silk road" to help Central Asia develop.

With its democratic traditions, India can "inspire others to follow a similar path of openness and tolerance," Clinton said.

"India's leadership has the potential to positively shape the future of the Asia-Pacific," she said. "We think that America
and India share a fundamentally similar vision for the future of this region."

From Chennai, Clinton will travel Thursday to Indonesia for a regional security conference, where she is expected to
renew U.S. concerns about Chinese aggressiveness with its neighbors, particularly in the South China Sea, where there
are numerous territorial disputes.

Last year, Clinton raised Beijing's ire by saying that maritime security in the South China Sea, over which China claims
sovereignty, was a U.S. national security interest. She made the matter a central point of her participation in the East
Asia Summit hosted by Vietnam.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780659 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780659 Date: 09/30/2015




In her speech Wednesday, Clinton said India could play an important role in helping to promote maritime security
beyond its own waters.

"The United States has always been a Pacific power because of our very great blessing of geography, and India,
straddling the waters from the Indian to Pacific Oceans, is with us a steward of these waterways," she said. "We are both
deeply invested in shaping the future of the rapidly changing region they connect."

She called for the two nations to help small Southeast Asian nations build a cooperative mechanism for dealing with
disputes. China is vehemently opposed to such an initiative, preferring to deal with each country on its own.

India and China are uneasy neighbors that fought a war in 1962, although there have been recent improvements. Clinton
stressed that cordial relations between India, China and the United States were important.

"This will not always be easy," she said. But she added that "if we want to address, manage or solve some of the most
pressing issues of the 21st century, India, China and the United States will have to coordinate our efforts."

In Central Asia, Clinton said it was in India's interest to spend time and resources on developing regional infrastructure,
including pipeline, energy, road and rail projects, that will boost commerce. At the same time, she said it was important
to eliminate archaic trade barriers to the benefit of Indian businesses.

"Helping people see regional neighbors as potential customers rather than adversaries is an important first step toward
building a broad-based constituency for peace and profitable coexistence," she said.

A "new silk road" should be created to help Afghanistan recover from decades of war without becoming a permanent
recipient of outside aid, Clinton said. This, in turn, would improve living standards and help stamp out poverty, which is a
main cause of extremism, she said.

Clinton allowed that the role she was asking India to play is ambitious.

"Yes, it is an ambitious agenda, but we can afford to be ambitious," she said. "This is not a time when any of us can
afford to look inward at the expense of looking outward. This is a time to seize the opportunities of the 21st century and
it is a time to lead."



    Original Message
From: Adler, Caroline E
Sent: Wednesday, July 20, 2011 06:37 AM
To: stratcomm; Sullivan, Jacob 1; Abedin, Huma; Fuchs, Michael H; Rooney, Megan
Subject: Press rxn to speech

"Speech was much more substantive than we expected."
"Lots to chew on."
We'll try and get wire clips shortly.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780659 Date: 09/30/2015
