      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784618 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                     B6


From:                             PIR <preines                                                                        B6
Sent:                             Tuesday, September 27, 2011 11:07 PM
To:
Cc:                               Huma Abedin; Jake Sullivan
Subject:                          Jamie Rubin



James Rubin Abruptly Departs Bloomberg
The New York Times
Tue, Sep 27, 2011

James P. Rubin, a former assistant secretary of state hired by Bloomberg News just 10 months ago to help lead its new
opinion-writing section, has left his job after a rocky start.

His departure came as a surprise not only because of his short tenure with Bloomberg but because of the pivotal role he
was supposed to play in an initiative that the company and its founder, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, see as central to
its growth as an influential media outlet.

Bloomberg announced Mr. Rubin's hiring last December with considerable fanfare, playing up his diplomatic experience
with the Clinton administration and placing him in charge of editorials on international affairs.

Mr. Rubin was part of a high-powered duo overseeing BIOOMberg View, as the editorial writing division is known, joining
David Shipley, the former op-ed editor of The New York Times. Mr. Shipley is remaining with Bloomberg View and will
become its sole executive editor.

Mr. Rubin's last day with Bloomberg was Monday. Both parties said their partnership was not working out as planned.

"It's clear, having discussed this with editors throughout the company, that this project wasn't the right fit," Mr. Rubin
said Tuesday. "I hope that Bloomberg View continues to play a constructive role in the public debate about international
and national affairs. I was proud to have participated in the launch of this new venture."

A spokesman for Bloomberg, Ty Trippet, said, "We appreciate his service and wish him the best in his next endeavor."

Those who worked with him said that Mr. Rubin, who had no former journalistic experience, struggled to fit into a
newsroom culture and at times clashed with his colleagues. Bloomberg prides itself on being a highly collaborative and
professional workplace where executives and lower level workers all sit in the same open, bullpen-style office
arrangement. Mr. Rubin, who had never worked in an open-office environment, raised eyebrows right away when he
objected that he did not have a private work space, said a person who was told of his complaints.

When he was later told he couid not use a conference room to do his writing, he used headphones to cancel out the
newsroom noise.

Mr. Bloomberg cast a wide net when he began searching for leaders of Bloomberg View, offering salaries of about
$500,000 for the top jobs.

Mr. Rubin lobbied aggressively for the executive editor post, and had the backing of the mayor despite the reservations
of some at the company who feared he was not the right for the position, according to several people briefed on the
hiring process. Mr. Bloomberg was said to be impressed with Mr. Rubin's enthusiasm for job and his State Department
credentials.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784618 Date: 09/30/2015
