       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783271 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                                                          RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Friday, September 23, 2011 9:33 AM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: Hamas tells Abbas not to beg for Palestinian state (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Friday, September 23, 2011 09:24 AM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Hamas tells Abbas not to beg for Palestinian state (Reuters)



GAZA (Reuters) - Palestinians should liberate their land, not beg for recognition at the United Nations, the
Islamist group Hamas said on Friday, firmly rejecting President Mahmoud Abbas's quest for statehood at the
U.N. General Assembly.

   Speaking hours before Abbas was due to ask formally that the United Nations recognise a Palestinian state,
senior Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh said this would not bring independence.

   "Our Palestinian people do not beg for a state. ...States are not built upon U.N. resolutions. States liberate
their land and establish their entities," said Haniyeh who heads the Hamas administration in the Gaza Strip.

   Hamas seized control of Gaza after a brief civil war against supporters of Abbas in 2007. The Palestinian
president holds sway in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and recent efforts to bring about reconciliation between
the two sides have stalled.

   "The Palestinian people have been fighting and resisting and struggling for more than 60 years, offering up
thousands of martyrs, thousands of prisoners...for the sake of liberating the land," he added, speaking to
reporters after morning prayers.

    "The state will not come about through this bargaining and this political blackmail," he said.

   Hamas's founding charter calls for the destruction of Israel and has repeatedly criticised Abbas for trying to
reach a negotiated peace deal brokered by the United States.

   Abbas says he is turning to the United Nations for statehood recognition because almost two decades of on-
off peace talks with Israel have failed to produce a lasting treaty.

   However, the United States has said it will veto any statehood resolution, arguing that the unilateral move
will make it harder to secure peace.

   Haniyeh said the U.S. veto showed Abbas was wasting his time and should focus instead on resolving the
political divisions with Hamas. "This is the choice to make, not running behind a mirage," he said.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783271 Date: 09/30/2015
