      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780660 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                             RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Wednesday, July 20, 2011 8:07 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: Reuters (Andy): Clinton tells India: "It's time to lead"



From Andy Quinn

    Original Message
From: Adler, Caroline E
Sent: Wednesday, July 20, 2011 08:02 AM
To: stratcomm; Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma; Fuchs, Michael H; Rooney, Megan
Subject: Reuters (Andy): Clinton tells India: "It's time to lead"

Clinton tells India: "It's time to lead"
By Andrew Quinn I Reuters —10 mins ago
http://news.yahoo.com/clinton-tells-india-time-lead-113004320.html

CHENNAI, India (Reuters) - Secretary of State Hillary Clinton told India on Wednesday "it's time to lead", urging the
government to do more to integrate economically with neighbors Afghanistan and Pakistan and take a more assertive
role across the Asia-Pacific.
Clinton, delivering a speech in the southern port city of Chennai, said New Delhi should exercise political influence to
match its fast-growing economic muscle.
"This is not a time when any of us can afford to look inward at the expense of looking outward. This is a time to seize the
opportunities of the 21st century and it is a time to lead," Clinton said.
U.S. officials billed Clinton's speech as a major address to outline Washington's vision for the U.S.-India partnership in
the coming century.
President Barack Obama, on a visit to India last November, publicly backed New Delhi's bid for a permanent seat on the
U.N. Security Council and U.S. officials

say they are looking to the world's largest democracy to become a more visible partner in facing global challenges.
Clinton listed a range of areas where India and the United States are cooperating, ranging from working on clean energy
technologies to addressing concerns over Iran's nuclear program.
But she said India could do more in two key areas: building a leadership role in

the Asia-Pacific region, where New Delhi already has a "Look East" policy, and using its thriving $1.6 trillion economy to
boost more fragile neighbors, including long-time foe Pakistan and Afghanistan.
In Asia, Clinton said India and the United States had aligning interests and values on everything from maritime security
to democracy and human rights -- areas where Washington has at times clashed with Asia's other rising giant, China.
"Because India shares these values and interests, expanding our cooperation can produce benefits for each of us,"
Clinton said, adding both New Delhi and Washington could still have "a strong, constructive" relationship with Beijing.
"This will not always be easy. There are important matters on which we all disagree, one with the others. But we do
have significant areas of common interest," she said.
"India, China and the United States will have to coordinate our efforts."
India, and the United States are looking with concern at China's increasingly assertive role, not just in its backyard but
also across the world where it can now combine economic and political might.
India and the United States, once on the opposite side of the Cold War divide, have boosted ties over the past decade,
as New Delhi seeks a greater global role

but at the same time the country's very DNA is traditionally to avoid being seen
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780660 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780660 Date: 09/30/2015




siding with one power or the other.
The United States, especially in light of challenges in Afghanistan and Pakistan, wants India to be an all-weather ally, but
a large part of the political elite in India still regard Washington with suspicion, partly because of its reluctance to take its
side on nuclear-armed rival Pakistan.
Clinton urged greater Indian participation in groups including the annual East Asia Summit, which Washington hopes will
become the major regional forum for dealing with political and security issues, and the ASEAN Regional Forum which
meets later this week in Bali, Indonesia.
Clinton said India should do more to support both political and economic progress in Afghanistan, where the Obama
administration has begun drawing down troops.
India is Afghanistan's biggest regional aid donor, having pledged $2 billion to help build roads and power lines in an
attempt to secure influence in a country it considers crucial to its security.
"Drawing down our troops is not the same as leaving or disengaging," Clinton said -- but added that India should join in
efforts to help Kabul build a strong economy, and an inclusive democracy, which may provide a bulwark against violent
extremism.
"We will continue to encourage New Delhi's constructive role," Clinton said, recognizing that some in India have
expressed concerns that Afghanistan's political reconciliation might be manipulated by outside forces such as Pakistan.
"Reconciliation -- achieving it and maintaining it -- will depend on the participation and support of Afghanistan's
neighbors, including both Pakistan and India," Clinton said.
"We all need to be working together."
She said India could work with Pakistan and its other neighbors to "adopt new rules for the 21st Century" to bring down
trade barriers and encourage regional projects such as a proposed natural gas pipeline stretching from Turkmenistan to.
India.

    Original Message
From: Adler, Caroline E
Sent: Wednesday, July 20, 2011 07:20 AM
To: stratcomm; Sullivan, Jacobi; Abedin, Huma; Fuchs, Michael H; Rooney, Megan
Subject: AP (Matt): Clinton urges India to expand influence

AP: Clinton urges India to expand influence

By MATTHEW LEE,
07.20.11, 06:46 AM EDT

CHENNAI, India -- U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton on Wednesday challenged India to expand its traditional
sphere of interest from South Asia to neighboring regions to compete with increasing Chinese assertiveness.

Clinton sought to nudge India to project its influence eastward, toward China's backyard in Southeast Asia and the
Pacific Rim, as well as boost engagement in Central Asia, on China's western flank. She said the U.S. and India shared
values that made them powerful partners in promoting security, democracy and development in these areas.

She reassured India that the United States would not abandon Afghanistan or allow it to become a haven for terrorism
again, and made clear that the U.S. has a vital ongoing stake in ensuring stability in India's archrival, Pakistan. But India
should play a constructive role, too, she said.

"Our interests align and our values converge," she said in a speech in India's southeastern port of Chennai.

Clinton, the first U.S. secretary of state to visit India's fourth largest city, a growing manufacturing hub, chose the venue
because U.S. officials believe it is a natural jumping-off point for a greater Indian role in East Asia. As a major export
center, Chennai will be key to creating "a new silk road" to help Central Asia develop.

With its democratic traditions, India can "inspire others to follow a similar path of openness and tolerance," Clinton said.
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780660 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780660 Date: 09/30/2015




"India's leadership has the potential to positively shape the future of the Asia-Pacific," she said. "We think that America
and India share a fundamentally similar vision for the future of this region."

From Chennai, Clinton will travel Thursday to Indonesia for a regional security conference, where she is expected to
renew U.S. concerns about Chinese aggressiveness with its neighbors, particularly in the South China Sea, where there
are numerous territorial disputes.

Last year, Clinton,raised Beijing's ire by saying that maritime security in the South China Sea, over which China claims
sovereignty, was a U.S. national security interest. She made the matter a central point of her participation in the East
Asia Summit hosted by Vietnam.

In her speech Wednesday, Clinton said India could play an important role in helping to promote maritime security
beyond its own waters.

"The United States has always been a Pacific power because of our very great blessing of geography, and India,
straddling the waters from the Indian to Pacific Oceans, is with us a steward of these waterways," she said. "We are both
deeply invested in shaping the future of the rapidly changing region they connect."

She called for the two nations to help small Southeast Asian nations build a cooperative mechanism for dealing with
disputes. China is vehemently opposed to such an initiative, preferring to deal with each country on its own.

India and China are uneasy neighbors that fought a war in 1962, although there have been recent improvements. Clinton
stressed that cordial relations between India, China and the United States were important.

"This will not always be easy," she said. But she added that "if we want to address, manage or solve some of the most
pressing issues of the 21st century, India, China and the United States will have to coordinate our efforts."

In Central Asia, Clinton said it was in India's interest to spend time and resources on developing regional infrastructure,
including pipeline, energy, road and rail projects, that will boost commerce. At the same time, she said it was important
to eliminate archaic trade barriers to the benefit of Indian businesses.

"Helping people see regional neighbors as potential customers rather than adversaries is an important first step toward
building a broad-based constituency for peace and profitable coexistence," she said.

A "new silk road" should be created to help Afghanistan recover from decades of war without becoming a permanent
recipient of outside aid, Clinton said. This, in turn, would improve living standards and help stamp out poverty, which is a
main cause of extremism, she said.

Clinton allowed that the role she was asking India to play is ambitious.

"Yes, it is an ambitious agenda, but we can afford to be ambitious," she said. "This is not a time when any of us can
afford to look inward at the expense of looking outward. This is a time to seize the opportunities of the 21st century and
it is a time to lead."



    Original Message
From: Adler, Caroline E
Sent: Wednesday, July 20, 2011 06:37 AM
To: stratcomm; Sullivan, Jacob 1; Abedin, Huma; Fuchs, Michael H; Rooney, Megan
Subject: Press rxn to speech

"Speech was much more substantive than we expected."

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780660 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780660 Date: 09/30/2015




"Lots to chew on."
We'll try and get wire clips shortly.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780660 Date: 09/30/2015
