        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783657 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Sunday, July 10, 2011 12:48 PM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: Quartet must take 'decisive action': Palestinians (AFP)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Sunday, July 10, 2011 12:36 PM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Quartet must take 'decisive action': Palestinians (AFP)




(AFP) - The Middle East peacemaking Quartet, which meets on Monday in Washington, must take "decisive
action" to restart peace talks, a senior Palestinian official said.

In a statement issued ahead of the meeting of representatives from the United States, United Nations, European
Union and Russia, Palestinian official Hanan Ashrawi urged the Quartet to "undertake its responsibilities
seriously."

The group is expected to discuss ways to restart stalled peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians, in a bid
to head off Palestinian attempts to seek membership at the United Nations in September.

The Palestinians have said they will not be deterred from seeking UNmembership, bUt that they remain open to
new talks if they are based on clear guidelines and Israel stops Jewish settlement construction during
negotiations.

"It is clear that if there is to be any genuine political momentum and progress, then the Quartet has to undertake
its responsibilities seriously," said Ashrawi, a member of the Palestine Liberation Organisation.

She called on the group to commit to clear guidelines and a timeframe for any new talks, and to "effectively
bring Israel to compliance, including a cessation of all settlement activities."

Talks between Israel and the Palestinians broke down shortly after they restarted in September 2010 when Israel
declined to renew a partial freeze on settlement construction in the West Bank.

The Palestinians have accused Washington of failing to insist on a new moratorium and weakening the Quartet's
position on settlement construction, which much of the international community regards as illegal.

"The United States must not again undermine its own standing and prospects for peace by diluting the Quartet's
political position or preventing positive engagement on the part of the international community," Ashrawi said.

"The Quartet must exhibit the political will to translate words into action. Until this happens there will be no
change to the current status quo."

NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783657 Date: 09/30/2015
