UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781687 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                             RELEASE IN
                                                                                                             FULL
 - Pursuant to the National Assembly of Serbia resolutions from December 26, 2007, July 25, 2007,
 February 14, 2007 and November 21, 2005, in which are the state policy toward Kosovo and
 guidance as to how to carry out that policy,

 - Having in mind the real danger to stability and the territorial integrity of Serbia, caused by the UDI
 of the provincial interim self-government institutions,

 - Notifying all international institutions that the Republic of Serbia, respecting the UN Charter and the
 Constitution, has the right and obligation to use legal means to oppose this possible development of
 the situation,

 - Expressing readiness, that even under the circumstances where the sovereignty and territorial
 integrity of the state are endangered, Serbia is committed to contribute to a peaceful and mutually
 agreed upon resolution to the issue, based on principles and norms of international law and the
 Constitution,

 - Guided by the necessity of continuity of a unified state policy, and of defending the honor and
 dignity of the people which the government legitimately and democratically represents:


 Based on the article 99. Point 7 of the Constitution, and article 8, point 1 of the Law on the National
 Assembly, the National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia at the session on July 30, adopts:

                                             The Declaration

   of the National Assembly of Serbia on the current situation in Kosovo and Metohia after the
          unilateral and violent acts of the interim self-government institutions in Pristina



 1. The National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia finds that the interim self-government institutions
 in Pristina attempted to change by force the reality on the ground, exert additional pressure on
 Serbia, and to essentially annul Resolution 1244.

 2. The National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia with especial concern, notes that certain
 international missions deployed in Kosovo based on decisions or authorization of the UN, with some
 of their activities are violating the status-neutral framework mandated by the (UNSC) Resolution
 1244 and supporting acts, thus endangering the rights and the survival of the Serb population and
 the interests of Serbia in the province.

  3. The National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia determines that these activities represent a
  brutal violation of international law, and above all of the UN Charter, the Helsinki Final Act, and UN
  Security Council Resolution 1244. Such acts and activities would directly endanger the sovereignty,
  territorial integrity and constitutional order of the Republic of Serbia.

  4. The National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia requests from the Government of Serbia to
  undertake the necessary measures in order to assure consistent respect of Resolution 1244 by all
  international missions in Kosovo,




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781687 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781687 Date: 09/30/2015




 5. The National Assembly condemns all violence in Kosovo and calls for a peaceful resolution of the
 crises caused by the unilateral act of Pristina,

 6. Having in mind all abovementioned facts, the National Assembly determines the framework of
 activities of state organs and other participants in the defense of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
 constitutional order of the Republic of Serbia:


 a) the defense of legitimate interests of Serbia and the people in Kosovo and Metohija, as an
 integral part of Serbia, under the interim administration of the United Nations, represents a priority
 for state institutions and all public factors in the state, until a compromise solution of this issue is
 adopted, based on the UN Security Council Resolution 1244.

 b) The National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia supports the Government of Serbia to continue
 the dialogue with Pristina with the intention to find a solution for concrete problems of citizens of
 Kosovo, and to reach a permanent compromise solution.

 The National Assembly calls the international community to condemn all unilateral acts that might
 endanger the successful results of the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.

 C) The Govemment is obligated to request from the international missions, based on the mandate
 and framework given by the UN Security Council Resolution 1244, to prevent unilateral activities of
 the interim institutions in Pristina, which jeopardize peace, stability and the possibility of a
 compromise solution, and change the existing situation in the field.

  d) The government is obligated to adopt concrete measures directed to continuation of all activities
  of Serbia's institutions on the territory of Kosova in conditions of additional obstructions and pressure
  of the interim institutions of self-government and a part of the international community.

  e) The government is particularly bound to act as efficiently as possible, in all circumstances that
  could emerge, in order to protect lives and property, rights and freedoms of the residents of the
  province, and especially Serbs and other residents endangered by violence.

  f) The government is obligated to adopt concrete and comprehensive plans for measures that would
  be undertaken in all areas of its jurisdiction in case of the deterioration of the situation in Kosovo.

  g) The National Assembly requests from the Government of Serbia regular reports on development
  in Kosovo in fulfillment of abovementioned activities and measures for protection of sovereignty,
  territorial integrity and the constitutional order of the Republic of Serbia.

  7. This declaration shall be published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781687 Date: 09/30/2015
