      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781792 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                                          RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                        Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                        Friday, August 19, 2011 6:39 AM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: Russia opposes Western calls for Assad to go (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Friday, August 19, 2011 05:25 AM
To: NEWS-Russia; Syria Unrest; NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Russia opposes Western calls for Assad to go (Reuters)

MOSCOW, Aug 19 (Reuters) - Russia opposes U.S. and European calls for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to
step down and believes he needs more time to implement promised reforms, a Foreign Ministry source said on
Friday.

   "We do not support such calls and believe that it is necessary now to give President Assad's regime time to
realise all the reform processes that have been announced," the Interfax news agency quoted the source as
saying.

   The position sets Russia firmly against the West, which has stepped up pressure on Assad five months into a
violent government crackdown against protesters seeking an end to his rule.

   On Thursday, U.S. President Barack Obama and the European Union made their first explicit demands for
Assad to give up power, and Western nations said they would draft a U.N. Security Council sanctions resolution
on Syria.

   Russia, which holds veto power as a permanent Security Council member, has said it would not support a
resolution on Syria but did back an Aug. 3 statement that criticised the violence and called for the clampdown to
stop.

    Russia, which has sold arms to Syria and has a naval maintenance facility there, has repeatedly urged Assad
to carry out promised reforms and has taken a more positive view of the government's actions on that score than
Western nations have.

    "Quite a lot has been done on this path," Interfax quoted the Foreign Ministry source as saying.

   "Most important is Assad's announcement yesterday that they are stopping all military operations. This is a
very important move and it bears witness to the intention of Assad and the Syrian authorities to proceed on the
path of reforms."

   Britain's U.N. ambassador said on Thursday that he did not believe military operations had ceased. U.N.
investigators say Assad's forces may have committed crimes against humanity in a campaign which killed at
least 1,900 civilians.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.



       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781792 Date: 09/30/2015
