UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779543 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL
 April 1, 2011

 Information on Libya, AQ, and al-Hasidi

 • Based on conversations with NEA, they do not believe that Abdulhakim al-
   Hasidi is linked to Al Qaeda or that Al Qaeda is fighting with the rebel forces in
   Libya.

 • Per my query, NBA put the question to Ahmed Jabril, an advisor to Transitional
   National Council (TNC) Chairman Mustafa Abdeljalil. He responded that al-
   Hasidi does not have a role as a commander of the rebel forces. The military is
   currently co-coordinated by Omar Hariri & Abdelfattah Younis, former
   Minister of the Interior. But there are press reports that there is likely to be a
   military leadership change (see translated media report below).

     The TNC advisor also reported that Abdulhakim al-Hasidi himself denied
     allegations that he was a leader in the opposition's military campaign against
     the regime and that he was working to create an Islamic state in Dama (a city
     east of Benghazi).

     The TNC advisor said that these allegations were propagated by Saif al-Islam
     and the regime to disparage the opposition and cause the West to be distrustful
     of the opposition, council, and revolutionary movement. He added that
     Abdulhakim al-Hasidi appeared on CNN to flatly deny all of Saif al-Islam's
     allegation.

     Separately, former regime Ambassador to the UN Abdulrahman Shalgham (and
     current TNC representative to the organization) suggested to Ambassador Cretz
     that while there may be lingering Al Qaeda sympathizers in the country's east
     (about 100), the Libyan government did not believe there remained active Al
     Qaeda fighters.

     Others I have checked with say we just don't know enough about the make-up
     or leadership of the rebel forces (due to classification reasons, I can talk more in
     person about this if you would like).

     NBA also noted that The Economist yesterday published the following:

        The freeing by post-revolutionary Egypt and Tunisia of thousands of
        Islamist political prisoners has closed a dark chapter for human rights in


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779543 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779543 Date: 09/30/2015




                                              2

        those countries. Outfits like Libya's Islamic Fighting Group and Egypt's
        Jamaat Islamiya, both of which pursued ten-or campaigns in the 1990s and
        were on the radical fringe, express a newfound keenness for peaceful
        politics, explaining that their past resort to violence was only a response to
        repression. The Libyan Islamic Fighting Group has changed its name to the
        Libyan Islamic Movement, and its 12-member politburo has pledged
        allegiance to the National Council in Benghazi.

        Media Report (Translated from Arabic)

        The Interim National Transitional Council in Libya said that they are
        considering a change in the military leadership after Al Qadhafi forces took
        over Brega again and made a real progress in other areas of the East, while
        the revolutionaries are still trying to defend I jdabeya and Misurata.

        The recent developments on the ground in Libya - which Al Qadhafi forces
        managed through it to regain control again on the towns of Brega and Ras
        Lanuf— has prompted the Council to convene a meeting to review the
        aspects of the military affairs after the retreat of the revolutionaries.

        The meeting - which was held on Thursday, in the city ofBenghazi in the
        east — was attended by the leaders of the Military Council and
        representatives of the coalition of February 17 revolution, also it was
        attended for the first time by delegates from the people of Misurata.

        The head of the Council, Mustafa Abdul Jalil said that the revolutionaries
        lack organization, and he did not rule out a change in military leadership
        of the management of operations in the field.
 Background on LIFG/Libya/ al-Hasidi (due to classification reasons, I can tell
 you a bit more in person, if you would like)

 • In terms of info on al-Hasidi specifically, he admitted that in the past he fought
   against coalition troops in Iraq and recruited "around 25" men from Derna in
   Eastern Libya for this purpose.

 • West Point's Combating Terrorism Center conducted a review of documents
   captured by allied forces from the town of Sinjar, Iraq, and released a report in
   the 2007 timeframe on foreign fighters entering Iraq via Syria.



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779543 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779543 Date: 09/30/2015




                                              3

 • This report revealed that while Saudi Arabia was by far the most common
   nationality of the fighters in the sample, Libya was the next most common
   country of origin. Libya contributed far more fighters per capita than any other
   nationality in the Sinjar Records (these records document the city/town/country
   of origin).

  • Al-Hasidi was a member of the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group (LLFG). The
    LIFG initially cooperated with Al-Qaeda, culminating in officially joining al-
    Qaeda in November 2007. However, as noted above, LIFG recently changed its
    name and pledged its allegiance to the National Council in Benghazi.

  • As noted in the press, al-Hasidi participated in killing dozens of Libyan troops
    in guerrilla attacks around Dem and Benghazi in 1995 and 1996.

  • According to the 2007 West Point Report: "Both Darnah and Benghazi have
    long been associated with Islamic militancy in Libya, in particular for an
    uprising by Islamist organizations in the mid-1990s.

     The Libyan government blamed the uprising in the mid-1990's on "infiltrators
     from the Sudan and Egypt" and one group—the Libyan Fighting Group
     (jama'ah al-libiyah al-muqatilah)—claimed to have Afghan veterans in its
     ranks.

     The Libyan uprisings became extraordinarily violent. Qadhafi used helicopter
     gunships in Benghazi, cut telephone, electricity, and water supplies to Darnah
     and famously claimed that the militants "deserve to die without trial, like dogs."

     Abu Layth al-Libi, LIFG's Emir, reinforced Benghazi and Darnah's importance
     to Libyan jihadis in his announcement, at the time, that LIFG had joined
     al-Qa'ida, saying: It is with the grace of God that we were hoisting the banner
     of jihad against this apostate regime under the leadership of the Libyan Islamic
     Fighting Group, which sacrificed the elite of its sons and commanders in
     combating this regime whose blood was spilled on the mountains of Damah, the
     streets of Benghazi, the outskirts of Tripoli, the desert of Sabha, and the sands
     of the beach."

  • Qadafhi, in order to retain his power, fought the LIFG.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779543 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779543 Date: 09/30/2015




                                              4

  • One particular view (just a view that I thought was worth noting) and one that
    some quarters might raise was characterized to me as follows:

     What is happening in Libya cannot be described as a problem, but as a
     condition (emanating from tribal culture, long historical conflicts, etc.). It's not
     something that is resolvable per se. But it can be leveraged.

     Ergo, for those who want Qadafhi gone, according to this view, care should be
     taken in who is supported, and before doing so, consideration should be given
     to removal of the remaining weapons infrastructure -- chemical,
     pharmaceutical, mustard gas, weapons plants, etc. -- before they come under
     new management.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779543 Date: 09/30/2015
