       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778401 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Saturday, March 12, 2011 11:52 AM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: S. Sudan accuses Bashir of ouster plot (AFP)




From: OpsNewsTicker@state.gov <OpsNewsTicker@state.gov>
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0_0S; SES-O_Shift-II
Sent: Sat Mar 12 11:47:52 2011
Subject: S. Sudan accuses BashIr of ouster plot (AFP)




KHARTOUM (AFP) — South Sudan on Saturday announced a suspension of talks with Khartoum due to an
alleged plot overseen by President Omar al-Bashir to oust its leaders ahead of the region's independence in July.
"We have details of a conspiracy to overthrow the government of south Sudan under the supervision of
President Omar al-Bashir himself," prompting the walkout from pre-partition talks, said Pagan Amum, secretary
general of the south's ruling Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM).
"The (north's ruling) NCP has been creating, training, supplying and arming various militia groups in southern
Sudan with the aim ... to destabilise southern Sudan and overthrow the government before July," Amum
charged.
The senior SPLM official, at a news conference in the Sudanese capital, said his party had the names of those
involved in the conspiracy, which it had asked the UN Security Council to investigate.
"This plan ... is to be implemented by the military intelligence inside the army, by the security advisers to the
president and by national security," Amum added.
He said the south was considering a cut in oil supplies to northern Sudan in response to the alleged plot.
On Saturday, a pre-dawn rebel attack on the capital of south Sudan's oil-rich Upper Nile state killed 11 people, a
southern official told AFP.
"Nine rebels have been killed in the fighting, and two policemen. Some of the rebels are still inside the town.
We can hear heavy gunfire," said Susan Oyach, an assistant in the state governor's office in Malakal.
The southern army said the rebel group which launched Saturday's attack was led by a man named as Ulony,
whose forces fought the SPLA in Owach, west of Malakal, in clashes earlier this week that killed more than 70
people.
Amum said the south had contacted the Security Council to probe the alleged "crimes" by NCP-backed rebel
militias in Jonglei's Fangak region and in Malakal on Saturday.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778401 Date: 09/30/2015
