UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778489 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL




                                     February 20, 2011

 Prime Minister Gilani
 Pakistan

 Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

         The United States deeply regrets the tragic events in Lahore on January 27,
  2011. We understand the sorrow felt by the families of the three Pakistani citizens
  who died, and we are keen to work with your government and the Punjab
  provincial authorities to settle the issues that this incident has raised. This is the
  right thing to do. At the same time, we expect that you will exercise leadership at
  this critical hour.

         As we proceed, however, we must not allow this incident to sidetrack the
  tremendous progress we have made in our bilateral relationship over the last two
  years. For us, the relationship with Pakistan is one of the most important bilateral
  relationships we have in the world. Our two countries have a long tradition of
  working together, and we now must work together to bring peace to Afghanistan,
  to set Pakistan's democracy on secure and prosperous foundations, and to combat
  the terrorist movements that threaten us both.

         Even as we do so, however, we must bear in mind that there are issues at
  stake that go beyond the scope of our purely bilateral relations. The 1961 Vienna
  Convention on Diplomatic Relations protects diplomatic personnel of all countries
  around the world. It is based on 500 years of international tradition, and it is vital
  to the conduct of normal diplomatic relations among states. Neither the United
  States nor Pakistan can compromise on the need for respect for diplomatic
  immunity without putting our diplomatic staff around the world at risk.

        I understand that questions have been raised about the status of Raymond
  Davis, who is at the center of this case. I would like to state clearly why the
  requirements of the Vienna Convention mandate Mr. Davis's immediate release.

         Under Article 7 of the Vienna Convention, the United States, like all sending
  states, is entitled to "freely appoint the members of the staff to the mission," as we
  did Mr. Davis. As a duly appointed member of the staff of the mission, Mr. Davis


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778489 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778489 Date: 09/30/2015




                                              2

 has privileges and immunities in Pakistan under international law, Vienna
 Convention Art. 39(1), as he has been assigned as a member of the staff of the U.S.
 diplomatic mission in Pakistan.

        Under the Convention, Mr. Davis's detention and the criminal proceedings
 against him in Pakistan are illegal. As a member of the administrative and
 technical staff, Mr. Davis does not hold all of the privileges and immunities that a
 diplomatic agent enjoys. There is no doubt, however, that administrative and
 technical staff members such as Mr. Davis enjoy both "immunity from the criminal
 jurisdiction of the receiving State" and inviolability from "any form of arrest or
 detention," pursuant to Vienna Convention Article 37(2).

        Article 44 provides that the receiving State must facilitate the departure of a
 person enjoying privileges and immunities. While Article 9 of the Convention
 permits the receiving State to declare such a person persona non grata or not
 acceptable, the individual's privileges and immunities stay in effect for a
 reasonable period to allow departure from the country. Pakistan has not exercised
 its rights under Article 9, but even if it did, it would have to permit Mr. Davis to
 depart.

        Accordingly, Pakistan is obligated under the Vienna Convention to
 recognize Mr. Davis's privileges and immunities in Pakistan as the consequence of
 his assignment as a member of the staff of the U.S. diplomatic mission in Pakistan.
 I would like to reaffirm to you that the United States respects the law and
 Pakistan's sovereignty, and we expect all representatives of our government to
 respect the laws of our host nation. We are cognizant of the Vienna Convention's
 provision that those enjoying privileges and immunities have a duty to respect
 local law, and we will redouble our efforts to ensure that our embassy personnel
 are aware of and conform their behavior to local law. I assure you that it is the
 practice of the U.S. government to conduct criminal investigations of these types
 of incidents, and we intend to follow that practice here, considering all the facts
 and relevant laws.

         Nonetheless, protections for the diplomatic personnel of states are
 fundamental and essential to the conduct of diplomatic relations among all
 sovereign states. Our two countries, like all nations, share a common interest in
 ensuring that these rules are strictly observed, even in the most difficult of
 situations. Pakistan's current inaction puts it in danger of a grave and almost
 unprecedented breach of these rules. I urge you to take all necessary steps to end
 the illegal detention and criminal proceedings against Mr. Davis and to provide for


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778489 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778489 Date: 09/30/2015




                                            -3-

 his safe exit from the territory of Pakistan, consistent with the provisions of the
 Vienna Convention. At that point, we can focus on the work before us: going
 beyond this tragic incident and turning to the true task of building strong ties
 between Pakistan and the United States, to the benefit of all.


                                                  Sincerely,



                                                  Hillary Rodham Clinton




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778489 Date: 09/30/2015
