     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779501 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                              Anne-Marie Slaughter <
Sent:                              Wednesday, February 23, 201110:48 PM
To:
Cc:                                Abedin, Huma
Subject:                           my thoughts are with you



You probably know this, but in case you don't, you should know that The Daily Beast has posted the most horrific
pictures of what is happening in Libya, including pictures of the bodies of soldiers reportedly burned in their barracks for
refusing to fire on their fellow citizens — these are also being sent all over Twitter. With this level of violence, force can
only be met by force. If the eastern provinces set up a government and invite the international community in, we have
good reason to believe that the army will defect as soon as possible. And the entire world would see, as they saw in
Bosnia, NATO forces using force to save Muslims. Remember Rwanda. Even a small deployment could have stopped the
killing. People will say that we will then get enmeshed in a civil war, that we cannot go into another Muslim country, that
Gaddafi is well armed, there will be a million reasons NOT to act. But all our talk about global responsibility and
leadership, not to mention respect for universal values, is completely empty if we stand by and watch this happen with
no response but sanctions. Acting together, at the invitation of a legitimate Libyan government rather than waiting for
the UN, could save thousands if not tens of thousands of lives and change the image of the United States overnight,
particularly with the millions of young people who are watching. Remember the role of the British in Sierra Leone.
Remember Kosovo. We could also get the AU to issue an invitation — there is precedent for that with the OAS in the
Cuban Missile Crisis.

I feel better knowing that you are leading our response — we need both toughness and a willingness to act. But I wish I
could help lighten your load.
AM




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779501 Date: 09/30/2015
