UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778316 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL




         po of YApii. YAKI
         Ya§ar Yaki, a founding member of the Justice and Development Party (AK
         Party), has been the Deputy Chairman of AK Party in charge of international
         relations from the date of its foundation untill the November 2002 elections and
         member of the governing board of the party until the General Congress of the
         party in 2005.

         In 2002 was elected Member of Parliament from the province of Duzce and
         became the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the 58th government.

         He served as the Chairman of the EU Committee of the Turkish parliament
         during the 22nd parliamentary term. At the July 2007 general elections, he was
         re-elected as the Deputy for Duzae.

         • Chairman of EU Committee of the Turkish Parliament

         • Co-Chairman of the Turkey-EU Joint Parliamentary Committee

         • Chairman of Turkey-France Friendship Group

         • Deputy-Chairman of Turkey-Egypt Friendship Group

         Mr. Ya§ar Yaki, who was born in Akcakoca in 1938, graduated from Ankara
         University, Political Sciences Faculty. After holding various positions abroad and
         within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, he followed courses in the NATO Defence
         College in Rome. He was appointed as Counsellor of Permanent Delegation of
         Turkey to NATO and Counsellor of Turkish Embassy in Damascus. He founded
         and chaired the Coordination Office established in order to provide secretarial
         services to the President of the Republic of Turkey in his capacity as the
         Chairman of the Standing Committee for Economic and Commercial Cooperation
         (COMCEC) of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference.

         He was Ambassador to Riyadh, Deputy Under-Secretary of the Foreign Ministry,
         Ambassador to Cairo and Permanent Representative of Turkey in UN Vienna
         Office.

         He taught Foreign Policy of Turkey in the Bilkent and Hacettepe Universities.

         He has been bestowed the decoration of "The King Abdelaziz" by the Saudi
         Government and the decoration of "Ordine della Stella della Solidarieta ltaliana"
         by the President of the Republic of Italy.

         Mr. Yaki speaks French, English and Arabic, is married and has one child.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778316 Date: 09/30/2015
