       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785561 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL


From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Tuesday, May 17, 2011 7:35 AM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: Palestinian Authority delays local vote to October (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTidcer
Sent: Tuesday, May 17, 2011 06:41 AM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0_0S; SES-O_SWO
Subject: Palestinian Authority delays local vote to October (Reuters)


RAMALLAH (Reuters) - The Palestinian Authority announced on Tuesday it was postponing local elections
scheduled for July until October, giving time to organise the vote in the Gaza Strip, now under control of
Hamas.

   The delay had been expected following a surprise unity deal in April between Palestinian President
Mahmoud Abbas's Fatah movement, which rules the West Bank, and Hamas, the Islamist group which has
controlled Gaza since 2007.

   Ghassan IChatib, spokesman for the Ramallah-based Palestinian administration, said delaying the vote until
October 22 would allow time for the body which oversees Palestinian elections to organise voting in the Gaza
Strip.

  The delay means the election will be held after September, when Abbas has said he will ask the United
Nations General Assembly to recognise a Palestinian state.

   The last time Palestinians voted was 2006, when Hamas won legislative elections, leading to a deep split in
the Palestinian national movement and the eventual establishment of rival governments in Gaza and Ramallah.

   The local elections will give an indication of the popularity of Fatah and Hamas ahead of presidential and
parliamentary elections, which the unity deal brokered by Egypt calls for within a year.

    Representatives of Fatah and Hamas are holding talks this week in Cairo aimed at agreeing on a government
of technocrats to run Palestinian affairs in both the West Bank and the Gaza Strip until the new elections are
held.

   The rival groups have agreed that the government will not include any members of either Fatah or Hamas, a
group which is hostile to Israel and whose security forces will continue to control the Gaza Strip.

    Municipal elections had been scheduled for the West Bank in 2010 but they were postponed after Fatah
failed to agree on a list of candidates.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785561 Date: 09/30/2015
