      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777659 Date: 09/30/2015


                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                 B6



From:                                Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                                Wednesday, February 16, 2011 8:56 PM
To:
Subject:                             FW: congratulations




From: Sheryl Sandberg [mailto:
Sent: Wednesday, February 16, 2011 6:54 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: congratulations

Cheryl,

I wanted to reach out and congratulate you and Secretary Clinton on the important and thoughtful speech she delivered
yesterday on Internet freedom. The Secretary highlighted the important challenges to advancing a freedom agenda and
laid out a reasoned framework that can guide international policymakers and private companies like ours. All of us at
Facebook are grateful for the opportunity to offer our ideas and suggestions as Alec Ross and others were field testing
elements of the framework — only the most recent example of the effective and productive collaboration we find in
working with your senior colleagues. We look forward to continuing to work together and supporting the Secretary in
this important work. On behalf of Mark Zuckerberg and myself, please give her our warmest congratulations.

Separately, I would like to invite Secretary Clinton to be a guest speaker at a dinner series I run at my home – the
Women of Silicon Valley. These are personal events that I have been hosting for about five years. Attendees are the
senior women working in the valley, most in technology companies as well as physicians and nonprofit leaders. Usually
40-50 women attend. The basic format is that we have a cocktail hour followed by a buffet dinner where we sit in a
large circle and have an open discussion with the guest speaker. The events are always completely off-the-record. In
one exception, we allowed this to be included in an article in Fortune, which you can look at to get a feel for this --
http://money.cnn.com/2008/09/25/news/newsmakers/selIers valleygirls.fortune/index.htm?postversion=20081. Past
guest speakers have included Mayor Bloomberg, Queen Rania, Steve Ballmer, Carly Fiorina, Gloria Steinem, John
Chambers, Arianna Huffington, Meg Whitman, Billie Jean King, George Lucas, and many others. If Secretary Clinton ever
had an evening in the San Francisco area where she could do this, I would love to have her. I think this is an important
audience for her to reach, particularly in light of yesterday's speech.

On a more personal note, I have long heard a lot about you through our mutual friends. I am a huge fan of yours from
watching your career from afar. I remember watching you speak on behalf of President Clinton during the impeachment
discussions and being so inspired. I think I became a better public speaker from aspiring to live up to your example. I
would love to have a chance to meet you one day, perhaps on a trip or when you are finished with this job.

My very best,
Sheryl

sheryl sandberg I chief operating officer I Facebook
1601 s. california avenue I palo alto, ca I 94304




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777659 Date: 09/30/2015
