UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780221 Date: 09/30/2015
                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL




                              Sitrep 2— 1100 Reporting, Embassy Port-au-Prince

      •    Voting in most provinces outside of Port au Prince orderly. Turnout a bit low but expected to
           pick up after church. Two voting centers closed in NE because of disturbances, and two
           people with weapons arrested. One voting center in Grand Anse closed because of crowding
           and disturbance.
      •    Some reports of SMS system slow or not responding, possibly because of large call load.
      •    In Port-au-Prince, MINUSTAH has delivered materials to most voting centers.
      •    Turnout low so far in the Southern claw.




  Sign in Creole instructing people how to use SMS system to find their voting center.




   Media Reporting:

   Media continue to report on delays in voting center opening due to missing supplies, though main focus
   has been on the VIPs casting their ballots. Rene Preval voted, and said that any problems today were for
   the CEP to correct. Bellerive cast his ballot. Manigat voted and denied rumors that her husband was
   dead, while a group of Martelly partisans heckled her. And Martelly is at the Lycee Petionville, site of
   previous delay, to cast his vote.

   International reporters, predominantly in Port-au-Prince, are tracking same, though the Miami Herald
   has someone in Gonaives who reported problems with voting lists at a center there. Our team went
   there and reports that things are proceeding smoothly at the center.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780221 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780221 Date: 09/30/2015




Port au Prince area:

Observers are reporting that MINUSTAH is delivering materials, although some voting centers yet have
to open as of 10:30am. The UN reported that up to 100 voting centers in the West Department had not
received materials or had received the wrong materials, hence the delay. Minor problems continue to
be voters not finding their names on the lists, missing materials, and unruly voters. Some poll workers
have not been recording voters' identification card numbers, according to several reports.

In one Champ-de-Mars voting center, MINUSTAH delivered materials around 9:30am, but the center
remained closed. In Kafou Fey, the voting center was also still closed as of 9:30am. A group of unruly
young men, mostly pro-Martelly, were assembled in front of the center and attempted to break through
the doorway.

Around Petionville, materials were still being delivered by MINUSTAH. In Pellerin, voting began at
800am. In Kenscoff, several center had yet to open due to missing ballots, ballot boxes and ink. In
Thomassin 25, voting began at 1030am promptly after delivery of the remaining voting materials. At the
Lycee Petionville, the situation had calmed and voting has started by 10:00am. Presidential candidate
Martelly cast his vote there.




Crowds pushing to enter through gate when Thomassin voting center finally opened at 10:30am.

In Leogane, Carrefour, Tabarre, Croix-des-Bouquests, Corail IDP camp, and Fond Verrettes, observers
reported no major disruptions.

North

Cap Haitien: Voting supervisor in Cap Haitien told embassy there she had no major problems last week
or today. The only issue was people trying to determine their polling station, but no issues with name
lists. Embassy team also saw USAID posters with voting information. HNP, including riot police, are
standing by.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780221 Date: 09/30/2015-
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780221 Date: 09/30/2015




Center

Mirebalais: Embassy teams sees three sets of local observers who report all is going well. Mandataires
are sitting on the benches not causing trouble and mostly chatting with their friends. Local observers
were given paper ID not plastic. UN present but not enough to do something if trouble occurred. Lots
of people voting. Random voters says much better organized from last round.

Artibonite

In Pivert, turnout has picked up in the last hour as voters are convinced the security situation is calm. In
St Marc, one INITE supporter escorted out after he became disruptive after his finger was inked. In
Verettes, at makeshift voting center set up on monastery grounds, poll workers indicated that roughly
15% of the 400 expected voters had already voted by 0915h. Officer observed that one voter at a time
was permitted into BV, voted and left. Party observers quietly sat on floor while voting proceeded.
Voters indicated they had no difficulty voting and that their ballot secrecy had not been violated.

Northeast

Embassy team visited 3 bureaus in Milot area, all had HNP and/or Minustah present. Things reported to
be slow due to church, expexted to pick up by noon. Lots of bored young men hanging around at each
bureau, but so far no chaos.

UN report: In Mombin Crochi, the sons and the wife of the vice delegate tore ballots and a HNP officer
was injured in the disturbance. The voting center was closed. Another voting center was closed after
ballot boxes stuffed with votes for a deceased candidate. Two people arrested with weapons.

SUD EST Department:

Haut Coq Chante: Ecole de l'Amitie center quiet as of 0920, with no voters observed in the process of
voting. Team estimates maybe 50 ballots total in all three BVs. Mandataires from Manigat's campaign
were observed, along with a CEP official wearing a pink shirt under his blue t-shirt. MINUSTAH is very
visible and officials expect voting to pick up after church. Radio reports a disturbance at Fort Oge center
and that individuals representing an unknown candidate are paying people to vote. Embassy team
arrived later and asked HNP on site about this, who replied they had not received any reports of votes
being paid for.

Paskette: Overall voting is calm and generally well organized so far, although a few people cannot find
their names despite voting at that location in November. At each of the 13 BVs, team reports
approximately 25 votes so far. Polling workers are identifying voters carefully and marking fingers after
voting. The supervisor noted a lack of space with four BVs per room and cautioned that there could be
problems as more people arrive. In addition, a group of young men are loitering at the entrance,
although officials have not yet made them leave.

GRAND ANSE Department:

Pestel: MINUSTAH had to shoot in the air to control crowds and the voting center is closed.

Jeremie:




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780221 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780221 Date: 09/30/2015




At Gommiers, MINUSTAH is present and reported that voting began at 0715. The supervisors indicate
low turnout as of 1015 and attribute it to church services. CV Supervisor was advised by the CEP
Supervisor in Jeremie that he should allow voters on the outside voter list but not the BV internal list to
vote. Mandataires reported that one mandataire was reported to have voted in at least two different
BVs because his thumb had not been marked.

At Maine de Roseau CV, short lines were observed (about six people) and all was orderly and calm at the
two BVs. Center was reported to be opened on time at 0600. Two or three voters reported successfully
using the call center at 2828, although SMS was slow. Three others had not heard of the system and did
not trust it.

NIPPES Department:

Leogane: Team has visited two CVs and the BEC. Centers appear to have necessary materials and
people are voting without problems. Turnout is observed to be low so far. An attempt by unknown
individuals to burn the BEC was unsuccessful; some voter lists were burned. Nonetheless, individuals
have successfully used the SMS system to identify voting locations in the absence of the burned voter
lists. Some voters indicate it is difficult to get though on SMS due to high volume. Some confusion
remains on where to vote.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780221 Date: 09/30/2015
