       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775388 Date: 09/30/2015

                                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                             B6




From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                               Monday, July 12, 2010 1:57 PM
To:                                 'JilotyLC@state.gov'
Subject:                            Fw: Sounds like Presbyterians (USA) have found a way forward on Israel/Palestine... Less
                                    abrasive than many mainliners wanted...



Pls print.

    Original Message
From: Burns Strider
To: H
Sent: Mon Jul 12 10:13:36 2010
Subject: Sounds like Presbyterians (USA) have found a way forward on Israel/Palestine... Less abrasive than many
mainliners wanted...




Presbyterian Church finds middle ground in Middle East debate "On Friday, meeting in Minneapolis, the church's
General Assembly overwhelmingly passed a resolution that seemed to placate nearly everyone on both sides of the
issue — a "miracle," some said, that offered hope to those who see the Mideast as hopelessly deadlocked."

A week ago, the Presbyterian Church USA seemed headed for a bruising, polarizing battle over a report on the Middle
East that sharply criticized Israel.
On Friday, meeting in Minneapolis, the church's General Assembly overwhelmingly passed a resolution that seemed to
placate nearly everyone on both sides of the issue — a "miracle," some said, that offered hope to those who see the
Mideast as hopelessly deadlocked.

The church's adoption of the report by its Middle East study committee was not without pointed language, including a
denunciation of the Caterpillar company for allowing its equipment to be utilized for "nonpeaceful" uses by Israel.
(Caterpillar, whose bulldozers have been used by Israel to knock down Palestinian homes, issued a statement in
response saying that it did not "condone the illegal or immoral use of any Caterpillar equipment.")

The report also affirmed previous positions of the church, including a call for the U.S. to withhold aid to Israel if it builds
new West Bank settlements.

But gone were calls for divestment in Caterpillar; references to Israeli "apartheid"; and the endorsement of a Palestinian
Christian document that called for a boycott and international sanctions against Israel, and described the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory as "a sin against God and humanity."



Burns Strider




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775388 Date: 09/30/2015
