       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775260 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART B5,B6


From:                              H < hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Friday, March 26, 2010 5:44 AM
To:                                'JilotyLC@state.gov'
Subject:                           Fw: US-Afghan Women's Council in Texas



Pis print.

    Original Message
From: PVerveer
To: H
Sent: Sun Mar 21 16:02:51 2010
Subject: US-Afghan Women's Council in Texas

I just wanted to tell you that the US Afghan Women's Council had a productive meeting and pubic forum at the Bush
Institute at SMU. Both President and Mrs. Bush participated. They hosted a dinner the night before for the members of
the Council, the acting Afghan minister of women's affairs, the Afghan ambassador, etc.

(I sat with the President and he told me how much he's enjoyed working with your husband, how they are going to Haiti
soon and how they are even doing joint appearances together. He said, "I like the guy." Having just come to Dallas from
CGI, I told him how hard President Clinton was working on Haiti and he responded that he knew that.)

In opening remarks at the public forum (which was the 2nd conference of the Bush Institute) and which got a lot of press
attention there, Bush talked about the barbarism of the Taliban in general and towards women in particular. He
introduced some female Marines who were about to be deployed to work with the women in Afghanistan and said it
was a terrific idea.

I mentioned that the US Afghan Women's Council was born in the Bush Administration but continues in the Obama
Administration with your strong support and that it represents the best of our country coming together in public/private
collaborations. Several Afghan women participated, including the Vital Voices honoree this year. They talked about how
women are still targeted and suffering harshly and how the violence against them has increased.

We had a very good meeting of the Council. Embassy Kabul was present via live video, so Amb Wayne, the Afghan
education minister's COS and others participated. We had a good discussion among the US participants who included
many from business, foundations, academia, etc on access to education, economic empowerment and other pressing
challenges.




Finally, while I was in Texas, I heard about that the Afghan amnesty law was published in the official gazette, bringing it
into force and providing amnesty for individuals responsible for large-scale human rights abuses before December 2001.
It says they shall "enjoy all their legal rights and shall not be prosecuted." I understand SRAP has sent you a memo on
this. At a time when discussions on reconciliation are already making the women fearful, this will only make matters
worse.

Sima Samar said that after the amnesty law was passed by parliament in 2007, Karzai told her he would not sign it and
therefore it would not be enacted. It is not clear when he did sign it, but it has just come to light as printed copies of
the law were received by organizations that monitor the gazette.



       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775260 Date: 09/30/2015
