UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780409 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL

 June 8, 2011

 Judith:

 Wanted you to be aware of the latest from ECA in terms of support for Tunis. Our folks
 had a conference call today with
 Embassy Tunis & PD Surge Team Tunis. Below are the action items and who's doing
 what. Maintaining good internal communication and consistent coordination will be
 key to making this work. Thanks. Adam.


     1. Fulbright Specialist Status
              a. Post has asked for Fulbright Specialist assistance for four Tunisian
                 institutions: Tunis Business School, ESPRIT Engineering School, University of
                 Sfax and IPSI (Journalism School in Tunis). Areas of focus include: English
                 language curriculum development; business specialists to teach seminars
                 on entrepreneurship, incubators, etc.; overall curriculum development;
                 university management.
              b. Next steps:
                           i. Per post's request, ECA will suspend its standard procedure for
                          the Specialist request process to help take the load off post by
                          contacting the four institutions to get more information about their
                          needs, timing and how they can support Fulbright specialists with
                          housing or other support, etc.
                               ECA will validate information through Embassy Tunis PAS before
                          proceeding to recruit specialists.
                         iii. Post will identify a project officer and provide monitoring and
                          oversight of the projects throughout. They will use the online
                          communication system established for the Fulbright Specialist
                          program that allows posts, ECA and the NGO grantee organization
                          to communicate.
                        iv. ECA, post and host institutions will identify doable timeframe for
                          project implementation.
     2. Fulbright Scholar / Student Status:
              a. ECA/A has identified four Fulbright scholars who will arrive in Tunisia in
                  time for academic year 2011-2012.
              b. ECA/A has identified one Fulbright graduate-level researcher who will
                  arrive in Tunisia in time for academic year 2011-2012. She is in the process
                  of revising her proposal for a placement in Tunisia. ECA is working closely
                  with post to secure a research clearance from the Tunisian government
                  before her arrival.
     3. English Language Specialists:
              a. Post has requested English language specialists to assist with curriculum
             • development for ACCESS teachers with their six partners in country.
              b. Post has requested English language specialist assistance in developing
                  English language curricula for various Tunisian academic institutions.
              c. Next steps:




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780409 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780409 Date: 09/30/2015




                       I. Post/RELO will submit requests for English language specialist(s)
                        to work with ACCESS teachers. ECA will then identify appropriate
                        specialists and aim to get them to Tunisia starting in early fall.
                           RELO will work with post/local partners to coordinate among
                        program options and determine whether Fulbright specialists,
                        English language specialists, or English language fellows would be
                        the best fit for developing English language curriculum at
                        academic institutions.
     4. English Language Fellows:
         a. ECA will provide three fellows to Tunisia for the upcoming 2011-2012
             academic year.
                o Fellow #1 will work on curriculum and teacher training in Tunis.
                o Fellow #2 will train teachers in La Manouba Faculty of Letters.
                o Fellow #3: The RELO with responsibility for Tunis is now developing the
                    third project proposal for Sfax. Final approval is pending the EL Fellow
                    grant amendment paneling and approval.
     5. Mobile English project:
              a. ECA will seek L approval to formally establish a public-private partnership
                 with Tunisiana, the main mobile carrier in Tunisia, to provide a 90-day
                 promotional period of their mobile English platform. The U.S.
                 Ambassador to Tunisia would sign the proposed Letter of Intent with
                 Tunisiana.
              b. An English Language Specialist has been identified to create and
                 support content, and can begin in late July or as soon the Letter of Intent
                 (L01) is signed. Once content is designed and created for the early
                 stages, the three ELFs can contribute to future phases of the project.
     6. Tunis Business School (TBS) counterparts in U.S.:
              a. TBS launched just a year ago and is the only business school in Tunisia
                 with a U.S.-based curriculum modeled on Stanford University's Business
                 School.
              b. Embassy Tunis will work with USAID/Higher Education for Development
                 (HED) to help promote post's RFA for U.S.-Tunisian university linkages to
                 interested U.S. academic institutions. ECA will also review potential
                 contacts in our own networks. Partners for a New Beginning (PNB) may
                 be another option to explore.




  Adam Ereli / Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary / Bureau of Educational and
  Cultural Affairs / Department of State / (202) 632-9444




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780409 Date: 09/30/2015
