         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781307 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL


From:                                          Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                          Monday, April 18, 2011 9:18 PM
To:
Subject:                                       Fw: Gaddafi envoy holds talks in Morocco (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker@state.gov [mailto:OpsNewsTicker@state.gov]
Sent: Monday, April 18, 2011 09:16 PM
To: NEWS-Libya; NEWS-NEA; NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0 Shift-III; SES-0 OS; SES-0 Shlft-I; SES-O_CMS
Subject: dadda
         fi envoy holds    alkst in Aorocco (Reuters)

RABAT (Reuters) - Morocco hosted a visit by a Libyan deputy foreign minister on Monday, a rare diplomatic
link between Muammar Gaddafi's government and one of the staunch allies of the Western coaltion determined
to overthrow him.

   Morocco has been one of the small number of Arab countries and the only North African state openly
involved in talks with Western powers over the Libyan crisis.

   State-run 2M television said Foreign Minister Taieb Fassi Fihri met Omran Boukraa, the Libyan deputy
foreign minister in charge of Arab relations, in Rabat on Monday.

     "(Fihri) ... reiterated Morocco's commitment to full respect for Libya's territorial integrity and national unity
... It is within that spirit that Morocco took part in international meetings in Paris, London and recently in
Doha," 2M quoted the foreign ministry as saying in a statement.

   Foreign ministers of Western powers and Arab states called at a meeting in Doha last week for Gaddafi to
leave power. Britain, France and the United States say they will not end their air campaign in Libya until
Gaddafi leaves power.

   The Moroccan foreign ministry statement said Boukraa had given "detailed accounts of various aspects of
the tragic situation that prevails in Libya".

   It added: "Morocco considers that ... the solution can not be military. It can only be political, forward-
looking and allowing the Libyan people to democratically determine their future."

  The ministry did not say how Boukraa had reached Rabat. Travel from Libya is restricted by a no-fly zone
imposed by the coalition.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781307 Date: 09/30/2015
