UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778945 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                          RELEASE IN FULL
                                      MEMORANDUM

 To: S
 From: Anne-Marie
 Re: The Clinton Doctrine
 Date: 2/12/11

 The Clinton Doctrine: Right now, after Mubarak has stepped down but the
 protesters are remaining in the square and similar movements are rolling across the
 Middle East, it is time to put forth a Clinton Doctrine. You should give a short,
 powerful speech on Monday or Tuesday announcing that "The United States will
 support people around the world who seek a transparent, accountable, and
 participatory government. We will work with governments around the world to
 meet these demands, even as we learn from other governments in meeting the
 same demands from our own people."

 Such support serves our strategic, economic, and moral interests. Lasting liberty and
 security is grounded in prosperity and opportunity, at home and abroad.
 Governments that do not protect the rights and ensure the welfare of all their people
 cannot last. Repression ultimately breeds extremism, violence, and instability.
 Governments that do not tax their people sufficiently to provide basic infrastructure
 and services that will allow their people to educate themselves and live healthy and
 productive lives cannot develop into thriving economies that will anchor regions and
 contribute to the global economy. And governments that deny their people the basic
 freedoms of expression, assembly, and representation ignore at their peril the moral
 equality and dignity of every human being and the ultimate power of the human spirit.

 At the same time, however, we are not "siding" with the people against their
 governments — governments in many cases that we have worked with for years. We
 will support the demands for this type of a government; we will work with
 governments to meet these demands; and we will recognize (as when we present an
 Open Government Charter at UNGA this year and as the Obama Administration has
 acknowledged in its own efforts to increase transparency at home), that meeting these
 demands is an ongoing process for any government.

 Comparison with the Truman Doctrine: Truman stated it would be "the policy of
 the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by
 armed minorities or by outside pressures." Truman reasoned, because these
 "totalitarian regimes" coerced "free peoples," they represented a threat to international
 peace and the national security of the United States. The CD is similarly phrased in
 terms of "supporting" people who seek a particular goal, and similarly justified not



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778945 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778945 Date: 09/30/2015




  only in security, but also in economic and moral terms, just as we have justified our
  development policy.

  Foundation for the CD: The best foundation is this Administration's commitment
  to development as a foreign policy imperative and the connection you made in your
  Georgetown speech between development, democracy, and human rights. You
  insisted that we cannot promote abstract ideals of democracy and civil and political
  rights without looking at the reality of people's lives, at whether or not they are
  actually in a position to exercise those rights. This view has deep roots in American
  history. Its most powerful exponent was Franklin Roosevelt, who understood both at
  home and abroad the unbreakable link between political liberty and economic
  security. In his four freedoms, freedom of speech and of worship were married to
  freedom from want and freedom from fear. That same impulse underlies your
  Internet freedom speech — to make human rights real in the 21st century they must
  include the freedom to connect.

  More recently, as I wrote last week, POTUS has put forward the open government
  ideal, saying at UNGA: "history is on the side of liberty; that the strongest
  foundation for human progress lies in open economies, open societies, and open
  governments." You pursued that same line in your Doha speech. Now is the time to
  broaden it and make it a doctrine, a guiding principle of American foreign policy.

  Concerns re declaring a doctrine: Obviously you will not present it as a "Clinton
  Doctrine." The press can do that. If you craft the speech right, it will follow
  seamlessly from your Doha speech and will be: 1) a key response to what has
  happened in Egypt and an establishing of criteria that both the protesters and we can
  use as a yardstick to measure the military government's actions, and 2) a roadmap to
  our position as other countries face their own protest movements.




                                               2


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778945 Date: 09/30/2015
