      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785036 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL


From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, September 29, 2011 9:06 AM
To:
Subject:                           FW: talked with Ambassador Ford



From: Ford, Robert S
Sent: Thursday, September 29, 2011 8:46 AM
To: Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Nuland, Victoria J., Burns, William J; Walles, Jacob; Dibble, Elizabeth L; Abedin,
Huma; Mills, Cheryl D; Zeya, Uzra S; Mull, Stephen D; Hof, Frederic C; Wailes, Jacob; Carle, Lisa M; Kennedy, Patrick F;
Boswell, Eric 3; Hof, Frederic C; Sherman, Wendy R
Cc: Hammer, Michael A; Snipe, Aaron D; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Vasquez, Edgar 3; Djerassi, Alexander M; Schedlbauer,
Amy W; Connelly, Maura; Conlon, Steven M; Lohman, Lee; Irwin, Matthew T; Hanson, Kathleen D
Subject: RE: talked with Ambassador Ford

I'll send to a select few some pictures of our 2 damaged vehicles.

I would just emphasize that the 2 RSOs dispatched from the embassy to extract me were at real risk of serious
bodily harm, as the pictures will demonstrate.

We have a superb American and Syrian staff here — responded very, very well.

Regards to all,

robert

Ambassador

U.S. Embassy

Damascus, Syria

tel: 963 11 3391 -4872

email: fordr@state.gov

This email is UNCLASSIFIED
From: Feltman, Jeffrey D
Sent: Thursday, September 29, 2011 2:34 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3; Nuland, Victoria 3; Burns, William 3; Walles, Jacob; Dibble, Elizabeth L; Abedin, Huma; Mills, Cheryl
D; Zeya, Uzra S; Mull, Stephen D; Hof, Frederic C; Walles, Jacob; Carle, Lisa M; Kennedy, Patrick F; Boswell, Eric 3; Hof,
Frederic C; Sherman, Wendy R
Cc: Hammer, Michael A; Snipe, Aaron D; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Vasquez, Edgar 3; Djerassi, Alexander M; Schedlbauer,
Amy W; Ford, Robert S; Connelly, Maura; Conlon, Steven M; Lohman, Lee; Irwin, Matthew T; Hanson, Kathleen D
Subject: talked with Ambassador Ford

FYI: Robert Ford called in from Embassy Damascus. He and his team are, as reported, back
at the Chancery. Robert was full of praise for the DS support he got, including his TDY
support from Beirut. Amy Tachco (who was with him) is already feeding us with information

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785036 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785036 Date: 09/30/2015




and has promised media guidance. Robert speculated that messages of intimidation were
directed to two audiences, the Embassy and the opposition figures they were meeting at
the time.

Robert was, as always, incredibly calm and focused, despite what sounds to me to be quite
a harrowing experience where the thugs succeeded in damaging two cars (parked a block
away for more discretion) beyond repair and were pounding on the doors of the room to
which Robert et al. had retreated (while, as Robert noted, their hosts continued, in true NEA
fashion, to serve coffee and tea). Robert commented laconically that, had he tried to
leave, "I do not think they would have killed me," confining themselves in his guess to
punches to the head.

Robert characterized the mob as "not spontaneous." 'They knew we were coming." He
noted that the Spanish Ambassador had visited the group a day earlier, without
problem. We discussed the problems of rent-a-mobs - easy to call them up, but not so easy
to control them. Thus, even though in the end the Syrian security services did the right thing
in extracting the Ambassador and team and escorting them all the way to the Embassy,
Robert believes it would be useful for me to demarche the Syrian Ambassador (who will
undoubtedly protest but still report back), especially as we've seen a pattern -- the attacks
on the French and U.S. embassies, the stone and egg-throwing against the French
Ambassador, and today's siege on our Ambassador. Robert noted that one side of the
SARG calls up rent-a-mobs, while another side eventually does the right thing in providing
security support (as in the Embassy attack).

Robert noted that the group they met, of Nasserites and leftists, had a legally permitted,
open meeting on Sunday that was covered in the press (including two days of front-page
coverage in Al-Watan). 'This was not a forbidden group," he said, noting that their publicly
reported platform called for "no to violence, no to sectarianism, and no to foreign military
action." This was not some forbidden organization.

Thus, Robert suggests that, for our media guidance, we emphasize that the Ambassador and
team were just doing the normal work of any Embassy. Intimidation by pro-government
mobs is "not civilized behavior" is the tone Robert suggests we strike.

Action: NEA/ELA - please work with Embassy Damascus on a demarche that we can deliver
today to lmad Moustapha. I'll ask Sandy to set up a time. Please note the pattern here.

Action: NEA Press - please work with Embassy Damascus and appropriate offices here on
the media guidance/statements.



Jeffrey Feltman

Assistant Secretary
Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs
Department of State

202-647-7209


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785036 Date: 09/30/2015
