       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782829 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                                                             RELEASE IN
                                                                                                                                             FULL


From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Monday, October 10, 2011 5:13 PM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: Militia hands over Tripoli airport to government (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Monday, October 10, 2011 05:01 PM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Militia hands over Tripoli airport to government (Reuters)


TRIPOLI, Oct 10 (Reuters) - Libya's interim government took over the country's main international airport from
a group of regional fighters on Monday as part of its efforts to consolidate control over strategic
infrastructure.

   The head of the ruling National Transitional Council (NTC), Mustafa Abdel Jalil, told journalists other
militia groups would soon follow suit and start handing over control of key installations to civilian
authorities.

  The airport had been under the command of Mukhtar al-Akhdar, commander of a unit of fighters from the
western town of Zintan, which converged on Tripoli to help drive Muammar Gaddafi from power in August.

    "After they liberated this important location, they are handing it over to the technical people who will take
care of organising flights from this important place," said Jalil at the airport, which has not restarted handling
flights.

  "The fighters committed themselves to hand over a location every week according to instructions by the
National Council and the executive committee for the benefit of this country," he added.

   Tensions have risen between militias from outside Tripoli and a military council led by veteran Islamist
dissident Abdulhalcim Belhadj, who says he has the endorsement of the NTC and has called on other armed
units to pull heavy weapons out of the capital.

   Turkish Airlines, which recently restarted flights, and domestic operators have been using a military airport
in Tripoli.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782829 Date: 09/30/2015
