      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780864 Date: 09/30/2015

                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sent:                             Friday, July 1, 2011 5:54 AM
To:                               H; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma
Subject:                          FW: Ann Stock to serve as Acting Under Secretary of State for Public Diplomacy and
                                  Public Affairs



FYI


From: DiMartino, Kitty
Sent: Thursday, June 30, 2011 7:39 PM
To: R_PD-Leadership; R_Regional PDODs; R; RPPR; CSCC
Subject: Ann Stock to serve as Acting Under Secretary of State for Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs

                                   Dear PD Leadership Team,

                                   Judith wanted me to let you know that she is delighted to announce that Assistant
                                   Secretary Ann Stock will be serving as Acting Under Secretary of State for Public
                                   Diplomacy and Public Affairs beginning Tuesday, July 5. The R front office will put out
                                   an Admin Notice on Friday to notify the building of Ann's status as Acting Under
                                   Secretary. Information about other changes in the R front office, including new
                                   Special Assistants and Staff Assistants as a result of the normal Foreign Service
                                   summer churn, will also be included.

                                  Ann will begin to be briefed in on a variety of topics beginning tomorrow. The
                                    comprehensive briefing book that many of you have worked hard to contribute to
                                    will be put to good use. We suggested that Ann could crack it open on Tuesday, but
she prefers to take it with her tomorrow evening to have for the holiday weekend.

With Ann at the helm of ECA, an enormous amount has already been achieved. Her support in implementing elements
of the Strategic Framework for Public Diplomacy has been critical in helping us get back in the game and extend our
reach to foreign publics, through the tools PD professionals the world over have so vigorously endorsed: English
teaching, alumni outreach, cultural programs, educational advising, exchanges and science diplomacy.

Ann has built strong relationships with her peers on the PD leadership team as well as with Ambassadors and PAOs at
Posts, her interlocutors in foreign governments and partners at educational and cultural institutions, NGOs and the
business community. In leading the ECA bureau, she has worked hard to ensure that programs and initiatives are
informed by an understanding of the policies we are pursuing and the publics with whom we are engaging. As Acting
Under Secretary, she will continue to challenge PD practitioners to articulate the PD-policy connection and to similarly
connect resources to policy priorities.

Ann has our best wishes as she undertakes this role, and we know she will be well supported by peers and colleagues
who will make it look easy (even when it's not).

Regards,
Kitty




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780864 Date: 09/30/2015
