      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776394 Date: 09/30/2015


                                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                             Saturday, August 21, 2010 6:41 PM
To:                               'JilotyLC@state.gov'; 'Russorv@state.gov'; 'ValmoroU@state.gov'
Subject:                          Re: Question



Did any of you get this?

     Original Message
From: H
To: 'JilotyLC@state.govi <JilotyLC@state.gov>; 'Russorv@state.govi <Russorv@state.gov>; 'ValmoroU@state.gov'
<ValmoroU@state.gov>
Sent: Fri Aug 20 15:45:04 2010
Subject: Question

Can you find out for me what the NPR stations I can hear on Long Island are? I lost the WNYC signal half way down the
island and can't figure out from Google what the next stations are.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776394 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776394 Date: 09/30/2015




self-styled Tea Party militia called the Oathkeepers. Galvanised by their fear of creeping socialism, the Oathkeepers
solemnly swore to refuse tyrannical federal orders such as cooperating with foreign troops and forcing Americans into
concentration-camps. Because the group's members trained for combat, the vow came with suggestion of armed
resistance.

Besides Mack, the Oathkeepers attracted a coterie of militia-movement retreads into its ranks. The most well-
established figure was Mike Vanderboegh, a longtime militia fanatic who published a booklet in the mid-1990s entitled
Strategy and Tactics for a Militia Civil War, calling for sniper attacks on "war criminals, secret policemen, rats." With
Obama in office, Vandeboegh churned out anti-government screeds on right-wing blogs with renewed passion and
supported his efforts by cashing in the $1,300 in federal disability compensation he received each month.

For all the energy the far right exerted in its campaign to strangle Obama's agenda, it was a Democrat who posed the
greatest threat to the passage of healthcare reform. Representative Bart Stupak of Michigan had been in office since
1993, placing him among the senior leadership of the so-called centrist Blue Dog Democrats. When healthcare reform
was introduced in Congress, Stupak became the leader of an informal caucus of anti-abortion Democrats, making him
the de facto swing vote on the House version of the bill. By extension, Stupak was the point man in the campaign to
ensure that the bill would not allow federal funding for abortion for low-income women.

But after close consultation with leaders of the US Conference of Catholic Bishops, Stupak went a step further. He
introduced a draconian amendment to block women from paying for abortions from even their own private insurance
plans. The amendment, which passed the House but was shut down in the Senate, became a key sticking point in
healthcare negotiations. "He's a big hero now in the pro-life community", Deal Hudson - former Catholic issues adviser
to George W Bush - told me in November 2009. "Thanks to him, this is the first time I can remember the pro-life
Democrats having any power."

To the chagrin of the Republicans, Stupak entertained offers of compromise from the Democratic leadership. According
to Hudson, the Catholic bishops were keen to see healthcare reform pass, but only if the bill contained a clear provision
forbidding patients from spending federal money on abortion. Finally, in March 2010, after pressure from Nancy Pelosi,
Obama agreed to sign an executive order forbidding the federal funding of abortion. Stupak had been mollified. Now he
and his anti-abortion caucus pledged to deliver the swing votes the Democrats needed to pass the bill. As soon as
reports seeped out declaring the imminent passage of healthcare reform, major right-wing blogs like RedState.org
churned out virulent denunciations of Stupak, calling him a traitor and sellout. The blog comment sections filled up with
dozens of diatribes referring to Stupak in language previously reserved for Dr George Tiller: "Bart the Baby-Killer."

On 20 March 2010, thousands of Tea Party activists surrounded the Capitol's Longworth Building in expectation of
Obama's pep talk to the House Democrats and the healthcare vote. Democratic Representative John Lewis, a hero of the
civil-rights movement, and Representative Barney Frank, the first openly gay member of Congress, passed through the
crowd on their way inside the Capitol. "Nigger!" a demonstrator barked at Lewis. Another called Frank a "faggot",
eliciting laughter and cheers from nearby protesters. Meanwhile, as another African-American Democrat,
Representative Emanuel Cleaver, ascended the Capitol steps, a protester who had been screaming at Lewis and Frank
spat on his face.

With the demonstration carried on into the night, cries of "Kill the bill!" drifted into calls for violence. "I would gladly
stand with any of you men here and take these fascists down", a man in camouflage battle-dress uniform proclaimed in
front of an amateur videographer, pointing toward the Capitol. "You haven't heard the last of me!"

The next day, Republican members of Congress emerged from the Longworth Building to salute the Tea Partiers. The
demonstrators cheered wildly for their proxies on the inside. Finally, after hours of impassioned speeches on the House
floor, the bill passed. But the drama was hardly over.

Republican Representative Joe Pitts, an anti-abortion Catholic who co-authored Stupak's original amendment,
demanded a motion to bring it back to the floor for a vote, a transparent exercise in grandstanding that was certain to
fail. In response, Stupak rushed to the podium with a stinging rebuke to Pitts and the Republicans. "The motion to

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776394 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776394 Date: 09/30/2015




commit does not support life", Stupak declared. "It is the Democrats who have stood up...." Heckling from the
Republican side interrupted his statement. As Stupak looked around the House chamber, Representative Randy
Neugebauer, a right-wing Republican from Texas who openly supported the Birther movement, began shouting at him
from the backbench, "Baby killer!" Other Republicans joined in, parroting base insults.

While the Republicans sank their heads in defeat, some more militant devotees of the Tea Party movement called for a
right-wing Kristallnacht. "If you wish to send a message that Pelosi and her party cannot fail to hear, break their
windows", Vanderboegh of the Oathkeepers wrote on a far-right blog hours after the bill passed. "Break them NOW.
Break them and run to break again." Within three days, windows and doors at Democratic Party headquarters in New
York, Kansas and Arizona had been shattered.

Meanwhile, at least ten Democratic members of Congress reported receiving death threats. Images of nooses were
faxed to the offices of Stupak and James Clyburn, an African-American congressman from South Carolina.
Representative Anthony Weiner, an especially vocal proponent of healthcare reform, received a menacing letter filled
with white powder. The brother of Representative Tom Perriello, another healthcare supporter, had his home gas line
deliberately sabotaged after a local Tea Party organiser posted his address online (he had meant to post the
congressman's) and encouraged activists to "drop by" to express their anger about Perriello's recent vote. In Tucson,
Arizona, the windows of Democratic Representative Gabrielle Giffords' office were shattered by shots from a pellet gun.
And a brick was thrown through the window of Representative Louise Slaughter's office in New York as her voicemail
filled with threats of impending sniper attacks.

After the passage of the healthcare bill, the Tea Party floated into a grey zone between authoritarianism and anarchy.
Crusading to restore a holy social order, they promoted disorder. Claiming to protect democracy, they smashed
windows of elected representatives. Warning of death panels, they called in death threats. With the atmosphere of
violence thickening, Palin took to her Twitter account to issue a battle-cry: "Don't Retreat, Instead-RELOAD!" Thus
concluded the first phase of the Obama era that was to usher in a peaceable kingdom of bipartisanship.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776394 Date: 09/30/2015
