      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780560 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL


From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
Sent:                             Monday, April 11,2011 7:00 PM
To:
Subject:                          FW: Erdogan's speech in Germany



FYI




From: Navratil, Thomas 3
Sent: Monday, April 11, 2011 5:10 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3; Crocker, Bathsheba N; McAuliffe, Marisa S; Gent, Stephanie R; Sokolsky, Richard D
Subject: Erdogan's speech in Germany



Jake, re: Erdogan's controversial speech in Germany, below please find my summary of the event and
context. Here is the section in Farah's memo you referred to: "Further, my recent trip coincided with Turkish
Prime Minister Erdogan's visit to Germany. During his visit, he spoke to mass audiences of German-Turks,
encouraging them to learn Turkish before German and discouraging full assimilation. Some newspapers
described his public appearances as "sermons of hate."

PM Erdogan spoke to over 10,000 ethnic Turks at a campaign-style gathering in Dusseldorf on Feb. 27 to mark
the 50th anniversary of the arrival of the first Turkish guest workers and to stump for votes ahead of Turkey's
June 12 election. There are over 1 million eligible Turkish voters in Germany, making it in effect Turkey's
fourth largest electoral district. Erdogan embraced the audience ("you are my fellow citizens, my people, my
friends, my brothers and sisters") and praised their accomplishments in Germany. He devoted most of his
remarks to extolling Turkey's economic and political advances and its important role in the world. The
controversy arose from brief remarks late in the speech: "Yes, integrate yourselves into German society but
don't assimilate yourselves. No one has the right to deprive us of our culture and our identity." He urged Turks
in Germany to learn German, but to learn Turkish first. He asserted their right to maintain their language,
culture, and religion. He warned against Islamophobia, saying it is just as much a violation of international law
as anti-Semitism. More constructively, Erdogan pledged to change Turkish law to allow Turks with German
citizenship to retain inheritance and other benefits in Turkey, which should remove one disincentive to taking a
German passport. Integration/multiculturalism remains a raw topic in Germany, and Erdogan drew criticism
from a wide range of officials and commentators, including some newspapers calling his speech a sermon of
hate. While Erdogan undoubtedly connected with those who came to see him in Dusseldorf, a number of Turks
in Germany offered more mixed reactions, sounding the theme that their problems need to be addressed in
Germany, not in Turkey.

Tom




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780560 Date: 09/30/2015
