        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782531 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL


From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Thursday, September 8, 2011 12:17 AM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: Gaddafi defiant in call Syria TV says is from Libya (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Wednesday, September 07, 2011 10:58 PM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Gaddafi defiant in call Syria TV says is from Libya (Reuters)


CAIRO (Reuters) - Former Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi, in a phone call a Syrian television station said
was made from inside Libya, vowed on Thursday to defeat rebels who control most of the country.

   He also said a Libyan military convoy that arrived in neighbouring Niger was "not the first", and gave no
hint this might be a step towards him and his followers fleeing Libya.

   Gaddafi, whose whereabouts are unknown, instead said in the brief live speech carried by Arrai TV that his
forces would rally to defeat the rebels and NATO, which has attacked his military through air strikes.

   "The youths are now ready to escalate the resistance against the 'rats' (rebels) in Tripoli and to finish off the
mercenaries," Gaddafi said during the call, which the television station said was being made from within
Libya.

    "We will defeat NATO...and NATO is rejected by the Libyan people," he said.

   Gaddafi said the Libyan military convoy, which French and Niger military sources said showed up in the
northern Niger city of Agadez this week, was nothing exceptional.

   "Columns of convoys drive into and out of Niger carrying goods and people inside and outside (of Libya)
say Gaddafi is going to Niger," he said.

     "This is not the first time that convoys drive in and out of Niger."

   Gaddafi's spokesman has repeatedly said he is in Libya and remains in high spirits. Niger said he was not in
the convoy.

    Libya's ruling National Transitional Council (NTC) has sent envoys to Niger to try to stop Gaddafi and his
 entourage from evading justice by fleeing across a desert frontier toward friendly African states.

 NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
 by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782531 Date: 09/30/2015
