        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782668 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Wednesday, October 5, 2011 5:12 AM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: Israel dismisses deputy envoy to U.S. over media leak (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Wednesday, October 05, 2011 02:46 AM
To: NEWS-NEA; NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Israel dismisses deputy envoy to U.S. over media leak (Reuters)

JERUSALEM (Reuters) - Israel has dismissed its deputy ambassador in Washington over a leak to the media
about secret discussions involving the United States, diplomatic sources said on Wednesday.

   They said the removal of Dan Arbell, formerly the deputy director for North American affairs at Israel's
Foreign Ministry, was announced in an internal memorandum to diplomats on Tuesday following an
investigation.

   Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Ilana Stein said: "A senior official is being returned after his tenure was
brought to an end". She described the move as unusual, but declined to elaborate on the circumstances or the
identity of the official.

   Israel's bedrock alliance with the United States has been bolstered by common worries about Iran, but cracks
have appeared as Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and President Barack Obama disagreed on how to pursue
Israeli-Palestinian peace.

   Israeli media published closed-door comments last year by Michael Oren, Israel's ambassador to
Washington, describing "a crisis of historic proportions" in bilateral ties after the Obama administration
censured Jewish settlement in the occupied West Bank.

   Netanyahu has described such reports as overblown, noting Obama's public support for Israel's military
build-up and, last month, its diplomatic campaign against a Palestinian bid to sidestep stalled peacemaking by
appealing for U.N. membership.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782668 Date: 09/30/2015
