     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780236 Date: 09/30/2015


                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL
Explanation of Vote by Ambassador Brooke Anderson, U.S. Alternate Representative for
Special Political Affairs, on MINURSO, in the Security Council Chamber
Brooke Anderson
U.S. Alternate Representative for Special Political Affairs
U.S. Mission to the United Nations
New York, NY
April 30, 2010


                                          AS DELIVERED

The United States fully supports the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy Chris Ross in
their efforts to find a peaceful, sustainable, mutually-agreed solution to the Western Sahara
conflict and welcomes the Special Representative of the Secretary General for Western Sahara
and head of MINURSO Hany Abdel-aziz.

We welcome the fact that, during Ambassador Ross' recent trip to the region, all of his
interlocutors confirmed their commitment to cooperate with the United Nations to reach a
solution to the Western Sahara conflict as soon as possible.

We encourage all involved to come to the table without preconditions. This conflict has
languished for too long, and has hindered regional cooperation on urgent and emergent issues
facing North Africa.

We believe it is essential that the parties demonstrate the political will to identify a mutually-
acceptable solution, and we hope that neighboring states will assist the parties in doing so.

We call on the parties to work collaboratively with the UNHCR to facilitate the implementation
of their agreement regarding family visits, including the establishment of family visits by land.
We hope that family visits by air will be resumed as soon as possible, and that the parties will
engage constructively with each other and the Personal Envoy of the Secretary General to
pursue other forms of confidence building measures.

We are deeply concerned about the allegations of human rights abuses by the parties. We urge
the parties to work with the international community to ensure full respect for human rights in
both Western Sahara and in the Tindouf camps.

In this context, we underscore the importance of making progress on the human rights situation.

Given the current situation on the ground and Ambassador Ross' continuing efforts, we agree
the presence of MINURSO remains indispensable and that is why we have just supported
renewing MINURSO's mandate for another 12 months.

Thank you Mr. President.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780236 Date: 09/30/2015
