      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781580 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN
                                                                                                     FULL


From:                           Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                           Wednesday, April 20, 2011 3:19 PM
To:
Subject:                        FW: U.S. Funds Help Democracy. Activists Evade Internet Crackdowns




From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Wednesday, April 20, 2011 8:58 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: U.S. Funds Help Democracy Activists Evade Internet Crackdowns

U.S. Funds Help Democracy Activists Evade Internet Crackdowns

By Nicole Gaouette and Brendan Greeley

April 20 (Bloomberg) -- The U.S. State Department is set to announce $28 million in grants to help Internet
activists, particularly in countries where the governments restrict e-mail and social networks such as those
offered by Facebook Inc., Twitter Inc. and Google Inc.

The program, which has drawn Republican criticism and budget cuts, has produced software that is spreading
widely in Iran and Syria, helping pro-democracy activists avoid detection, said Dan Baer, deputy assistant
secretary of state for democracy, human rights and labor.

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton recently described web restrictions by more than 40 governments as a
"disturbing trend." Governments can't escape the impact of today's social networks and the U.S. is committed
to helping people worldwide connect, she said in an April 12 speech.

"We will stand with those who exercise their fundamental freedoms of expression and assembly in a peaceful
way, whether in person, in print, or in pixels on the Internet," she said.

Governments have curtailed Internet freedom in two ways.

First, they've blocked foreign news and social networking sites. Facebook, for example, is frequently
unavailable in China and Vietnam. Activists use circumvention software to route around these blocks.

Second, governments track, harass and arrest activists who meet online. Tunisia, before President Zinc El
Abidine Ben Al's fall from power on Jan. 14, spoofed Facebook and Gmail login pages to steal passwords.
Egypt, before President Hosni Mubarak stepped down, arrested opposition bloggers.

Competing Approaches

Republicans in Congress said the U.S. should focus on helping activists get around government firewalls, such
as China's. The State Department has taken a broader approach, making training and protecting activists
"perhaps the most critical part" of its mission, Michael Posner, Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy,
Human Rights and Labor, said in a March 19 interview.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781580 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781580 Date: 09/30/2015



"There's been one paradigm, that's the Chinese firewall," Posner said. "But there's another piece of this, which
has I think become more and more evident in the months since the Tunisian demonstrations began," he said.
"Governments are also effectively trying to attack people who are activists using the Internet."

The State Department has built up a stable of technically able activists to help democracy movements in places
including China and Iran. They have created firewall circumvention software and trained more than 5,000
people to avoid detection while using services such as San Francisco-based Twitter, Baer said.

'Underground Railroad'

Training takes place through "an underground railroad of trust," said Baer. "We're opportunistic about going to
places where people are, or taking them to places that are safe."

By summer, Baer said, the department will have awarded grants of more than $50 million.

About $22 million already spent includes all funding from fiscal years 2008 and 2009 and some funding for
fiscal year 2010. The $28 million in new grants, which the agency is soon expected to advise Congress about, is
from fiscal year 2010.

One result has been creation of "panic button" technology for mobile phones, which activists can use to erase
their address books if they are arrested, to avoid incriminating colleagues. Other programs help keep web sites
running when governments attack them.

Posner said department officials are approaching funding of these projects "like venture capitalists," doling out
small amounts to a wide variety of companies in a competitive process through May, 2011.

Republican Criticism

Republicans including Arizona Senator Jon Kyl and Indiana Senator Richard Lugar, the ranking Republican on
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, have criticized the administration for not focusing exclusively on
firewall circumvention.

Baer argues the broader approach is needed. "If the objective is to empower people on the ground, you have to
keep them out of jail. That means they have to be able to circumvent any blocks, get out their message,
communicate with people and have the self-defense training," said Baer.

To only teach people how to circumvent firewalls "would be tantamount to painting a target on activists'
backs," said Courtney Austrian, director of the State Department's office of policy planning and public
diplomacy.

Lugar also released a report Feb. 15 that faulted Clinton's agency for not spending the $30 million Congress
allocated last year more quickly.

Budget Cut

Last week, the Republican-controlled House cut the agency's budget for Internet freedom by one third to $20
million this year, part of the plan to cut the federal deficit in fiscal 2011.

"Twelve months elapsed before the State Department moved to disburse some $30million in funds specifically
appropriated for Internet freedom promotion, including the development of Internet censorship circumvention
technology. Such technology should be given a much higher priority by the U.S. government," Lugar wrote.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781580 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781580 Date: 09/30/2015



The cuts mean "we have less money than we had hoped to fund valuable programs," said Posner in an e-mail.
"But there is a great and growing interest in promoting Internet freedom and $20 million is no small amount of
money these days. We're going to use that money wisely to help embattled democracy and human rights
activists. And we hope we'll get more funds for this important work in 2012."

Stable of Geeks

The delay in using the funding came because it took time to build up the stable of "geeks at the intersection of
human rights and technology," Baer said. Two and a half years ago, grant advertisements drew two
applications. The latest advertisement drew 60, Baer said in a telephone interview.

 "Money does matter in this space," says Brett Solomon, executive director of Access Now, a private
 organization that supports Internet freedom. His organization does not accept money from governments because
•it can carry a stigma.

The wisdom of accepting government funds depends on where they are employed. "In Syria," said Solomon,
"how they frame the opposition as lackeys, a falsely generated movement, can actually put people at risk." In
Burma, by contrast, the regime does not rely on an anti-American narrative.

Republicans have pushed for more money for Internet circumvention to go to the Broadcasting Board of
Governors, which oversees government media including Voice of America.

Last year the BBG funneled the $1.5 million it received for circumvention technology to the Global Internet
Freedom Consortium, a group that provides anti-censorship software and is associated with the Falun Gong, a
Buddhist spiritual sect banned in China.

Outside News Blocked

Posner described the work of the BBG and the State Department as "different, but complementary." The BBG
has a legitimate interest in tools that allow traffic to reach the Voice of America site and other Western news
sources, he said.

A group of Internet activists, lawyers and academics, including senior researchers from MIT and Harvard's
Berkman Center for Internet & Society, recently wrote to Congress to urge them not to redirect money to the
BBG. The BBG's "overemphasis" on firewall circumvention efforts doesn't meet the needs of on-the-ground
activists, the letter said.

To contact the reporters on this story: Nicole Gaouette in Washington at ngaouette@bloomberg.net Brendan
Greeley in Washington at bgree1ey2@bloomberg.net

To contact the editor responsible for this story: Mark Silva at msilva34Abloomberg.net




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781580 Date: 09/30/2015
