            UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778697 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL



    From:                                  Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
    Sent:                                  Monday, February 7, 2011 7:59 AM
    To:
    Cc:                                    Sullivan, Jacob J
    Subject:                               FW: Independent



    FYI


    From:  Posner, Michael H
    Sent: Monday, February 07, 2011 6:33 AM
    To: Crowley, Philip J; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Burns, William J
    Cc: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob)
    Subject: FW: Independent




    This is getting a lot of attention in Egypt today. --



    US envoy's business link to Egypt
    Obama scrambles to limit damage after Frank Wisner makes robust call for Mubarak to remain in place as
    leader.

    By Robert Fisk in Cairo
    Monday, 7 February 2011


                                                                                                                                    EPA

    Mr Wisner is a retired State Department 36-year "career" diplomat ? in otherwords, he was not a political appointee


•      NLARGEFrank Wisner, President Barack Obama's envoy to CAIRO WHO INFURIATED THE WHITE HOUSE THIS
    WEEKEND BY URGING HOSNI MUBARAK TO REMAIN PRESIDENT OF EGYPT, WORKS FOR A NEW YORK AND WASHINGTON LAW FIRM
    WHICH WORKS FOR THE DICTATOR'S OWN EGYPTIAN GOVERNMENT.


    Mr Wisner's astonishing remarks - "President Mubarak's continued leadership is critical: it's his
    opportunity to write his own legacy" - shocked the democratic opposition in Egypt and called into question
    Mr Obama's judgement, as well as that of Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.
    The US State Department and Mr Wisner himself have now both claimed that his remarks were made in a
    "personal capacity". But there is nothing "personal" about Mr Wisner's connections with the litigation firm
    Patton Boggs, which openly boasts that it advises "the Egyptian military, the Egyptian Economic
    Development Agency, and has handled arbitrations and litigation on the [Mubarak] government's behalf in
    Europe and the US". Oddly, not a single journalist raised this extraordinary connection
    with USgovernment officials - nor the blatant conflict of interest it appears to represent.


     •
     •    Mr Wisner is a retired State Department 36-year career diplomat - he served as US ambassador to
          Egypt, Zambia, the Philippines and India under eight American presidents. In other words, he was not
          a political appointee. But it is inconceivable Hillary Clinton did not know of his employment by a
          company that works for the very dictator which Mr Wisner now defends in the face of a massive
          democratic opposition in Egypt.

            UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778697 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778697 Date: 09/30/2015



So why on earth was he sent to talk to Mubarak, who is in effect a client of Mr Wisner's current
employers?

Patton Boggs states that its attorneys "represent some of the leading Egyptian commercial families and
their companies" and "have been involved in oil and gas and telecommunications infrastructure projects
on their behalf'. One of its partners served as chairman of the US-
Egyptian Chamber of Commerce promoting foreign investment in the Egyptian economy. The company
has also managed contractor disputes in military-sales agreements arising under the US Foreign Military
Sales Act. Washington gives around $1.3bn (£800m) a year to the Egyptian military.
Mr Wisner joined Patton Boggs almost two years ago - more than enough time for both the White House
and the State Department to learn of his company's intimate connections with the Mubarak regime. The
New York Times ran a glowing profile of Mr Wisner in its pages two weeks ago - but mysteriously did not
mention his ties to Egypt.

Nicholas Noe, an American political researcher now based in Beirut, has spent weeks investigating Mr
Wisner's links to Patton Boggs. Mr Noe is also a former researcher for Hillary Clinton and questions the
implications of his discoveries.

"The key problem with Wisner being sent to Cairo at the behest of Hillary," he says, "is the conflict-of-
interest aspect... More than this, the idea that the US is now subcontracting or 'privatising' crisis
management is another problem. Do the US lack diplomats?

"Even in past examples where presidents have sent someone 'respected' or 'close' to a foreign leader in
order to lubricate an exit," Mr Noe adds, "the envoys in question were not actually paid by the leader they
were supposed to squeeze out!"
Patton Boggs maintains an "affiliate relationship" with Zaki Hashem, one of Egypt's most prominent legal
firms. It was founded in 1953 and Zaki Hashem himself was a cabinet minister under Mubarak's
predecessor, President Anwar Sadat, and later became head of the Egyptian Society for International Law.
By a further remarkable irony, one of Zaki Hashem's senior advisers was Nabil al-Araby, one of the 25
leading Egyptian personalities just chosen by the protesters in Tahrir Square to demand the overthrow of
Mubarak. Nabil al-Araby, a former member of the UN's International Law Commission, told me yesterday
that he ended his connection with Zaki Hashem three years ago and had "no idea" why Mr Wisner had
come out in support of Mubarak's continued rule. He himself believed it was essential Mubarak make a
dignified but immediate exit. "The head must go," he said.
When Frank Wisner joined Patton Boggs in March 2009, the company described him as "one of the
nation's most respected diplomats" who would provide clients with "strategic global advice concerning
business, politics and international law". The firm stated specifically that "it looks to Ambassador Wisner to
use his expertise in the Middle East and India to assist its American and international clients."
Stuart Pape, managing partner at Patton Boggs, said at the time that "it is a real coup for the firm to have
Ambassador Wisner - one of the most experienced and highly regarded diplomats - join our ranks... His
in-depth knowledge of global politics and the international financial world is a huge asset for our clients."

We still do not know exactly what kind of "expertise" he has bestowed upon the dictator of Egypt. But his
remarks at the weekend leave no room to doubt he advised the old man to cling on to power for a few
more months. The vast network of companies with family connections to Mubarak's regime is, of course,
one of the targets of the pro-democracy demonstrators in Egypt.
A spokesman for the State Department said he "presumed" Mrs Clinton knew of Mr Wisner's employment
by Patton Boggs and the firm's links with the Mubarak government, but refused to comment on any
conflict of interest for the envoy. A spokesman for Patton Boggs could not be reached yesterday.
Like Robert Fisk on The Independent on Facebook for updates




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778697 Date: 09/30/2015
