UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775992 Date: 09/30/2015


                                                                             RELEASE IN FULL




       The Perils of Ignoring History: Big Tobacco
       Played Dirty and Millions Died. How
       Similar Is Big Food?

       KELLY D. BROWNELL and KENNETH E. WARNER

       Yale University; University of Michigan


       Context: In 1954 the tobacco industry paid to publish the "Frank Statement to
       Cigarette Smokers" in hundreds of U.S. newspapers. It stated that the public's
       health was the industry's concern above all others and promised a variety of
       good-faith changes. What followed were decades of deceit and actions that cost
       millions of lives. In the hope that the food history will be written differently,
       this article both highlights important lessons that can be learned from the
       tobacco experience and recommends actions for the food industry.

       Methods: A review and analysis of empirical and historical evidence pertaining
       to tobacco and food industry practices, messages, and strategies to influence
       public opinion, legislation and regulation, litigation, and the conduct of science.

       Findings: The tobacco industry had a playbook, a script, that emphasized
       personal responsibility, paying scientists who delivered research that instilled
       doubt, criticizing the "junk" science that found harms associated with smoking,
       making self-regulatory pledges, lobbying with massive resources to stifle gov-
       ernment action, introducing "safer" products, and simultaneously manipulating
       and denying both the addictive nature of their products and their marketing to
       children. The script of the food industry is both similar to and different from
       the tobacco industry script.

       Conclusions: Food is obviously different from tobacco, and the food industry
       differs from tobacco companies in important ways, but there also are significant
       similarities in the actions that these industries have taken in response to concern
       that their products cause harm. Because obesity is now a major global problem,


       Address correipondetzte to: Kelly D. Brownell, Rudd Center for Food Policy and
       Obesity, Yale University, 309 Edwards St., Box 208369, New Haven, CT
       06520-8369 (email: kelly.brownell@yale.edu).

       The Milbank Quarterly, Vol. 87, No. 1, 2009 (pp. 259-294)
       C) 2009 Milbank Memorial Fund. Published by Wiley Periodicals Inc.

                                              259




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775992 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775992 Date: 09/30/2015




        2 60                                         K.D. Brownell and K.E. Warner


       the world cannot afford a repeat of the tobacco history, in which industry talks
       about the moral high ground but does not occupy it.

        Keywords: Food, obesity, tobacco, industry, ethics, politics, public policy.




       1
            N DECEMBER 1953, THE CEOs OF THE MAJOR TOBACCO
            companies met secretly in New York City. Their purpose was to
            counter the damage from studies linking smoking to lung cancer. A
       year earlier Reader's Digest---then the public's leading source of medical
       information—had printed an article entitled "Cancer by the Carton"
       (Norr 1952). After it appeared, cigarette sales plummeted for two years,
       the first such decline of the century except during the Great Depression.
           Working closely with John Hal, the founder of the public relations
       giant Hill & Knowlton, the industry created "A Frank Statement to
       Cigarette Smokers" and paid to have it published in 448 newspapers
       on January 4, 1954. To give the industry a human face, the statement
       included the signatures of the nation's top tobacco executives and as-
       sured Americans that "we accept an interest in people's health as a basic
       responsibility, paramount to every other consideration in our business."
       Furthermore, they promised that "we always have and always will coop-
       erate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public's health"
       (Tobacco Industry Research Committee 1954).
          The "Frank Statement" was a charade, the first step in a concerted,
       half-century-long campaign to mislead Americans about the catastrophic
       effects of smoking and to avoid public policy that might damage sales.
       Unearthed later, industry documents showed the repeated duplicity of
       its executives. Everything was at stake. The industry wanted desperately
       to prevent, or at least delay, shifts in public opinion that would permit
       a barrage of legislative, regulatory, and legal actions that would erode
       sales and profits.
           Today another industry is under attack for marketing products per-
       ceived by some to damage health, and it also faces legislative, regulatory,
       and legal threats that could fundamentally alter how it does business.
       Schools are banning soft drinks and snack foods; legislation requiring
       calorie labels on restaurant menus has been passed at state and local
        levels and is being considered nationally; restrictions in food marketing
       practices have been proposed around the world; and even radical mea-
       sures such as taxing snack foods are part of the national debate. Such




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775992 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775992 Date: 09/30/2015




       The Perils of Ignoring History                                       261


       actions invite comparison of the food and tobacco industries, exempli-
       fied by a Fortune magazine cover story in 2003 entitled "Is Fat the Next
       Tobacco?" The cover depicted a French fry lying in an ash tray as if it
       were a cigarette. The article did what is now common—debate the par-
       allels between tobacco and food in the context of culpability for health
       damage and ask whether Big Food should be sued for the same reasons
       that Big Tobacco was.
          There are, of course, differences between food and tobacco as sub-
       stances. The most obvious is that humans must eat to maintain health
       and life, whereas the unnecessary activity of smoking is, in the words
       of former Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare Joseph Califano,
       "slow-motion suicide." Moreover, selling tobacco to children is illegal,
       but there currently are no restrictions on food sales. Tobacco has a well-
       chronicled addictive process, whereas research on food and addiction is
       just now maturing. And although the fight against tobacco coalesced
       around a single product made by a few companies, food and its industries
       are far more complex.
          The more important issue is whether tobacco history is instructive
       in addressing the problems created by unhealthy diets. A half cen-
       tury of tobacco industry deception has had tragic consequences: Since
       the "Frank Statement," approximately 16 million Americans have died
       from smoking, and millions more have suffered from debilitating dis-
       eases ranging from emphysema to heart disease. Had the industry come
       clean in 1954—matching deeds with promises—many of these deaths
       would almost certainly have been prevented. No one knows how many.
       Perhaps 3 million. Maybe 5 million. Maybe 7 million—just in the
        United States. An honest approach by industry might have saved more
       lives than any public health measure taken during the past fifty years.
       Furthermore, if industry had made good faith efforts globally, rather than
       exploit and addict the developing world, the benefits could have been
       stunning.
           Food, physical inactivity, and obesity may be in the same league.
       An astonishing two-thirds of the U.S. adult population is overweight
       or obese (Ogden er al. 2007). As with smoking, social justice issues are
       prominent, given that obesity rates are highest in the poorest segments of
        the population (Kurnanyika 2006). But weight issues are hardly unique
        to the United States. The World Health Organization has declared
       obesity a global epidemic, now surpassing hunger as the chief nutrition
       problem, even in some developing countries (WHO 2004).




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775992 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775992 Date: 09/30/2015




       262                                          K.D. Brownell and K. E. Warner


          Obesity rates are especially troubling in children, rising at three
       times the rate of increase in adults (Ogden, Carroll, and Flegal 2008).
       Indeed, the term adult onset diabetes has now been scrapped and replaced
       with Type 2 diabetes because children as young as eight are developing
       the disease. Canadian researchers conducted a fifteen-year follow-up of
       children diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes and found an alarming rate in
       young adults of blindness, amputation, kidney failure requiring dialysis,
       pregnancy loss, and death (Dean and Flett 2002). Health experts now
       are asking whether America's children will be the first in the nation's
       history to live shorter lives than their parents (Olshansky et al. 2005).
          Such statistics worry people, leading the press, parent groups, school
       officials, nutrition experts, health care providers, and government leaders
       to conclude that something must be done. Caught in the crosshairs,
       the food industry is reacting, sometimes with heavy ammunition. As
       an example, in response to menu-labeling. initiatives, the restaurant
       industry has sued New York City, used its political might to weaken
       legislation in California, and successfully encouraged federal legislators
       to introduce weak national legislation that would preempt states and
       cities from acting more aggressively.
           There are striking similarities, and some differences, in the way the
       food and tobacco industries have responded to public mistrust, damning
       scientific evidence, and calls for legal and legislative actions. As an
        important example of the similarities, food companies have issued their
       own versions of frank statements, stating their concern with the public's
        well-being and pledging to make changes to benefit public health. In
        this article we discuss what can be learned from tobacco and propose
        what might be done to avoid the repetition of a deadly history.


        A Crossroads for Food

        The food industry is on the defensive, hit hard by nutrition groups and
        public health professionals, the press, parent groups, child advocacy or-
        ganizations, and state and national legislators sponsoring bills that could
        have a powerful impact on business. Popular books like Fast Food Nation
        (Schlosser 2001) and movies like Supersize Me have sensitized the public
        to industry practices. In turn, the industry has had to react to claims that
        it seduces children into a lifestyle of unhealthy eating, infiltrates schools,
        buys loyalty from scientists, and pressures administration officials into




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775992 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775992 Date: 09/30/2015




       The Perils of Ignoring History                                          263


       accepting weak and ineffective nutrition policies (Brownell and Horgen
       2004; Nestle 2002).
          To the extent that these charges are fair, the analogy with the tobacco
       experience is inescapable. Seducing children? There is no better example
       than Joe Camel. Buying the loyalty of scientists? It happened time
       and again with tobacco. Using pressure to stall or prevent needed policy
       change? Few industries have been more effective than tobacco (Advocacy
       Institute 1998).
          A first step is to understand the industry players. Unlike tobacco,
       with one major product and a handful of companies producing it, food
       involves an immense array of products made by thousands of companies
       worldwide. The industry is diverse and fragmented in some ways, count-
       ing as its players a local baker making bread for a few stores; a family
       running a convenience store; an organic farmer; mega companies like
       Kraft, McDonalds, and Coca-Cola; and even Girl Scouts selling cookies.
       The same company making fried foods laden with saturated fat might
       also sell whole-grain cereal.
          In other ways, the industry is organized and politically powerful. It
       consists of massive agribusiness companies like Cargill, Archer Daniels
       Midland, Bunge, and Monsanto; food sellers as large as Kraft (so big
       as to own Nabisco) and Pepsi-Co (owner of Frito Lay); and restaurant
       companies as large as McDonald's and Yum! Brands (owner of Pizza
       Hut, Taco Bell, KFC, and more). These are represented by lobbyists,
       lawyers, and trade organizations that in turn represent a type of food (e.g.,
       Snack Food Association, American Beverage Association), a segment of
       the industry (e.g., National Restaurant Association), a constituent of
       food (e.g., Sugar Association, Corn Refiners Association), or the entire
       industry (e.g., Grocery Manufacturers of America).
          Common to all these players is an arresting logic: to successfully
       address the obesity epidemic, the nation must consume fewer calories,
       which means eating less food. Marion Nestle (2002) estimates that the
       number of daily calories created for the American food supply rose from
       3,300 per person in 1970 to 3,800 in the late 1990s, far in excess of what
       the average person needs to maintain a healthy weight. If consumers'
       demand for food were to reflect what they needed to maintain a healthy
       weight, the market would contract. A shrinking market for all those
       calories would mean less money—a lot less.
          Of course there will always be a need for food—people cannot stop eat-
       ing. But the types and amounts of food people eat must change dramatically




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775992 Date: 09/30/2015
