     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780961 Date: 09/30/2015


 Classified by DAS, A/GIS, DoS on 9/30/2015_ — Class
                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
 : CONFIDENTIAL — Reason:B1, 1.4(B)(D)— Declassify on:
                                                                                   1.4(B),B1,B5,1.4(D),B6
 06/13/2031



From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
Sent:                             Tuesday, June 14, 2011 5:34 AM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Quick read-out of Day 1 in Pak with Tom



A long read, but thorough description of Tom's day in Pakistan. I talked to him separately about the Immelt trip.



From: Feldman, Daniel F
Sent: Monday, June 13, 2011 10:48 PM
To: Grossman, Marc I; Ruggiero, Frank.]; Singh, Vikram J; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Lenderking, Timothy A; Nepal, Rohit S;
Bommer, Ashley F; Dunn, Courtenay
Cc: Munter, Cameron P; Nides, Thomas R; Sullivan, Stephanie S; Viehe, Ariella R; Mier, Alex (OAPA/OD)
Subject: Quick read-out of Day 1 in Pak with Tom

Marc/Jake --Just a quick debrief and thoughts from our first day in Pak (cables no doubt being drafted), which was very
positive in tone. Also cc'ing Cameron and traveling party, in case they want to add anything. In general, Tom amplified
the messages delivered recently by Marc and S, but kept focused on the theme of economic ties and civilian
assistance. If you didn't see them already, pasted below are his two press statements, following his meetings with
Shaikh and Hina. Only one Q was allowed of the press after Shaikh (none after Hina), and it focused on ROZs. Tues we'll
be primarily in Karachi, where he'll do some business media. The overwhelming message he received on civilian
assistance was the need for many fewer, but higher visibility, projects. And we need to be doing a much better job of
communicating what we're providing (including, I might add, today's $190M CDCF announcement). Tom made a
constant positive pitch about the importance of the relationship, but described the real difficulties we face with
Congress in particular, and the need to show them some concrete results from our partnership soon to maintain
assistance.

Internal mtgs -- Started the day with a modified country team briefing,                                                    B5




Hina Rabbani Khar and Bashir — V warm optics. She commented on the value of Tom's background in the private sector,
and that they were both very honest business-minded straight-shooters. Both committed to the importance of the
relationship and making sure it's headed on the right trajectory, per the comments below.                           .4(B)
                                                                                                                    .4(D)
                                                                                                                   B1




                                                             Hina broached the idea of visiting the US (by then as FM?),
perhaps in late July, and her willingness to go to the Hill when she comes. In the public remarks, Tom referenced the
APTTA implementation.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780961 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780961 Date: 09/30/2015




Gilani — The                                                                                         Pretty general 1 . 4(B)
conversation, but where he thanked the US for help post-earthquake, IDPs, and flood. He referenced his phone calls  1.4(D)
                                                                                                                    B1




                                                                                                                            B6

Zardari —
                                                                                                                     1.4(B)
                                                                                                                     1.4(D)
                                                                                                                     B1




Shaikh —                                                                                                                 1.4(B)
                                                                                                                         1.4(D)
                                                                                                                         B1




                                                                                      After the public statements, in
response to the one asked Q, Shaikh credited the US not only with the CDCF disbursement, but with playing an
important advocacy role for EU market access.

Fulbright Scholars alums —We did a roundtable event with about 10 alums, some recently returned from the US, which
was the surprise hit of the day. They were everything you'd hope — thoughtful, dynamic, and eloquent —                        B5




                                                                         They all said they took their news almost
uniformly from print/tv outlets (not Internet or social media), and they all talked about the misperceptions about the
US. In an earlier session, with members of the Higher Education Commission (to which we provided $45M in assistance


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780961 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780961 Date: 09/30/2015




last year), its representatives acknowledged that the US could have gotten far more and better publicity for our
contribution.

Dinner —The day concluded with a dinner hosted by Cameron of leading Parliamentarians, current and retired
government officials, and media and civil society representatives. (Marc — I had a long conversation with Maleeha Lodhi,
including about her book, which she said she would send to S. and she also sent you her best.)

DF




     Deputy Secretary Of State Thomas R. Nides Press Statement with Minister
                                    Shaikh

Islamabad, June 13, 2011 — Good afternoon. I am glad to be in Pakistan for the actually very first
time. Pakistanis are famous the world over for their hospitality, and I very much appreciate Finance Minister
Shaikh's warm welcome. Thank you, Mr. Minister, for a very very productive meeting.

We recognize the efforts of Minister Shaikh and the entire Government of Pakistan to deal with the serious
structural problems that affect your country. We acknowledge your commitment to work with the international
community to orient Pakistan toward financial security and sustainable growth.

The United States has interest in a stable, democratic, and prosperous Pakistan. This is why we are investing in
a better future for the Pakistani people through our civilian assistance and educational programs, among the
largest we have in the world.

We have tried to be a good friend to Pakistan. When terrible floods hit your nation last summer, the United
States was the first country to provide aid. We also provided your people with more assistance than any other
country.

Today, I am pleased to announce that we have fulfilled a commitment we made to the Pakistani people. We
have transferred the 190 million dollars we pledged last year to the Citizen's Damage Compensation Program.

Let me say what this means in real terms. This money will go directly to help one million Pakistani families. It
will provide tangible help to the Pakistani children, women, and men in need. It will help them rebuild their
homes, their livelihoods, and hopefully their lives. There are a number of international partners in this
effort. The United States is giving a significant portion and making good on our promise to help the people of
Pakistan. We will work in cooperation with the government to ensure it is spent transparently, honestly, and     -
effectively for the people of Pakistan.

This assistance is funded by the American people. It demonstrates the commitment of the United States to a
comprehensive, long-term cooperation with the Pakistani people.

Again, Mr. Minister, thank you for the warm welcome and the wonderful partnership.


                                                           ###


                                                       REMARKS


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780961 Date: 09/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780961 Date: 09/30/2015




             Deputy Secretary Of State Thomas R. Nides Press Statement
                             with State Minister Khar
                          —
Islamabad, June 13, 2011 Let me say at the onset how much I appreciate the warm welcome I have received
on my first visit to Pakistan. We've just finished an open and very constructive meeting. Madam Minister, I
want to thank you personally for your wonderful hospitality.

I am here as part of a long series of visits from representatives of the United States: Senator John Kerry was
just recently here, Special Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan Ambassador Marc Grossman, Secretary
Clinton herself was just recently here as well as Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Mike Mullen.

This series of meetings shows how important this relationship is to both of our countries. I believe we are now
heading in the right direction. Still, all of us have a great deal of work ahead to sustain this momentum.

The U.S. and Pakistan have a broad, challenging and complex relationship. But one thing should be clear: The
people of both of our countries benefit when we work together towards a common goal.

As Secretary Clinton said during her visit a few weeks ago, we believe that the Pakistanis and the Americans
share the same objectives: Defeat violent extremism. End the conflict in Afghanistan. Ensure a secure, stable,
democratic, and prosperous future for Pakistan. And we will work closely with the government and the people
of Pakistan to act on this common interest.

We recognize that Pakistan faces severe challenges at this moment in its history. Pakistanis have suffered
terribly at the hands of violent extremists. Your army and security forces have paid a heavy price. We respect
your sacrifice. We grieve with you over the loss of so many innocent people wantonly murdered by terrorists,
as we saw once again in Peshawar over the weekend. And we share the distress of the Pakistani people that so
many brave journalists have paid with their lives for pursuing the truth.

Everyone gains from a stable, prosperous, and democratic Pakistan—at peace with itself and with its
neighbors. And on that note, I am pleased to learn of the completion of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit Trade
Agreement, and important step toward regional prosperity. As Secretary Clinton said during her visit to
Pakistan last month, we are prepared to stand by the Pakistani people for the long haul. Let me reiterate: We
respect your democracy. And we look to you, the Pakistani people, to choose the kind of country you wish to
live in. And it is for the democratically-elected leaders of Pakistan to deliver results for the people.

What the United States can do is what we strive to do every day as long as we are there: we work with you to
identify our common goals and then work together to realize them. You can see this approach at work in our
civilian assistance programs.

We are working with your government to help renovate the Tarbela dam, which will expand electricity
generation and help address the energy crisis that affects your quality of life so much. Yes, we can see it at
work in our people-to-people exchange programs. These are the largest programs in the world, and I look
forward to visiting with Pakistani students later today. And you can see it in our cooperation to disrupt,
dismantle and defeat the violent extremists who have repeatedly killed women and children, blown up mosques
and markets, and shown no regard for human life or dignity.

We all know that nothing truly important happens without your effort. Our relationship is critically
important. It benefits the people of both countries in very concrete ways. I thank the Government of
Pakistan. And I thank you, Madam Minister, for your leadership for engaging in a spirit of partnership as we
work together to move together.
Thank you very much.
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780961 Date: 09/30/2015
