     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776615 Date: 09/30/2015


                                                                                                        RELEASE IN
                                                                                                        PART B6




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Monda , December 13, 2010 8:19 AM
To:                                'preine
Subject:                           Re: Letter to Hillary - from Tina Brown



See below.

    Original Message
From: Jill Iscol
To: H
Sent: Fri Dec 10 11:16:23 2010
Subject: FW: Letter to Hillary - from Tina Brown

Dear Hillary,




Although I had intended to shoot you an email about far more mundane matters, Tina called and asked me for advice on
this request so I figured this should take precedence. Admittedly, in my opinion, this would be a particularly wonderful
story because it would certainly underscore the significance of your work as well as that of the women throughout the
world who are truly making a significant impact as they gain rights and access to opportunities in every sector. Having
said this, I don't have a clue what else is on your calendar nor what the variables are that go into these kinds of
decisions. Hence, although I personally love the idea, I am, primarily, a messenger.




I am so sorry I didn't get to the TED Women's conference in DC. Perhaps, if I had known you were on the agenda, I
would have tried to crash!! ( remember that word from our high school days)? In reality, I did not have the time to go
and thought it was rather pricey to attend. I am busy working on the book which is going so well. It lifts my spirit to be
talking to a diverse group of young, inspiring leaders who, for me, represent the very best hope for our future. And, I
think it will shape the next chapter of my own life because it is a project which just might generate more and more
possibilities.




In any case, I am so proud of you. I had an event for CYNY last night and the attendees who were couples ranging in age
from their 30's into their 80's. Almost all, pulled me aside at different times throughout the evening to tell me how
much they admire you..no surprise but always nice to hear..at least for me!




I am quite sure that Tina sent Huma a pcopy of this email. Please let her know that Tina asked me to send one to you as
well.




I'll miss seeing you over the holiday but send you and your family much love and best wishes for a New Year filled with
good health, peace and happiness.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776615 Date: 09/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776615 Date: 09/30/2015




Your ever lovin' friend,

Jill




Jill Iscol, Ed.D.




From: Brown, Tina [mailto
Sent: Thursday, December 09, 2010 2:23 PM
To: Jill Iscol
Subject: Letter to Hillary




Dear Jill,




I wondered what you thought of this idea for the Newsweek cover that we'd publish March 7 the week of our next
Women in the World Summit. It's going to be incredibly powerful this year after the success of last year. The ultimate
Woman in the World is Hillary — her passion for global women's human rights has been the lodestar of her life. All of us
who were at the summit were struck about how again and again women on the stage — women who most people had
never heard of — spoke with such feeling of moments when Hillary had validated their work and in doing so had given
them the strength to continue. And yet for all the years she has worked so tirelessly on the part of women she has never
really had the right media acknowledgment for it, in my view. I understand that, for instance, during the campaign the
goal was to keep presenting an image of the next Commander in Chief. And at State, there are so many issues to be out
front on. But I do think now would be a wonderful time simply to pull together the work she has done over the years for
women and acknowledge how with the creation of Melanne's role and her emphasis on integrating needs of women
into her diplomacy efforts - and indeed the powerful women she has appointed into key roles at her State department -
she should now be saluted for the unique role she plays as a woman for other women.




The writer I had in mind is not the usual kind of journalist assigned to cover her. I wondered if Hillary might enjoy talking
to Stacy Schiff, author of the brilliant study of Cleopatra, Vera Nabokov and the prize winning history of Benjamin
Franklin. I spoke to Stacy and she is very excited at the notion and encouraged me because she tells me that Hillary did
indeed like her book. What we would really like is for Stacy to be able to interview Hillary about all the work she's doing
for women and ideally accompany her on a trip sometime in the next six weeks when especially she might be holding
meetings with women (I was struck last year at the Summit when I think it was Alyse who told me that when Hillary visits
other countries she so often makes the time to see women activists who are working behind the scenes). Of course we
would also love to take a photograph of her perhaps with a group of global women whose causes she might like to
handpick to spotlight. Since we don't have very much time if it is to be written by the mid-February deadline, I'd love any
advice you could give me on getting a fast response of whether you think this is something she'd like to do. It will have
big media attention since it will be the first issue of Newsweek under my full control after the transition. I would of
course give Stacy all the numbers of the women featured in SEVEN to talk to about Hillary as well as encourage her to
see Melanne and so on so she could be well-briefed before the interview.

       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776615 Date: 09/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776615 Date: 09/30/2015




Love,

Tina




                                                       ,




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776615 Date: 09/30/2015
