     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780568 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                              Anne-Marie Slaughter <                                                                        B6
Sent:                              Tuesday, April 12, 2011 10:55 AM
To:
Cc:                                Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma
Subject:                           Les Gelb on AU proposal for ceasefire



I basically agree with this — the most important thing by a mile right now is to get the fighting stopped — every day it
goes on we lose the goodwill we generated in the first place by coming to the opposition's aid, b/c they are increasingly
calling for us to do more, which will quickly (and is already) shifting to blaming us for their losses. It also gets every
harder to rebuild. In my view the winset for a compromise is to get Gaddafi out but to keep Saif (or another son) as part
of a governing Council. But Les is right that if NATO counter-proposes with a really tough proposal it starts to box
Gaddafi in diplomatically instead of allowing him to say that he was ready for a cease-fire. And given his propaganda
hold on many of the citizens in Western Libya, at least according to some very good on-the-ground sources, there is still
a constituency for his family/govt if not for him. Another possibility would be to have Qatar or UAE or someone
represent Arab League and have negotiations b/w both sides take place under combined auspices of AU and Arab
League. Libya has always seen itself BOTH as part of the Arab world and of Africa — as the gateway to sub-Saharan Africa.



Give the Libya Cease-Fire Plan a Chance
by Leslie H. Gelb
April 12, 2011

Westerners who rushed to the defense of the Libyan rebels bridle at the thought of any cease-fire proposal that doesn't
require Col. Gaddafi's removal from power. Indeed, Libyan rebels have already rejected the proposal by African leaders
that restricts itself to a straight cease-fire and puts off other contentious issues. But NATO leaders would be dead wrong
to reject the African proposal out of hand. They would be wrong to let the absolutists and the rebels let the war go on
until they have everything they want, no matter what the costs. For all the holes in the African initiative, it does start the
ball rolling toward a possible cease-fire. At the very least, U.S. leaders owe it to Americans to explore the ideas seriously,
perhaps through NATO or the U.N. Security Council. And the moral war-mongers can always console themselves with
the thought that if these cease-fire talks collapse, all parties can resume the killing in the name of freedom and
humanity.

No one expects Col. Gaddafi to agree to or keep a full-fledged cease-fire, but he has accepted the limited African
proposal. Obviously, NATO shouldn't simply accept the African plan as is. But it should respond with a beefed-up
counterproposal, one with inspectors in place and other reasonable requirements that can't be dismissed as ploys to
make the cease-fire idea fail. And if the colonel says no to that, most Westerners-including myself-would feel less
strained about the ongoing and costly battle.

In sum, here's what the five African presidents placed on the table on behalf of the African Union: (1) An immediate
cease-fire, (2) the unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid, (3) protection of foreign nationals, and (4) a dialogue
between the government and rebels on a political settlement.

Among other things, the NATO counterproposal should call for a U.N. inspection team to police the cease-fire, a pullback
of Gaddafi's forces to their base areas, and a cessation of all Libyan helicopter and aircraft flights. But other than items
such as those to reinforce a cease-fire, the African suggestions seem necessarily general and wise as starting points. If a
cease-fire would result in the creation of two Libyan states, that doesn't seem like a terrible outcome when compared to
a never-ending civil war.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780568 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780568 Date: 09/30/2015




Predictably, the Italian and British foreign ministers threw cold water on the African plan, and joined the rebels in
insisting that Gaddafi must go as part of any cease-fire. To me, this is not a serious response. Their main mission is
supposed to be saving civilian lives, and everything they are saying would simply guarantee more killing.

As for the position of the Obama administration, it seems to be a typical mystery. On Monday, Secretary of State Clinton
proffered a list of non-negotiable terms including: cease-fire, pullback of troops from areas that had been forcibly
entered, and resumption of water, electricity, and humanitarian aid. She added: "We believe, too, that there needs to
be a transition that reflects the will of the Libyan people and the departure of Gaddafi from power and from Libya."
Interestingly, she did not include Gaddafi's departure among her non-negotiable demands for a cease-fire. That omission
would seem very promising, save that department officials were reluctant to underline its importance.

White House press secretary Jay Carney produced his own tongue twisters on Monday: "What matters here are actions
and not words...{Gaddifi's forces) need to stop menacing the civilians... pull back from the cities...garrison
themselves...{But} we are in no way letting up the implementation {of United Nations Security Council Resolution
1973}." To me, that sounds like the basis for a serious counterproposal. But then Carney went on to repeat the usual
lines about U.S. policy being to squeeze Gaddafi until he leaves power. Go figure.

Administration officials tell me that reacting favorably toward a cease fire proposal would lead Gaddafi to think he's
winning. And that, in turn, would make him more determined to fight on. My response is that NATO and the U.S. can
control Gaddafi's reactions by their counter proposal -- hopefully a tough one. Besides, didn't President Obama say that
while he wanted to get rid of Gaddafi, that was not to be accomplished by military force, but by diplomatic and
economic means?

Of course, every decent person wants to get rid of Gaddafi. But the goal set out by the United Nations here is to save
civilian lives, and it seems fair to try to achieve this by allowing for a cease-fire with Gaddafi in place, if only for the
purpose of providing a power transition. Don't let us be too squeamish about dealing with the Gaddafi monster. America
and its allies have a long history of bargaining with devils-mass murderers like Stalin and Mao, and nasty opponents in
war like Ho Chi Minh. And don't forget the almost decade-long love fest the West had with Gaddafi himself after he
renounced terrorism and destroyed his nuclear programs. The West can and does deal with devils to keep the peace and
to save lives-without compromising its own security or fundamental values.

Leslie H. Gelb, a former New York Times columnist and senior government official, is author of Power Rules: How
Common Sense Can Rescue American Foreign Policy (HarperCollins 2009), a book that shows how to think about and use
power in the 21st century. He is president emeritus of the Council on Foreign Relations.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780568 Date: 09/30/2015
