       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783200 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Tuesday, September 20, 2011 12:23 PM
To:                                           H
Subject:                                      Fw: Palestinians see sufficient votes at UN council (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Tuesday, September 20, 2011 11:35 AM
To: NEWS-I0; NEWS-NEA; NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Palestinians see sufficient votes at UN council (Reuters)



NEW YORK (Reuters) - The Palestinian foreign minister voiced confidence September 20 that his delegation
would muster the minimum nine votes needed to win U.N. Security Council support for Palestinian statehood.

    Security Council resolutions need nine votes from the 15-nation body to pass, but the United States has
already said it will veto the measure, which would prevent its passage.

  Israeli officials who oppose the bid had said the Palestinians would have difficulty securing the minimum
number needed.

   "We're working towards it (securing nine votes) and I think we'll manage it," Palestinian Foreign Minister
Riyad al-Malki told reporters after meeting his Venezuelan counterpart.

    Mallci did not consider the U.S. position as unchangeable.

  "We hope the United States will revise its position and be on the side of the majority of nations or countries
who want to support the Palestinian right to have self determination and independence," Malki said.

   Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas plans to give U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon an application
Friday for full U.N. membership for a Palestinian state, setting the stage for a showdown with Israel and the
United States.

   Israel, which has called for renewed direct talks with the Palestinians, opposes the U.N. move and says it is
aimed at de-legitimizing Israel. The Palestinians say their U.N. bid is aimed at opening the door to renewed
peace talks among two equals -- both of them sovereign states.

   The latest round of direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians collapsed a year ago after Israel
refused to extend a moratorium on new settlements in areas the Palestinians want for a future state.


News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783200 Date: 09/30/2015
