     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779549 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                             B6


From:                                Anne-Marie Slaughter
Sent:                                Friday, April 1, 2011 10:47 PM
To:
Cc:                                  Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:                             Weekend Reading (in your infinite spare time)



Here and below is a piece I wrote for the New York Review of Books blog this week building on the framework of states
and societies that I laid out in my farewell remarks and connecting it both to the Libya debate and to the women go to
war meme (altho v lightly). I think you will like it. httpj/www.nybooks.comiblogs/nyrblog/2011finar/301interests-
values-obarnas-libva-stratmL.

There is also a really interesting piece by an Israeli professor arguing that if in fact the UN were to recognize Palestine
w/I 1967 borders it would be recognizing Israel w/I 1967 borders as well – immediately delegitimizing all who claim
Israel does not have a right to exist. Here is the link. It may well be too. clever by half, but it's thought-provoking re
simply creating the baseline via int'l recognition and then let them work out land-swaps.
htto://rnideast.foreigmflicy,conilpostsi2011j0:3/_31Jisrael should endorse un recognition of a oalestinian state

I hope you get at least an hour or two of downtime this weekend – everywhere I go people are rooting for you but
worrying how on earth you can keep up the pace – out of concern for you but also for the country.
AM



Interests vs. Values? Misunderstanding Obania's Libya Strategy
Anne-Marie Slaughter




                                                Barack °barna; drawing by John Springs


President Obama made an important contribution to the Libya debate in his speech Monday night by rejecting the over-worked
dichotomy between America's strategic interests and its core values. Most of the media coverage of the debate relied on this
familiar trope. On March 16, at the beginning of the critical week that resulted in a UN resolution and the start of air strikes two
days later, the Times reported that "senior officials, notably the national security adviser, Thomas E. Donilon, have made it clear
that the United States does not view Libya as a vital strategic interest." After the President made the decision to support a no fly
zone, the press continued to refer to this dichotomy, but now asserted that values had triumphed over interests. The Times story
of the crucial meetings in which the decisions were made—the story which, not coincidentally, provided the original fodder for
the "women go to war" saga—began: "Ever since the democracy protests in the region began three months ago, the Obama
administration has struggled to balance America's national security interests against support for democratic principles."

In his account of why he decided to support a UN resolution authorizing military intervention in Libya, Obama began by
reminding us of what did not happen. He summoned the prospect of a house-to-house massacre of all opposition supporters in
Benghazi, a city of 700,000, a massacre that would have "reverberated across the region and stained the conscience of the
world." He then said: "It was not in our national interest to let that happen."


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779549 Date: 09/30/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779549 Date: 09/30/2015




Later in the speech (Mama specified precisely the interests he weighed against the costs and risks of intervention. First was the
strain that floods of refugees resulting from a Qaddafi victory would put on the fragile transitions in Egypt and Tunisia. Second
was the message that would be sent to other dictators across the region, "as repressive leaders concluded that violence is the best
strategy to cling to power." Third was the erosion of all credibility for the UN Security Council.


Alongside these specific strategic interests, as Obatna characterized them, was a more fundamental betrayal of "who we are," a
denial of our values that would cost us our integrity as a nation and as a global leader. That is a reason grounded in both our
values and our interests. When the gap between what we say and think about ourselves and what we actually do becomes too
great, it can cause a crisis of both national identity and international legitimacy. Obama knows this better than most Presidents;
it is why he came to power vowing to reject torture and close Guantanamo (though that has proven difficult to accomplish in
practice). During his inaugural address, remember the sense of a weight lifting from our collective shoulders and the roar of
applause after the line: "As for our common defense, we reject as false the choice between our safety and our ideals."


Obama acknowledged, rightly, that the US has more direct vital interests—the preservation of US territory, the safety of our
people, the security of our allies, and "our core interests." Protecting civilians in Libya does not fall within that category, but
rather within the category of "challenges to our common security and common humanity." The US should not "be afraid to act,"
but neither should it act alone.


I dwell on Obama's parsing of values and interests because both the terms and the way that they are typically used in foreign
policy debates are heavily freighted with assumptions and associations that typically skew the outcome of those debates. In the
first place, any effort to argue for intervention in circumstances where the protection of lives and rights are involved almost
immediately gets framed as values versus interests, no matter how hard the advocate of intervention insists that it is interests
versus interests. It's a very smart debating move, because that framing carries all of the following baggage:


INTERESTS              VALUES


Strategic              Moral


Vital                  Optional


 Realist               Idealist


 Cool                  Passionate


 Hard-headed           Warm-hearted


 Calculation           Emotion


 Narrow                Broad


 could add the question of gender, but every woman reading this has already filled it in. When the President said at the Gridiron
dinner, "I've dispatched Hillary to the Middle East to talk about how these countries can transition to new leaders--though, I've
got to be honest, she's gotten a little passionate about the subject," I sincerely doubt that he understood why so many women
bridled. To any professional woman who has done battle to get herself taken seriously, "passionate" is the kiss of death. In my
view, the entire "women go to war" narrative was fueled in part by the automatic association of women with strong emotional
engagement with humanitarian causes and crusading support for idealist principles.


If we can move away from values versus interests and recognize that many participants in the Libya debate are weighing
interests versus interests (some of which are reinforced by values), then we can focus on the deeper question of how American
interests should be defined. In this debate, the disagreement is really between those who define American interests only with
respect to a world of states, or with respect to a world of both states and societies. In a world of states, the United States is
threatened only by strong states; Libya is weak. In a world of both governments and the societies they rule, the fate of the


        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779549 Date: 09/30/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779549 Date: 09/30/2015




Libyan opposition would have resonated through social networks across the region, with pictures of horrific atrocities against
men and women calling for liberty, democracy, justice, and Western help.


In a world of states, geography is still a function of bounded physical borders. In a world of governments and societies,
geography includes the unbounded virtual world in which social networks operate despite the efforts of some governments to
control them. In a world of states, we look to the distribution of natural resources among them and favor those states that have
more. In the world of governments and societies, we must look not only at natural resources but also at the distribution of the
wealth they generate. In a world of states, governments can be bribed, coerced, and cajoled into pursuing a desired course of
action. In a world of governments and societies, we must take account of the power of citizens to constrain their governments in
ways that are directly contrary to our ability to solve global problems.




                                                                                                                    Toby Melyille/WPA Pool/Getty Images
                     Hillary Clinton after the Libya Conference at the Foreign & Commonwealth Qffice. London. March 29, 2011


This is a much more complex definition of interests, and a much more complex game—so complex that it is hardly surprising
that many foreign policy advisers would rather stick to the world of great power chess. Yet here is what it means in practice. It
means that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was probably not arguing for a No Fly Zone because the people of Libya were
tugging at her heart-strings or because of a patriotic commitment to American values, but because she had just returned from a
trip to Egypt during which a number of members of the Egyptian youth movement refused to meet with her because of the
perception that the US had sided with Mubarak—and young people now make up 60 percent of the population of the Middle
East.

It means that Samantha Power, who is assumed to be automatically for military intervention whenever a massacre looms
because she wrote a Pulitzer Prize—winning book on genocide, may well have been motivated to take a position favoring a NFZ,
if indeed that is the position she took, because the gravamen of her book, A Problem fi-on2 Hell, was precisely that the US said
"never again," but actively did whatever it could to avoid calling Rwanda a genocide precisely so we would not .have to
intervene. As a former journalist and writer, she is acutely sensitive to both the power of words and the tremendous and lasting
damage that can be done by the gap between "said" and "did."


This world of governments and societies is the foreign policy frontier. Many members of the Administration have been arguing
that although it may be messy and uncomfortable, US foreign policy must change fairly dramatically to prosper in that world.
Recognizing the importance of societies as well as governments—and both are important—requires focusing on development,
the suite of policies dedicated to improving the lives of the individual human beings who comprise a society, as much as on •
diplomacy. It requires standing for Internet freedom and promoting all the ways in which information technology can help
societies hold their governments to account. It requires paying attention to which voices are and are not heard in societies. And
it points to the value of engaging the full spectrum of US society—economic, civic, educational, religious, philanthropic—to
connect to foreign societies.


•More specifically and immediately, defining US interests with respect to both governments and societies, rather than of unitary
 states, means supporting all efforts to reach a negotiated solution in Libya. Our goal should be not only to have Qaddafi leave
 office, but also to support as broad a spectrum of Libyans as possible in making a transition to, in the President's words, "a
 legitimate government that is responsive to the Libyan people." We should not try to engineer a government that will support us
 in Qaddafi's stead, or fight to the finish to burnish US credibility and power.


 We know from too many examples how difficult it is for a society to reconstruct itself both physically and socially after a
 conflict. The more killing and destruction, the longer and harder it will be for Libyans to rebuild the economic and social ties
 that can support development and a healthy political process. As commentators have already begun to point out, many of the
 members of Qaddafi's army are young and terrified conscripts who want no part of Qaddafi's war but whose families will be



        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779549 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779549 Date: 09/30/2015




mobilized by their deaths. Let us protect Libya's civilians by any means necessary, but let us at the same time support any effort
to stop the conflict on whatever terms both sides will ultimately accept. Both our interests and our values will be well served.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779549 Date: 09/30/2015
