       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784170 Date: 09/30/2015

                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
Sent:                              Sunday, May 22, 2011 1:13 AM
To:                                Valenzuela, Arturo A; H
Cc:                                Burns, William J
Subject:                           Re: Update on Honduras Reintegration



This is big. Fingers crossed that it holds - but if it does, the entire USG team working this deserves enormous credit.
Thanks, Arturo.



     Original Message
From: Valenzuela, Arturo A
Sent: Sunday, May 22, 2011 12:41 AM
To: 'HDR22@clintonemall.com' <HDR22@clintonemail.com>
Cc: Sullivan, Jacob Burns, William J
Subject: Update on Honduras Reintegration

Madame Secretary:

Late this evening, President Lobo agreed to the final draft of the text of an "Agreement for National Reconciliation and
Democratic Consolidation in the Republic of Honduras" brokered by Colombia and Venezuela. It will be signed in
Cartagena tomorrow. I spoke to President Lobo a short while ago. He was upbeat about the outcome. He expressed his
deep appreciation for the steadfast support from the United States throughout this process, and from the beginning of
his presidency.
The president will travel from Cartagena tomorrow afternoon to Managua to a meeting with Presidents Colom, Funes
and Ortega. The Central American countries will ask for a special session of the Permanent Council this week and
present a resolution to re-admit Honduras to the OAS.

It has been a long day since the negotiations appeared to have failed late last night and Lobo was preparing to send a
letter to Santos and Chavez withdrawing from the negotiations. Through Ambassador Llorens we cautioned patience.
Since then, I have been in continuous touch with Foreign Minister Holguin of Colombia--- she has shared drafts of texts
and concerns with me -- and both Mike McKinley in Bogota and Hugo in Tegucigalpa have worked around the clock on
this, speaking to both presidents, VP Bogran in Honduras and others.

The key was to ensure that Colombia, working with Venezuela, push back on Zelaya's demands and that Lobo find
enough space to effectively counter many in his own circle that are hostile to the negotiations. The Colombians
succeeded in modifying the text that was problematic last night (I quietly worked w Holguin on the language.)

Julissa early in the day spoke to FM Rodas of Guatemala-- and I followed up with an additional call to reiterate our
support for the meeting the Central Americans are convening in Managua. We have worked to get them to propose a
short resolution that avoids extraneous text that might damage its prospects, and to hold the line on amendments. This
effort seems to be on track. I spoke with Insulza to reiterate the same message.

Amb McKinley and Llorens went out of their way in this effort. While we need to be cautious in case of unexpected
developments, this matter appears headed in the right direction.

Regards, Arturo




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784170 Date: 09/30/2015
