      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781395 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL


From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Thursday, July 28, 2011 6:53 PM
To:
Subject:                          FW: Tim Gunn, talking smack...




From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Thursday, July 28, 2011 6:35 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Valmoro, Lona 3; Laszczych, Joanne
Subject: Tim Gunn, talking smack...



Tim Gunn May Know Style, But He Doesn't Know Hillary Clinton, Diplomacy, Or
Apparently, Much About Sexism

By Alyssa Rosenberg on Jul 28, 2011 at 8:38 am

Tim Gunn's description of Hillary Clinton as someone who dresses like "she's confused about her gender!" is
disappointing not just because Tim Gunn is someone who has been able to achieve great fame and wealth
because society's become more accepting of men who are more interested in things that are traditionally
feminine than masculine, but because Tim Gunn has achieved that great fame and wealth by purporting to know
something about fashion. And I've always thought one of the most important things about fashion is that it's
situational. Gunn doesn't appear to have considered that playing up her femininity and sex appeal might not
always be strategic for Hillary as one of the first women to serve as Secretary of State. It's not like Clinton
doesn't know how to dress in accordance with normative conceptions of American femininity, as she did when
her daughter Chelsea got married last year. I particularly liked this number she wore to the rehearsal dinner,
which was a terrific color and cut for her:

But if you're meeting with, say, the Saudi foreign minister, it wouldn't necessarily be respectful to wear
something so low-cut. And if you're sitting down at the table with Hu Jintao, it might actually be strategic to
dress as if you're dowdy or less formidable so people will underestimate you. Fashion choices that are
diplomatically appropriate and strategic may have nothing to do with current conventions of style. Gunn said,
after insulting Clinton's clothing choices, that "I have great respect for her intellect, and her tenacity, and for
what she does for our country, and for our governmental role, I just wish she could send a stronger message
about American fashion." It's disappointing that a man who thinks so much time thinking about what will make
women's bodies look good apparently hasn't considered very carefully how style can accentuate or detract from
the other parts of themselves that women might care about presenting, too.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781395 Date: 09/30/2015
