     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776279 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                   Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
Sent:                                   Monday, January 3, 2011 7:05 PM
To:
Subject:                                FW: Action: Draft Clinton-Ashton Statement on Belarus Closure of OSCE Mission



FYI — first one went over very well. This one should too.


From: Russell, Daniel A
Sent: Monday, January 03, 2011 1:59 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob); Macmanus, Joseph E
Subject: Action: Draft Clinton-Ashton Statement on Belarus Closure of OSCE Mission

Jake, Joe: We prepared a second draft joint US-EU statement on Belarus in the wake of the December 31 decision to
shut down the OSCE Mission in Minsk. The following text has been cleared by D, P, Phil Gordon and the NSC, as well as
the EU. The EU would like the joint statement to be issued as a Clinton-Ashton statement, just like the one on
December 23 (attached below). Can we get approval for this to be issued in the Secretary's name?

"The United States and the European Union regret the Government of Belarus' decision to terminate the mission of the
OSCE's office in Minsk. The mandate of the mission is not completed, as the OSCE's critical assessment of the
presidential elections indicates. The United States and the European Union reiterate that the elections and their
aftermath -- particularly the continuing detention of presidential candidates and new detentions and raids targeting the
media -- represent a step backwards in the development of democratic governance in Belarus. We reiterate our call for
the immediate release of the presidential candidates and other detainees.

"The United States and the European Union also reiterate their call on the Belarusian authorities to fulfill Belarus's
commitments to the OSCE by reforming the election process and providing greater respect for human rights. The OSCE
has carried out valuable work in the country in particular in promoting institution building and the rule of law and
supporting the development of civil society. The United States and the European Union remain willing to assist Belarus
in meeting its OSCE commitments in the field of human rights and fundamental freedoms. We will continue to take the
Government of Belarus's actions into account in our current review of relations with Belarus."



  Joint Statement by Catherine Ashton, EU High Representative and Secretary of State
  Hillary Clinton on the Post-Presidential Elections' Situation in Belarus

  WASHINGTON, Dec. 23, 2010 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- "The United States and the European Union reiterate their call for
  the immediate release of the presidential candidates and the over 600 demonstrators who have been taken into custody in the
  wake of the presidential elections in Belarus. We strongly condemn all violence, especially the disproportionate use of force
  against presidential candidates, political activists, representatives of civil society and journalists. Taken together, the elections and
  their aftermath represent an unfortunate step backwards in the development of democratic governance and respect for human
  rights in Belarus. The people of Belarus deserve better.

  "The European Union and the. United States recognize the serious problems with the electoral process and the vote count as
  reported by the OSCE election observation mission and urge the Government of Belarus to meet its commitments to the OSCE to
  substantially reform the electoral process. The Government of Belarus should take the steps necessary to create political space
  for political activists, civil society representatives, and independent journalists.

  "Respect for democracy and human rights remain central to improving Belarus's relations with the United States and the European
  Union. Without substantial progress in these areas, relations will not improve. It is against this background that we will be
  assessing the Government of Belarus's actions to address the current situation and to take developments into account as we
  review our relations with Belarus. The European Union and the United States intend to continue their support for and engagement
  with the people of Belarus and civil society representatives."



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776279 Date: 09/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776279 Date: 09/30/2015




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776279 Date: 09/30/2015
