        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777816 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                          Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                          Friday, February 18, 2011 8:30 AM
To:
Subject:                                       Fw: Abbas likely to reject Obama request on settlements (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker@state.gov <OpsNewsTicker@state.goy>
To: NEWS-NEA; NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-O_Shift-11; SES-0_0S; SES-O_SWO
Sent: Fri Feb 18 08:29:06 2011
Subject: Abbas likely to reject Obama request on settlements (Reuters)

RAMALLAH (Reuters) - Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbbas is likely to turn down Washington's request
to withdraw a U.N. Security Council resolution demanding Israel halt settlement expansion on occupied land.

   Several officials close to Abbas on Friday predicted this would be the consensus of a meeting of the
Palestine Liberation Organisation's executive later in the day to discuss President Barack Obama's telephone
call with Abbas on Thursday. The U.N. Security Council is scheduled to start discussions later on Friday on a
draft resolution that Arab states submitted in January, demanding that Israel halt settlement activities in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem.

   The Palestinians say continued building flouts the internationally-backed peace plan that will permit them to
create a viable, contiguous state on the land after a treaty with Israel to end its occupation and 62 years of
conflict.

    Israel says this is an excuse for avoiding peace talks and a precondition never demanded before during 17
years of negotiation, which has so far produced no agreement.
Obama, who has said Israeli settlements in territories it captured in a 1967 war are illegal and unhelpful to the
peace process, is opposed to a U.N. move that in Washington's view could shatter hopes of reviving the stalled
talks.

   In a 50-minute phone call, he asked Abbas to drop the resolution and settle for a non-binding statement
condemning settlement expansion, Palestinian officials said. Abbas on Friday received a follow-up call from
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on the issue, the Palestinian news agency Wafa said.

   "Caving in to American pressure and withdrawing the resolution will constitute Goldstone 2," said a
Palestinian official, speaking on terms of anonymity.

   He was referring to the wave of protest in October 2009 accusing Abbas of caving in to U.S. pressure by
agreeing not to submit for adoption a U.N. report that accused Israel and Hamas Islamists of war crimes during
the brief Gaza war two years ago.

   Abbas was hanged and burnt in effigy by pro-Hamas supporters furious over the move. Abbas maintains he
insisted on submitting the report.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.



        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777816 Date: 09/30/2015
