      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781282 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                             Monday, July 25, 2011 6:43 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: U.S. military says won't halt spy flights near China (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Monday, July 25, 2011 06:26 PM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: U.S. military says won't halt spy flights near China (Reuters)


WASHINGTON (Reuters) - The U.S. military vowed Monday to press ahead with surveillance flights near
China despite opposition from Beijing, after reports Chinese jets crossed a boundary with Taiwan to pursue a
U.S. spy plane.

   Admiral Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs ofiStaff, was asked about a June 29 incident in which
two Chinese Sukhoi-27 fighters briefly crossed a line in the center of the Taiwan Strait that is considered an
unofficial air boundary between both countries.

   Asian media reported the Chinese jets were attempting to intercept a U.S. U-2 reconnaissance plane.

   "We won't be deterred from flying in international airspace," Mullen told reporters in Washington in
response.

   "The Chinese would see us move out of there. ... We're not going to do that, from my perspective. These
reconnaissance flights are important."

   His spokesman later told Reuters that Mullen did not have specific knowledge of the reported incursion and
was only speaking generally about the U.S. right to conduct surveillance flights in international airspace in the
region.

    The Pentagon did not immediately confirm or deny details about the incident. Chinese jets regularly attempt
to intercept U.S. reconnaissance aircraft to show they are aware of the U.S. presence.

   Still, Mullen said it was important not to repeat what happened in 2001, when a U.S. Navy surveillance
plane collided with a Chinese fighter jet trying to intercept it over the South China Sea. The U.S. aircraft made
an emergency landing on a Chinese island and its crew were briefly detained.

   "These are lives that are at stake up there, in addition to creating an incident ... that escalates the tension over
there and could put countries in a position to miscalculate," he said.

    FIGHTER JETS FOR TAIWAN?

    The comments follow a trip by Mullen to China, part of a broader effort to improve ties with the People's
 Liberation Army, whose rapid buildup and territorial disputes in the South China Sea have set off alarms in the
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781282 Date: 09/30/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781282 Date: 09/30/2015




region.

   Self-ruled Taiwan, claimed by China as part of its sovereign territory, has been at the center of Sino-U.S.
military friction.

   China severed military ties with the United States for most of 2010, furious about a package of U.S. arms
sales to Taiwan worth up to $6.4 billion.

    For U.S.-China watchers, the big question is when the United States might resume arms sales to Taiwan.

   U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has told Sen. John Comyn that she will announce on Oct. 1 whether
the United States will answer a call from Taiwan for more F-16 fighter jets, an aide to the senator told Reuters.

   Comyn had delayed Senate confirmation of a senior State Department appointment in a tactic to force
Clinton to review a request from Taiwan for the aircraft.

  At the State Department, spokeswoman Victoria Nuland declined on Monday to offer a timeline, saying:
"We'll let you know when we do have something to report."

  When he visited Washington in May, Chinese General Chen Bingde warned that new U.S. weapons sales
would damage ties.

   Mullen noted that the United States was obligated under the 1979 Taiwan Relations Act to help the island
defend itself.

    "We have a relationship (with Taiwan) and responsibilities and there are legal responsibilities in my country
to support the Taiwan Relations Act," Mullen said.

   "So when we have another bump in the road, should that occur, I hope we work our way through that with
the Chinese military."

   Taiwan is also still waiting for an upgrade to its existing U.S.-made F-16 fighter jets, six new cargo aircraft
and an overhaul to a fleet of Lafayette frigates.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781282 Date: 09/30/2015
