      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782084 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                              Anne-Marie Slaughter
Sent:                              Saturday, August 13, 2011 9:38 AM
To:
Cc:                                Abedin, Huma; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject:                           weekend reading



Here are three pieces that I think you will like and learn from.

   1) A smart piece from a blog called "Architecture for Development" called. "It's the Elites, Stupid." It begins with a
      discussion of athe role of aid relative to the rest of a country's GDP — aid accounts for some 3% and should not
      be held responsible for "ending poverty" but rather improving people's lives; ending poverty depends on what
      happens with the other 97% of GDP, which is controlled by a country's elites. Then the question — which is the
      same question you ask — is whether those elites are actually doing something to develop their country or not. He
      distinguishes between "elite bashing" and holding elites accountable.
      http://www.architecturefordevelopment.com/2011/08/the-elites-stupid/

    2) A piece by a 28 year old Briton on the riots. I sent it to David Miliband with the following description:" it brings
       together the moral arguments of the right and the sociological arguments of the left in a way that argues above
       all for reconnecting the worlds of rich and poor — not redistributing but reconnecting, so that we inhabit the
       same physical and moral universe. It absolutely insists that the looters be held responsible, but it insists on the
       haves being held responsible as well." I think there is a very important point here that I am going to try to
       develop and I would be happy to help you develop in a speech: growing interdependence has not meant
       growing inter-connection — actually quite the opposite — income inequality means we increasingly inhabit
       separate worlds and are no longer part of the same moral universe. http://grimeandreason.blogspot.com/

    3) A thoughtful piece by a wonderful woman named Myra McDonald, a Reuters journalist based in Pakistan, on the
       New Yorker article about the capture of bin Ladin and what it reveals about a much broader mindset — her
       overall point is that the entire account of the capture as given by the SEALS treats the Pakistani people as little
       more than extras in a Hollywood movie. If we are really going to make diplomacy about government to society,
       we have to really factor in society very differently in how we think about the world — the point of my new
       column. http://blogs.reuters.com/pakistan/2011/08/08/when-there-are-no-people-in-pakistan/

None of these is very long!
Best,
AM




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782084 Date: 09/30/2015
