       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779842 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL



From:                            Sullivan, Jacob 1 <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                            Wednesday, April 13, 2011 12:03 PM
To:
Subject:                         FW: English Text of Prince Turki speech

Importance:                      High



See Prince Turki speech below, which has a number of interesting dimensions, among them this:

why not have a nuclear deterrent with which to face Iran - should international efforts fail
to prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons - or Israeli nuclear capabilities?




From: Andrews, Theodore H
Sent: Wednesday, April 13, 2011 10:54 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Cc: Gent, Stephanie R
Subject: English Text of Prince Turki speech
Importance: High

Thanks to NEA for heLp in getting this

Global Strategic Developments: A Futuristic Vision Keynote Address H.R.H.
Prince Turki Al Faisal Bin Abdel Aziz Al Saud Monday 21 March 2011


Periods of change must be confronted wisely so as to both utilize their positive aspects and
avoid their negative effects. The unipolar world order which has reigned since the collapse
of the Soviet Union is not eternal; new powers are emerging, such as China, India, Brazil,
South Africa, the European Union, Russia, and even the GCC, thanks to its wealth. This
confirms that we are witnessing a redistribution of power, moving toward a multi-polar world
order. Natural disasters and climate change are also at work, and contribute to shaping the
future of our world.

The Arab world has been hit by a political earthquake; Sudan was divided, regimes collapsed
in Tunisia and Egypt, Libya is in turmoil, and Bahrain has been on the verge of chaos.

In the GCC, we are facing vast challenges which we must overcome in order to lead. An
analysis of the current situation shows that we are vulnerable politically, economically,
culturally and in terms of security, and we cannot afford to assume that the stability and
growth we have enjoyed so far will continue unabated. Change is a fact of life; therefore,
these strategic vulnerabilities must be curtailed, and greater efforts should be made to
secure our future.

I would like to stress that we have reached the stage where we must rethink many of the
axioms which were appropriate in the past, and which enabled us to face challenges such as
the Iranian Revolution, the Iran-Iraq war, the invasion of Kuwait, and the occupation of
Iraq. The wealth of the region alone is not enough to secure its stability. We should be
active in relation to all international issues and should not allow others to impose their
will on us under the pretext of vulnerability.


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779842 Date: 09/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779842 Date: 09/30/2015




 We should seek to unite and unify our political and security-related decisions, and
 reconsider the goals and aims of the Gulf Cooperation Council. Why not seek to turn the GCC
 into a grouping like the European Union? why not have one unified Gulf army? why not have a
 nuclear deterrent with which to face Iran - should international efforts fail to prevent Iran
 from developing nuclear weapons - or Israeli nuclear capabilities?

 We must also reconsider the nature of national sovereignty, which could result in the failure
 of joint initiatives. We in the GCC deeply believe that the security of one country
 contributes to the security of others, and a danger which threatens one is a threat to all.
 This means that we share a collective sovereignty. We have recently witnessed how the GCC
 countries responded to the challenges facing some of its members - namely Oman and Bahrain -
 just as they responded in the past to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.

  We need to proceed as one regional bloc. We must overcome our differences - including those
  related to monetary union and a GCC central bank - through dialogue and mutual understanding.
  We should remember that we share the same future.

 We must also consider regional conditions and make       reforms as required to enhance our
•domestic stability; we cannot be strong externally       if we are not strong internally. We need
 to review our economic policies which have made us       a market for international labour while
 our citizens are unemployed. We need to review our       cultural policies, enhance the concept of
 citizenship and promote Gulf citizenship.

  The problems and challenges facing us are vast, but they are not insurmountable.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779842 Date: 09/30/2015
