      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780418 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Friday, June 10, 201112:09 AM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: June 9 UNSC Consultations on Libya (SBU)


 Worth a read.



From: Meehan, Bernadette M
Sent: Thursday, June 09, 2011 10:27 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob .1; Wells, Alice G
Cc: S_SpeclalAssistants
Subject: Fw: June 9 UNSC Consultations on Libya (SBU)

Below is USUN's more detailed readout of al-Khatib's UNSC briefing today.

From: Holmes, Stephanie E
Sent: Thursday, June 09, 2011 10:22 PM
To: SES_DutyDeputies; S_SpecialAssistants
Cc: SES-O_SWO
Subject: June 9 UNSC Consultations on Libya (SBU)

 Colleagues - further to the Overnight Brief, USUN sent a more detailed readout of al-Khatib's UNSC briefing today.

 Kind regards,

Stephanie E. Holmes
Senior Watch Officer
Operations Center - U.S. Department of State
202-647-1512

Security Council Consultations on Libya
June 9,2011

 UN Special Envoy for Libya al-Khatib briefed the Security Council June 9 via video-teleconference on his recent trip
 to Tripoli and Benghazi. Although he had tentatively been promised a meeting with Colonel Qadhafi, once he
 arrived in Tripoli, he was told that he would instead be meeting with Prime Minister al-Mahmudi and Qadhafi's son
 Saif al-Islam (allegedly due to nervousness surrounding the NATO bombing campaign carried out during Khatib's
 visit). Khatib said that Mahmudi focused his comments on the ongoing NATO attacks and the detrimental effects
•he claimed sanctions were having on the humanitarian situation.

 Khatib said he told Mahmudi and Saif al-Islam that both the TNC and the international community have made clear
 that Qadhafi must go. Both said that Qadhafi refuses to leave Libya, with Saif al-Islam suggesting Qadhafi would be
 better off staying in Tripoli and fighting until the end, but Mahmudi told Khatib that "everything is up for
 discussion" as far as a future transition of power. Khatib floated with them the idea of creating some type of
 interim body, which would include all factions, as a transitional mechanism. Mahmudi suggested that the Libyan
 People's Congress should be responsible for elaborating the plans for a transitional authority, a plan Khatib said is
 clearly unacceptable to the TNC. Khatib told the Council that a "member of Qadhafi's inner circle" had intimated to
 him that they were exploring options for Qadhafi to step down but only if he could remain in the country. Saif al-


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780418 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780418 Date: 09/30/2015




Islam did not challenge the notion of Qadhafi stepping down when Khatib raised it, but was adamant that Qadhafi
would never leave Libya.

In Benghazi, Khatib and TNC Chairman Mahmoud jibril discussed the opposition's demand that Qadhafi step down
as a pre-condition for a ceasefire and political process. Jibril clarified to Khatib that the TNC could accept that
Qadhafi remains in Libya as long as he relinquishes his command of the military. Khatib said that the TNC is not
open to any kind of immunity agreement for Qadhafi. He said the INC could accept in principle the idea of indirect
informal discussions through the UN with regime representatives, but was skeptical about any engagement before
Qadhafi committed to step down.

Responding to questions from France, Lebanon and the UK on next steps, Khatib said that he hoped both sides
would further develop their positions on the process for setting up a transitional authority. He told the Council
that he would develop his next steps - and travel plans - based on his follow up with both sides in the coming days,
but he noted that the two parties were not yet at a point where shuttle diplomacy could be effective. Following
comments by China, Russia and South Africa that Khatib was exceeding his mandate by telling Tripoli officials that
Qadhafi must go, Khatib said he was conveying an explicit demand of the TNC and he felt it was necessary to
discuss the issue in Tripoli in order to find a way forward. He also said that members of Qadhafi's regime had
raised the issue with him; he hadn't raised it himself. Gabon, speaking in its national capacity, said it didn't feel
that Khatib had overstepped his mandate.

At Khatib's request, the meeting on June 14 has been canceled, as he was coming to NY only to brief the Council and
felt today's briefing covered what he would say on the 14th. He told the Council he would make himself available
for further updates via VTC if requested.

SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780418 Date: 09/30/2015
