     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780929 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL


From:                             McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sent:                             Tuesday, May 3, 2011 6:52 AM
To:    •
Subject:                          FW: UBL Death - Media/Internet Reaction in Indonesia



Wanted to give you an idea of how we are monitoring coverage --- traditional and on-line -- around
the world. By and large positive, with predictable negative comments from fundamentalist press and
commentators.

From: Belmont, Paul T
Sent: Tuesday, May 03, 2011 12:16 AM
To: Hodges, Thomas M
Cc: Schalow, Kathryn; Stout, Jennifer P; Kurzbauer, Ruth A; Daigle, J. Jeff; EAP-P-Office-DL; Roskamp, Philip W; Sanders,
Corina R; Washington, Don Q
Subject: UBL Death - Media/Internet Reaction in Indonesia

Thomas,

Hello. Here is the quick read that you requested from Indonesian media on the death of Osama bin Laden.

The bin Laden killing is a lead story in all media. Most of the reporting has been straightforward or supportive
in line with Indonesian public's predominant disapproval of Islamic based terrorism and the GOI's active anti-
terrorist campaigns. Negative reaction has come from expected sources, hard-line fundamentalist groups or
commentators. There has been an interesting local connection noted in the press about the arrest last month
of Indonesian terrorist Umar Patek in the same Pakistani city where bin Laden was slain, Abbottabad.

All major print dailies carried front page reports on the killing and excerpts from President Obama's
announcement on May 1. The largest Muslim daily, Republika, carried the entire text in a full page article.

Below are some snippets from the Indonesian media:

1) Front Page Highlights:

Osama Bin Laden Shot to Death (Kompas) Osama Dead (Republika) World Keeps Alert (Media Indonesia)
Cornered Since March (Koran tempo)
U.S. President Barrack Obama announced the death of the founder and leader of Al Qaeda, Osama Bin Laden
on Sunday, May 1. Osama was reported dead in a secret military operation held on early morning Monday in
a location where Osama was hiding in Abbottabad

2) Supportive Commentary:

The Death of Osama Bin Laden (Kompas, p.6; editorial)
The death of Osama Bin Laden must be seen as a moment to increase awareness since there may be a
possibility that his followers will retaliate. Indonesia also needs to anticipate this following recent bomb
threats. Regardless of Osama's ideology, we are against the terrorism and the terrorist ideology he adhered
to. The peace and the nobility of human beings condemns the way Osama achieved his political goals. With


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780929 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780929 Date: 09/30/2015




this attitude, we are determined to combat terrorism they way the U.S. hunted Osama Bin Laden and combats
Al Qaeda.


3) Many commentaries carried a note of caution that bin Laden's death should not be interpreted as the end
of fundamentalist jihad terrorist activities and that continued vigilance would be needed in Indonesia and
elsewhere. There were many reports of increased GOI security measures to protect against any possible
attacks from local terrorist groups.

Print:

After Bin Laden Killed (Koran Tempo)
Osama Bin laden's death is not the end of the war against terrorism. On the contrary, terrorist movement
may become stronger since terrorist networks are not bound to its leaders. Bombings in Indonesia prove
that. It is not necessary to have a direct connection between Al Qaeda and bombing perpetrators. Thus, the
death of the number one terrorist fugitive should not be a reason to let down our guard.... Indonesian security
must be more alert because Osama and Al Qaeda has become a symbol and inspiration to fight. The media
noted that top Indonesian terrorist Umar Patrek, was apprehended in Abottabad, Pakistan last month --- a
significant coincidence with obvious implications for an Al Qaeda connection.

From top on-line media:

Osama Dead, SBY Asked Indonesia To Stay Alert
(VIVAnews, Kompas.com, Tempo Interaktif, Detlk, 5/2) President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono asked
Indonesia to stay alert after Osama bin Laden shot to death. Coordinating Minister for Political, Legal and
Security Affairs said that the President thought that is the best way to anticipate possible counter attacks.
"President asked the people, TNI and national police to stay alert," said Djoko. Djoko called for a meeting with
political and security officials to anticipate impacts of Osama's death. "Intelligence agents and police work
more intensively to protect nation's security.

Embassy Twitter Response: There were comments of praise and criticism on Embassy Twitter, with most criticisms
suggesting this will provoke a violent reply from radicals.


TV:


Government increases Security For Vital Areas (SC7V, Metro TV, TV One 5/2)
Following Osama's death, the Indonesian government has increased security for several vital areas, such as
foreign embassies„including the U.S. Embassy although there has not been any special request by the U.S.
Embassy. The Indonesian National Police (INP) Chief General Timur Pradopo said on Monday, May 2, that
despite no special request, the INP would still help protect U.S. citizens here. Indonesian Armed Forces (TNI)
Commander-in-Chief Admiral Agus Suhartono also added that the TNI has increased alertness to prevent
unwanted incidents and he asked the people to immediately report if they spot any unusual things.

 4) Omar Patek Connection?

 Umar Patek Planned to Meet with Osama Bin Laden (Koran Tempo 5/3, p.A2)
 Umar Patek, who was the mastermind of the Bali Bombing in 2002, was suspected of intending to meet with
 Osama Bin Laden in Abbottabad, Pakistan, before he was captured last January. Patek was arrested in
 Abbottabad, the city where Bin Laden was living. A source at BIN said that Patek is connected to Bin Laden.
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780929 Date: 09/30/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780929 Date: 09/30/2015




Patek's visit to Pakistan is believed to have been connected with a plan to meet a number of Al Qaeda figures
to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the September 11 attacks.


5) Negative Commentary


Ba'asyir: Osama Dead, U.S. Will be in Disaster
(VIVAnews, Republik° Online, 5/2) (Indicted terrorist suspect) Abu Bakar Ba'asyir said that Osama bin Laden's
death will bring disaster to the U.S. because he died as martyr for carrying jihad. "Osama is a great ulema and
killing him will bring punishment from Allah to the country," said Ba'asyir through his secretary Hasyim.
Ba'asyir also added that he did not believe that America is not at war with Islam as Obama conveyed during
his speech. He said "It's a big lie that Obama is not against Islam. America started the crusade during Bush
administration. "


Security Analyst Al Chaidar ( SCTV) Al Chairdar, a security analyst frequently supportive of fundamentalism
and critical of the US said the following: Radical movements will still use the same methods, such as suicide
bombings because they do not have advanced weapon systems like the U.S. He also mentioned that Osama
died as a martyr to show his respect of Osama.


We will send a more comprehensive read-out in our usual publications later today.


Paul



SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Hodges, Thomas M
Sent: Tuesday, May 03, 2011 2:05 AM
To: Belmont, Paul T; Roskamp, Philip W; Washington, Don Q; Sanders, Corina R
Cc: Schalow, Kathryn; Stout, Jennifer P; Kurzbauer, Ruth A; Daigle, J. Jeff; EAP-P-Office-DL
Subject: UBL Death - Media/Internet Reaction in Indonesia

Dear Jakarta Friends,

We're very eager to get a quick read from you on how Usama bin Laden's death is playing in the
Indonesian media and in cyberspace. Any illustrative snippets you can get to us early and quickly on your
Tuesday morning would be very valuable to us here. We assume you'll send in a fuller report through the
usual media reaction channels (which we'll read with interest), but we could really use some quick, short
stuff soon.

Best,

Thomas


Thomas Hodges
Director, Office of Public Diplomacy (EAP/PD)
Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 736-4598; HST, Rm. 5318




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780929 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780929 Date: 09/30/2015



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780929 Date: 09/30/2615
