     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777790 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL



From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.goy>
Sent:                            Friday, January 21, 2011 6:26 PM
To:
Subject:                         FW: USAID chief to Congress: Don't play games with national security




From: Seiden, Maya D
To: Hyde, Dana; Smith, Jeannemarie E; Campbell, Piper
Sent: Fri Jan 21 17:04:13 2011
Subject: USAID chief to Congress: Don't play games with national security

http://thecable.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2011/01/21/usaid chief to congress don t play games with national secur




USAID chief to Congress: Don't play _games
with national security
Posted By Josh Rogin • Friday, January 21, 2011 - 1:26 PM • 113 Share




Rajiv Shah, head of the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), has a message for those in Congress
who want to slash development and foreign-aid budgets: Cuts will undermine U.S. national security.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777790 Date: 09/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777790 Date: 09/30/2015




On the heels of a major speech on the coming reforms to America's premier development agency, Shah sat down

for an exclusive interview with The Cable to explain his vision for making USAID more responsible and accountable,

an effort he said will require increased short-term investment in order to realize long-term savings.



But if Congress follows through on a massive defunding of USAID as the 165-member Republican Study Group

recommended yesterday, it would not only put USAID's reforms in jeopardy, but have real and drastic negative

implications for American power and the ongoing missions in Afghanistan and Pakistan, according to Shah.



"That first and foremost puts our national security in real jeopardy because we are working hand and glove with our

military to keep us safe," said Shah, referring to USAID missions in Afghanistan, Iraq, Pakistan, Yemen, the Horn of

Africa, and Central America, and responding directly to congressional calls for cuts in foreign aid and development.


The RSC plan calls for $1.39 billion in annual savings from USAID. The USAID operating budget for fiscal 2010 was

approximately $1.65 billion. The RSC spending plan summary was not clear if all the cuts would come from

operations or from USAID administered programs.

"That would have massive negative implications for our fundamental security," said Shah. "And as people start to

engage in a discussion of what that would mean for protecting our border, for preventing terrorist safe havens and

keeping our country safe from extremists' ideology ... and what that would mean for literally taking children that we

feed and keep alive through medicines or food and leaving them to starve. I think those are the types of things

people will back away from."


The interests between the development community and U.S. national security objectives don't always align, and this

tension is at the core of the debate on how to reinvigorate USAID. Short-term foreign-policy objectives sometimes

don't match long-term development needs, and U.S. foreign-policy priorities are not made with development

foremost in mind.


But Shah's ambitious drive to reform USAID seems to embrace the idea that development investments can be

justified due to their linkage with national security. He is preparing to unveil next month USAID's first ever policy on

combating violent extremism and executing counterinsurgency. He also plans to focus USAID's efforts on hot spots

like Afghanistan, Pakistan, Sudan, and parts of sub-Saharan Africa, while transitioning away from other countries

that are faring well and downgrading the agency's presence in places like Paris, Rome, and Tokyo.


Shah pointed out that Defense Secretary Robert Gates, Joint Chiefs Chairman Adm. Mike Mullen, and ISAF

Commander Gen. David Petraeus have all come out in strong support of increasing USAID's capacity to do foreign

aid.



       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777790 Date: 09/30/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777790 Date: 09/30/2015




"In the military they call us a high-value, low-density partner because we are of high value to the national security

mission but there aren't enough of us and we don't have enough capability," he said. "This is actually a much, much,

much more efficient investment than sending in our troops, not even counting the tremendous risk to American lives

when we have to do that."


For those less concerned with matters of national security, Shah also framed his argument for development aid in

terms of increased domestic economic and job opportunities: If we want to export more, we need to help develop

new markets that are U.S.-friendly.


"If we are going to be competitive as a country and create jobs at home, we cannot ignore the billions of people who

are currently very low income but will in fact form a major new middle-class market in the next two decades," he

said.


One of the main criticisms of USAID both on Capitol Hill and elsewhere is that the agency has been reduced over

the years to not much more than a contracting outfit, disbursing billions of dollars around the world to organizations

that have mixed performance records. In Shah's view, if Congress wants USAID to eliminate waste, fraud, and

abuse, it has to increase the agency's operating budget and allow the agency to monitor contracts in-house.


"It was the Bush administration that helped launch the effort to reinvest in USAID's capabilities and hiring and

people, and the reason they did that is they recognized you save a lot more money by being better managers of

contracts," Shah said. 'We have a choice. We have a critical need to make the smart investments in our own

operations ... which over time will save hundreds of millions of dollars, as opposed to trying to save a little bit now

by cutting our capacity to do oversight and monitoring."


Shah wouldn't comment on the latest and greatest USAID contracting scandal, where the agency suspended

contractor AED from receiving any new contracts amid allegations of widespread fraud. But he did say that his

office would be personally reviewing large sole-source contracts from now on, requiring independent and public

evaluations, and that more corrective actions are in the works.

"I suspect you'll see more instances of effective, proactive oversight that in fact saves American taxpayers

significant resources," he said.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777790 Date: 09/30/2015
