UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781557 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL




                                 U.S. RUSSIA
                              BILATERAL PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION

                              AMERICAN SEASONS IN RUSSIA




           U.S. Embassy Moscow Launches American Seasons in Russia

                     •
 June 22, 2011;    Moscow, Russia—U.S. Embassy Moscow invites you to attend a press
 conference launching American Seasons in Russia, a year-long celebration of American arts
 and culture in Russia. The press conference will be held at ITAR-TASS (Tverskoy boulevard #2)
 on Monday, June 27th at 2:00 pm. It is timed to coincide with the opening of the Alvin Ailey
 American Dance Theater's performances in Moscow, which will mark the first event that falls
 under the American Seasons program. Participants in the press conference include Ambassador
 John Beyrle of the U.S. Embassy; Ambassador Mikhail Shvydkoy, Special presidential
 Representative for International Culture Cooperation; Vladimir Urin, General Manager of the
 Stanislavsky Musical Theater; Mikhail Gusman, Deputy Director-General of ITAR-TASS;
 Robert Battle, Artistic Director of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater; and dancers
 Matthew Rushing and Alicia Graf Mack of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.

 As homage to Sergei Diaghilev's Russian Seasons, which aimed to introduce Russian culture to
 Europe, American Seasons will bring a wide spectrum of cultural offerings including
 contemporary American dance, art, and music to the Russian public. Upcoming events include
 performances by the MOMIX Dance Company and the hip hop/salsa fusion band Ozomatli, as
 well as an exhibit of Annie Leibovitz's photography at the Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts. This
 fall will also see the continuation of the New American Plays for Russia initiative, which will
 translate contemporary American plays into Russian and stage readings around the country. The
 highlight of American Seasons in Russia will be the appearance of the Chicago Symphony
 Orchestra led by music director Riccardo Muti. The Orchestra hails from Moscow's sister, city
 and will give a total of three concerts in Moscow and St. Petersburg next April.

 American Seasons in Russia falls under the auspices of the U.S.-Russia Bilateral Presidential
 Commission. Formed on June 9, 2009 by Presidents Obama and Medvedev to increase
 cooperation, the Commission marks a fresh start in relations between our two countries to
 contribute to our future progress and shared prosperity.

 Members of the press who are interested in attending should contact Natalya Menshikova at
 ITAR-TASS by telephone: (495) 629-6403 or by e-mail: press-c@itar-tass.com




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781557 Date: 09/30/2015
