        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777741 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                   B5



From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Friday, January 21, 2011 1:18 PM
To:
Subject:                           FW: AFP reporting Ambassador Rice comments on Haiti [Press Reports]



FYI traffic


From: Rice, Susan E (USUN)
Sent: Friday, January 21, 2011 1:01 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Re: AFP reporting Ambassador Rice comments on Haiti [Press Reports]

Understood. I am in back to back mtgs until mid-late afternoon and will call therafter.


From: Mills, Cheryl
Sent: Friday, January 21, 2011 12:40 PM
To: Rice, Susan E (USUN)
Cc: Adams, Thomas C; Barks-Ruggles, Erica J
Subject: FW: AFP reporting Ambassador Rice comments on Haiti [Press Reports]

Susan


I want to make sure we are synched up over the next several sensitive days on Haiti.




                          Caroline Tess from USUN joined me during that call.




I would welcome a chance to touch base quickly today to frame up the challenges over the next week.

Best.


cdm




Your candidate is out, US tells Haiti' s Preval

Source: AFP World News / English Date: January 20, 2011

PORT-AU-PRINCE, Jan 20, 2011 (AFP) -

The United States told President Rene Preval on Thursday to pull his favored candidate out of
Haiti s disputed presidential election race or risk losing US and international support.

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777741 Date: 09/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777741 Date: 09/30/2015




The bold call from the US, which had been largely silent on Haiti's post-election quagmire,
came as the shock return of notorious ex-dictator Jean-Claude "Baby Doc" Duvalier threatened
to muddy the political waters.

Susan Rice, US ambassador to the United Nations, said Haiti must carry out recommendations
made by international monitors who have called for Preval protege Jude Celestin to be
discarded from the delayed presidential run-off."Sustained support from the international
community, including the United States, will require a credible process that represents the
will of the Haitian people," Rice told a UN Security Council debate on Haiti.

"We urge the Haitian authorities to outline a very clear way forward that will lead promptly
to the inauguration of a democratically elected government."

Initial results sparked deadly riots in December when it was revealed that opposition
candidate Michel Martelly had 7,000 fewer votes than ruling party candidate Jude Celestin and
would not advance to the now-delayed second round.

After analyzing the ballot sheets, international monitors advised that the second and third
placed candidates should be switched so that Martelly faces Mirlande Manigat, a former first
lady who was clearly first, in the run-off.

More than a week after being handed the Organization of American States (OASD) report, Preval
is yet to comment and the election commission insists it can only change the order if legal
complaints from the candidates are upheld.

The patience of the international community is wearing thin as more than a year after a
catastrophic earthquake killed a quarter of a million people, much of the capital remains in
ruins with the rubble uncleared as Haiti cries out for responsible leadership.

"We urge the Provisional Electoral Council to implement the OAS recommendations," Rice said,
also calling for a "timely" timetable for the second round.

Duvalier's surprise return to the nation he fled amid an uprising 25 years ago has only
stoked further turmoil.

He issued a statement to AFP denying remarks by his aides Wednesday that he intended to
return to power, but did not rule out a political role.

Memories of Duvalier's repressive 1971-1986 regime remain strong, and human rights groups
have accused him and his late father of having presided over decades of unparalleled
oppression and abuse.

On Tuesday, prosecutors charged him with corruption, embezzlement of millions of dollars from
state funds and criminal association.

And in a new legal challenge, four Haitians, including a prominent journalist, filed criminal
suits against him on Wednesday alleging crimes against humanity.

Rice also highlighted US concern over Duvalier's return.

"Given the continuing turmoil surrounding the November 28 election, the United States is
concerned about the unpredictable impact that Duvalier's return may have on Haiti's political
situation," she said.

"My government is clear about Duvalier's notorious record of human rights abuses and
corruption," she told the UN council.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777741 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777741 Date: 09/30/2015




But aides have suggested that the former strongman is in no hurry to leave.

He "will stay in Haiti forever, it's his country. And take part in politics. That's his
right. A politician never dies," said his lawyer Reynold Georges, adding that Duvalier was
preparing to move back into his old house.

bur-ag/jm

AFPNANviaNews Edge




US warns Haiti over election changes

(AFP) – 2 hours ago

UNITED NATIONS — The United States warned Haiti on Thursday that it would lose international support if
it rejects calls for President Rene Preval's favored candidate to be taken out of an election runoff.

The US ambassador to the United Nations, Susan Rice, also expressed concern over the "unpredictable impact"
of the return of Jean-Claude "Baby Doc" Duvalier on the political turmoil in the Caribbean nation.

Rice told a Security Council debate that Haiti must have a "legitimate" government and that authorities must
carry out the recommendations made by the Organization of American States (OAS).

OAS monitors said the November 28 presidential vote was riddled with irregularities and fraud and that Preval's
handpicked candidate, Jude Celestin, should be eliminated from the runoff vote.

"Sustained support from the international community, including the United States, will require a credible
process that represents the will of the Haitian people," Rice told a UN Security Council debate on Haiti.

"We urge the Haitian authorities to outline a very clear way forward that will lead promptly to the inauguration
of a legitimate and democratically elected government," she said.

France and Britain also backed the call. Speaking for the United Nations, Alain Le Roy, the peacekeeping chief,
said Haiti's electoral commission "must honor its commitment to fully take into account the report's
recommendations."

Le Roy said he expected an official announcement on the first round results on January 31 and a second round
vote around mid-February.

The OAS monitors said that former first lady Mirlande Manigat won the first round and popular singer Michel
Martelly came second, ahead of Celestin.

Haiti's election commission said on Wednesday that it will only change the two candidates in the runoff on the
basis of valid legal complaints, which must be filed by Friday.

"We urge the Provisional Electoral Council to implement the OAS recommendations," Rice said, also calling
for a "timely" timetable for the second round and inauguration of a new government.

Rice also highlighted US concern over the presence of former strongman president Duvalier in Haiti.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777741 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777741 Date: 09/30/2015




"Given the continuing turmoil surrounding the November 28 election, the United States is concerned about the
unpredictable impact that Duvalier's return may have on Haiti's political situation," said Rice.

"My government is clear about Duvalier's notorious record of human rights abuses and corruption," she told the
UN council.


This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777741 Date: 09/30/2015
