      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778606 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                            RELEASE IN FULL



From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Monday, March 14, 2011 3:59 PM
To:
Subject:                         FW: Conversation with Congresswoman Maxine Waters



FYI

We reached out to her staff who we briefed on fact that we were leaning into guidance and saying return b/f Sunday
was problematic. Maxine returned the call within 10 minutes.

cdm


From: Adams, Thomas C
Sent: Monday, March 14, 2011 1:45 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Adams, David S; Mcdonald, Kara C; Merten, Kenneth H; Lindwall, David E; Blumenfeld, Joshua R
Subject: Conversation with Congresswoman Maxine Waters

I took a call from Congresswoman Maxine Waters about two minutes before one. Josh had
apparently briefed her foreign affairs staffer, Kathleen Sietenstock about 20 minutes earlier on our
press statement.

The Congresswoman's main point was that Former President Aristide needed to return before the
election because Martelly, who in her opinion was bound to win, would not allow him back after the
election, because he was "in the ton tons." How we could allow Baby Doc back and try to prevent
Aristide was not understandable.

I told her that if that was her fear, then it was unfounded, because Preval would remain in power until
May. She said results would come out Sunday and that would be the end of his chances to come
back. I said the contestation period meant that there would be no official results until April 16, so
there was plenty of time for him to return after the election.

She gave her own history of our relationship with Aristide (the kidnapping, not allowing FL to register
for this election, our unwillingness to provide him security upon his return, etc.) all of which I gently
pushed back on. I suggested she allow us to give her a classified briefing on all of this at some point
in order to correct factual untruths related to this. She said she would follow up.

She was not as hysterical as she has been on prior conversations, but did at one point say "what are
you going to do when he returns in the company of Danny Glover, Harry Belafonte and maybe me,
mow us all down?"

I thanked her for calling and sharing her views and said that we believed that the interests of the
people of Haiti would best be served if they could vote in peace and calm.

Tom




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778606 Date: 09/30/2015
