      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781663 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL


From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Thursday, April 21, 2011 6:12 AM
To:
Subject:                         Fw: In Yemen, anger from activists over U.S. policy (Washington Post)




From: OpsNewsTicicer
Sent: Thursday, April 21, 2011 04:04 AM
To: NEWS-NEA; NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-O_Shift-I; SES-0_0S; SES-O_Shift-II; SES-O_SWO
Subject: In Yemen, anger from activists over U.S. policy (Washington Post)


SANAA (Washington Post) — When pro-government snipers killed 52 protesters last month, opponents of
Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh thought the United States would finally support calls for his immediate
resignation.




But the Obama administration has yet to publicly urge one of its key allies in the Middle East to step down. Its
policy has fallen far short of the strong actions that Washington took in Egypt and in Libya, where it is using its
military and diplomatic might to press for a new leadership. Since that violent March day, the attacks on
protesters have continued.


Now, many activists here are convinced the United States will speak up only when the death toll rises
significantly. "We feel disappointed, and we feel left out," said Khaled Al-Anesi, a human rights lawyer and
activist.


Anger and frustration at the Obama administration are building among activists and political opposition leaders
amid intensifying violence across this Middle Eastern nation. As Saleh remains defiant, many here believe the
United States should apply more pressure to bring his 32-year rule to a swift end.

"The American administration has been too slow to act," Anesi continued. "Until now, we have not seen a firm
public stance. They don't have to wait until thousands of us are killed."

The crisis in Yemen, perhaps more than elsewhere, underscores the dilemma the Obama administration faces in
grappling with the ongoing rebellions across the Middle East and North Africa and their potential consequences.
On one hand, Yemen's activists are fighting for democratic values that Obama strongly signaled he would
support in his Cairo speech in June 2009. On the other hand, Saleh is a vital U.S. ally in a nation that poses the
most significant terrorism and security threat to the United States after Afghanistan and Pakistan.

An oil-producing region nestled along strategic shipping lanes, Yemen is home to al-Qaeda in the Arabian
Peninsula. The al-Qaeda affiliate, known as AQAP, has tried to attack the United States twice over the past two
years, with a failed plot to bomb a U.S. airliner over Detroit on Christmas Day in 2009 and last year's attempt to

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781663 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781663 Date: 09/30/2015




send parcel bombs to Chicago.

For several weeks, the United States has been pushing behind closed doors for a peaceful transfer of power and
has denounced the violence in Yemen. But publicly the administration continues to send mixed signals. The
Pentagon still expresses doubts that a post-Saleh government can effectively combat AQAP, terrorism and
potential influence from Iran; the State Department has yet to publicly demand regime change, even though in
private U.S. officials acknowledge that Saleh is no longer capable of leading Yemen.

Saleh's opponents say he has exaggerated the threat of al-Qaeda to help persuade the United States to support
him. The absence of a strong U.S. stance against him, they say, has allowed Saleh to use his close relationship
with the United States as leverage in power transfer talks, as he argues that Washington wants a gradual
transition of power and that he should oversee such a change. The more he prolongs his departure, the more
Yemen inches toward violent upheaval, even civil war, they warn.

"The international community needs to freeze his accounts and stop all means of support for him," said
Tawaldcol Kaman, a key architect of the uprising. "They need to deal with him as an illegal regime."

Diplomats and Yemeni officials have long warned the Obama administration of Saleh's vulnerabilities. Yet
Washington has continued to back Saleh, seeing little alternative to tackling AQAP. Last year alone, the United
States gave $300 million in military and development aid, largely to fight AQAP and contain its reach.

What the Obama administration worries about most in the face of Saleh's possible departure is who will replace
him. Decades of marginalizing his opponents has left behind a weak and divided opposition, raising concerns
about its capability to fight AQAP.

Last month, U.S. Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates appeared to suggest that the administration needed Saleh,
saying that the United States "had a lot of counter-terrorism cooperation" with Saleh and Yemen's security
services. He added that "if the government collapses or is replaced by one that is dramatically more weak," then
the United States would face "additional challenges out of Yemen."

Last week, though, State Department spokesman Mark Toner told reporters that the United States did not solely
depend on Saleh to fight AQAP, saying that "our shared interests in fighting counter-terrorism extends beyond
one individual."

But when asked why the United States was not explicitly calling for Saleh to step down when his security forces
are killing his own people, Toner said: "This is something that the Yemeni people need to dictate and demand
and that he needs to respond to their aspirations. It's not for us to impose a solution."

The Obama administration's dilemma in calling for regime change in some states, but not others, was illustrated
in'a recent speech by Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton in Washington. Clinton congratulated the
people of Tunisia and Egypt, where entrenched leaders were ousted, and repeated the U.S. insistence that
Moammar Gaddafi move aside in Libya.

But she tempered her remarks on those countries where turmoil threatens U.S. interests. In Bahrain, she called
for an unspecified "political process" and warned against violence.

In Yemen, Clinton said, the United States strongly supports the "quest for greater opportunity" and the "pursuit
of political and economic reform." Saleh, Clinton said, "needs to resolve the political impasse with the
opposition so that meaningful political change can take place in the near term in an orderly and peaceful
manner."

In interviews, many activists said they believe in free and fair elections, separation of powers, freedom of
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781663 Date: 09/30/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781663 Date: 09/30/2015




speech and other core democratic values — so they expected the United States to take a strong public stance
against Saleh.

If this doesn't happen, Kaman warned, the protesters would themselves ratchet up their rebellion, knowing full
well they could invite the wrath of Saleh and his security forces.

"We are willing to pay with our blood if takes that to reach our goals," she said. "And we are running out of
patience."

NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781663 Date: 09/30/2015
