UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781264 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                      RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                      B6




 CONFIDENTIAL


 June 20, 2011




 For: Hillary
 From Sid
 Re: Syria



 Enclosed is an article by David W. Lesch, perhaps the U.S. expert with the closest relationship
 with Bashar al-Assad, developed out of my continuing correspondence with him, an edited
 version which I have appended.

 The bottom line is that Assad's gestures at reform are delusional attempts to recreate the pattern
 of his own recent past when he gained a modicum of respect from the West. Likely the most
 important event that could alter the Syrian equation would be the fall of Qaddafi, providing an
 example of a successful rebellion.


 What could shake Syria's regime
 Editor's note: David W. Lesch is professor of Middle East history at Trinity University in San
 Antonio. Among his books are: "The New Lion of Damascus: Bashar al-Assad and Modern
 Syria"; "The Arab-Israeli Conflict: A History"; "The Middle East and the United States: History,
 Politics and Ideology"; and "1979: The Year That Shaped the Middle East".

 (CNN) -- Of the many occasions that I met with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad from 2004 to
 2009, this one seemed different.

 He was always very affable and unpretentious, certainly not the profile of the brutal Middle East
 dictator that he appears to be today with the violent crackdown against Syrian protesters. But in a
 February 2006 meeting, he was much more confident than usual in discussing the state of U.S.-




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781264 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781264 Date: 09/30/2015




 Syrian relations; in fact, he was almost cocky.

 He knew by then that he had survived the intense pressure the United States and its allies had
 applied on him following the U.N. investigation into the assassination the previous year of
 former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri, which initially had implicated the Syrian
 leadership.

 His new-found confidence lasted. A few months later in a follow-up meeting, he triumphantly
 remarked that, "I don't want the United States. I don't need the United States."

 After successfully weathering that storm, Assad and his cohorts may well believe that they can
 once more emerge intact from a major challenge to their regime.

 Assad has an exaggerated sense of Syria's importance on several Middle East fronts, from
 Lebanon and Iraq to the Arab-Israeli conflict. Before policymakers in the West started thinking
 that Syria was too big to fail, he thought it.

 To Assad's way of thinking, the enemies of Syria are at it once again in 2011, somehow
 transporting premeditated instability to Syria under the guise of the Arab Spring. What other
 delusion could have possibly led to the pathetic speech he gave on March 30 -- his initial public
 response to the uprising -- in which he blamed terrorists and malevolent external forces for the
 unrest rather than the underlying socioeconomic problems and political repression that lay at the
 root of the protests in other Arab countries and his own.

 He had an opportunity to get ahead of the curve of the opposition; instead, he chose the the too-
 little-too-late route of Mubarak (Egypt), Ben Ali (Tunisia), Saleh (Yemen) and Gadhaft (Libya).
 This is not to diminish the difficulty of initiating transformational change. There are powerful
 pockets of resistance to this in Syria.

 But Assad thought Syria was different from the others. He was wrong, and he is probably still in
 a state of denial. The sad part is that he had history as a guide right before his eyes, but he chose
 to ignore it.

 The regime has fallen into full survival mode, having retreated into an Alawite sectarian fortress.
 When pressured, the military-security apparatus convulsively leapt to the fore, and Assad
 appears to have dutifully acquiesced. He is an authoritarian ruler without absolute power, and the
 disconnect between him and the security forces that he allowed to fester in good times has come
 back to haunt him -- and many Syrians -- in bad.

 With few exceptions, the international community has aided and abetted the Syrian regime's
 confidence that it can survive and be resuscitated. The regime has been able to act with virtual
 impunity because of the international community's fear of the chaos that might occur in such a
 strategic part of the Middle East should the central authority in Syria precipitously fall from




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781264 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781264 Date: 09/30/2015




 power.

 The potential sectarian strife in Syria and spillover effects into Iraq, Lebanon and Israel are too
 chilling to consider. And Russia continues to protect Syria in international forums for strategic
 and diplomatic reasons.

 One game-changer could be the fall of Col. Moammar Gadhafi in Libya. Until now, the only
 models for removing dictatorial regimes in the region have been mass unrest combined with the
 splitting of the military from the ruling circle, as happened in Tunisia and Egypt (and unlikely in
 Syria), or many American boots on the ground, as happened in Iraq (and is unlikely to happen
 again anytime soon).

 If Gadhafi falls within the next few months, there will be another. model for regime change: that
 of limited but targeted military support from the West combined with an identifiable rebellion.
 Not that this can be easily applied in Syria. It hasn't even been easily applied in Libya, and Syria
 would be a much harder nut to crack. Furthermore, the Syrian opposition is far from united or
 being able to establish a Benghazi-like refuge from which to launch a rebellion and to which aid
 can be sent.

 But if there is regime change in Libya, the international community would be emboldened with
 the precedent, with maybe even the Russians finally getting on board, and it would give the
 Syrian regime something to really think about. Perhaps it would even give Bashar al-Assad the
 upper hand with his ruthless brother and security minders to finally do what he should have done
 in the beginning -- forgo violence, offer and implement real reform and enter into a national
 dialogue with the opposition.

 The options are not pretty. The Syrian regime does not want, nor can it probably survive, long-
 term international pressure or isolation, but it is used to sanctions, special tribunals, the
 withdrawing of ambassadors and similar actions. These are marginal levers that will have very
 little effect on the regime in the near term.

 Success for the rebels in Libya might change that.

 The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of David W. Lesch.




 Find this article at:
 http ://edition.cnn.com/20 11 /OPINION/06/1 6/lesch.syria.repression




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781264 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781264 Date: 09/30/2015




  David: Hear anything about these divisions? Sidney [This is an article below from Le Monde
  reporting on rebellious sentiment within the Syrian army.]
  2011/6/13 <sbwhoeop
  http ://vvww.lemonde.fr/proche-orient/article/2011/06/13/syrie-des-temoins-evoquent-des-
  dissensions-dans-1-armee 1535361 3218.html#ens id=1481132


       Original Message
  From: David Lesch <
  To: sbwhoeor
  Sent: Mon, Jun 13, 2011 9:31 am
  Subject: Re: David: Hear anything about these divisions? Sidney
  I've been seeing reports like this the last few days, especially, as the article says, with refugees
  crossing over into Turkey and reporting what is happening. The army seems to want to crush
  Jisr al-Shahgour as a deterrent lesson to its own military as much as to the opposition. In
  addition, I think it desperately wants to prevent any "Benghazis" being established, i.e. safe
  haven where foreign powers can send aid, military and intelligence support, and where
  opposition elements can flee in relative safety. The rank and file of the army, who are mostly
  Sunni, may defect more and more, especially as the govt relies more on Maher al-Assad and his
  mostly and all Alawite divisions to spearhead the crackdown.

  See where Jordan's King Abdullah announced sweeping reforms. At least he has the good sense
  to try to get ahead of the opposition curve Bashar on the other hand

  I really wonder if he is in total control. The two pronged policy is fairly typical for Syria, i.e.
  repression and national dialogue feelers being sent out more, but it almost seems like he was
  forced to cave on the nature of the crackdown and was "allowed" to try to bring about a political
  solution, which can't happen while the regime is butchering people. Almost seems like a more
  intense version of the Damascus spring then winter that followed shortly after Bashar came to
  power in 2000.


      Original Message
  From: David Lesch
  To: sbwhoeop
  Sent: Mon, Jun 13, 2011 9:53 am
  Subject: Re: David: Hear anything about these divisions? Sidney
  From the beginning you've said that Qaddafi's fall would be a huge factor in all this. As the
  Syrian situation is shaping up, I think you are right. Till now it has only been US boots on the
  ground that have forcibly removed regimes that stayed fairly united and did not want to give up
  power. If Qaddafi falls, there is now another successful model of regime change that, while
  there are differences in Syria and probably a more difficult nut to crack, has got to worry the
  regime that seems to be thinking primarily in a military, strategic sense and not in terms of




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781264 Date: 09/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781264 Date: 09/30/2015




 political solutions. So, if this is correct, then, yes, I agree with you: the repression, in its whack a
 mole approach with Maher, will intensify.

     Original Message
 From: David Lesch
 To: sbwhoeop
 Sent: Mon, Jun 13,2011 10:16 am
 Subject: Re: David: Hear anything about these divisions? Sidney

 Agreed. I said a while back that Bashar's playing into the opposition's hands with the repression
 route, especially as the regime seemed to be trying to calibrate just enough repression to quell the
 uprising w/o attracting international attention--and possible military action in some form. Maybe
 too late for that b/c once you unleash the hounds

 I still think Bashar feels he can emerge from this down the road intact as he has in the past after
 Hariri, etc. Someone needs to tell him that he won't this time heads will have to roll, and
 probably his if this continues.


 On Tue, Jun 14, 2011 at 8:16 AM, <sbwhoeop                     wrote:
 What effect would an ICC referral have?

 Lesch: At a policy level probably not much in the near term. The big thing for them is the
 UNSC, and as long as Russia and China aren't playing along, the Syrians feel somewhat
 protected (same thing happened in Dec 2005 when Russia refused to support a US-sponsored
 UNSC resolution on more sanctions against Syria in wake of Hariri assassination). Bashar and
 others prefer looking to the West, but they have also always left open the option (and some have
 preferred it although not Bashar) of looking eastward (Russia, Iran, India, China). Not as viable,
 but they do think this it is a real option (economically and politically) if they feel forced into it.
 Also, having re-directed and apparently survived for now the Special Tribunal in Lebanon on the
 Hariri, again they feel they can re-emerge out of these types of international constraints, although
 the ICC is a different animal in many ways, especially if Bashar himself is indicted.

 At a personal level, however, if it is referred and Bashar is indicted, it has to be personally
 devastating to him and his wife, Asma. They both, especially Asma, see themselves as
 cosmopolitan, internationally oriented, love to travel together internationally, etc. They also
 believed they were finally emerging out of the Bush shadow into international acceptability, even
 respect. That would all officially end with an indictment--and certainly a conviction.

 It is another level of pressure, but I think it is something of a point of no return in the long term
 and in a brutally ironic way, may free up the regime to do more b/c it has nothing to lose w/o
 really gaining anything in return. The possibility of an ICC referral and indictment I think would
 be more psychological to Bashar and some of his inner circle than anything else, which may be
 more potent than the actual thing. So I think public discussions about the possibility are useful,
 but at some point, regime brutality may leave us with no choice but to refer it.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781264 Date: 09/30/2015
