    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778498 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART B6


From:                               Oscar Flores <
Sent:                               Monday, February 21, 2011 8:39 AM
To:
Subject:                            Re: Saif Qadhafi speech



Sure. All emails from yesterday are printed and on kitchen counter.

    Original Message
From: H
Sent: Monday, February 21, 2011 08:13 AM
To: Oscar Flores
Subject: Fw: Saif Qadhafi speech

Pis print this and all the other emails I sent you yesterday.

    Original Message
From: Huma Abedin
Sent: Monday, February 21, 2011 08:11 AM
To: H
Subject: Saif Qadhafi speech

Full text of Saif Gadaffi's speech, as Transcribed and tweeted live February 20, 2011

I saw that I had to speak to you. Many Libyans asked me to speak. I don't have a paper or a document to read from.I will
not speak in classical Arabic, I will speak in Libyan, I don't have any papers, this is a talk from the heart & mind. We all
know that the region is passing through an earthquake, a hurricane or change. If this change does not come from the
govts it will come from the people, we have seen this in other Arab countries. Today I will tell you only truth only. We
know that there are opposition figures living abroad who have support in Libya. There people try to use Facebook for a
revolution to copy Egypt. These people want to bring Libya to what happened in Egypt & Tunisia. We saw this on
facebook and on emails. The country did a pre-emptive move by arresting some people before the protests, shots were
fired, people died. The anger was directed at the police in Benghazi. People wanted to storm the police stations, people
died, funerals occurred. This is a summary of what happened in Bengazi, now there is a major Fitna and a threat to the
unity of Libya. Of course there were many deaths, which angered many people in Benghazi, but why were there people
killed? The army was under stress, it is not used to crowd control so they shot, but I called them. The army said that
some protesters were drunk, others were on hallucinogens or drugs. The army has to defend its weapons. And the
people were angry. So there were deaths, but in the end Libyans were killed.

There are thee parts behind this

1- Political Activists whom we agree with,
2- What happened in Bayda are Islamic elements. Bayda is my town, my mother is from there. People called me. They
stole weapons and killed soldiers. They want to establish an Islamic Emirate in Bayda. Some people took drugs & were
used by these protesters.
3. The third part are these children who took the drugs and were used. These are facts like it or not.

We have arrested tens of Arabs and Africans, poor people, millions were spent on them to use them by millionaire
businessmen. There are people who want to establish a countries in parts of Libya to rule, Like the Islamic Emirate. One
person said he is the Emir of Islamic Emirate of Darna. The Arabic Media is manipulating these events. This Arabic media
is owned by Arabs who are distorting the facts but also our media failed to cover the events.
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778498 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778498 Date: 09/30/2015




Then there are the Baltagiya who destroyed public property, they fled jails. There are our brothers who sit and drink
coffee and watch TV and laugh at us when they see us burn our country.

It is no lie that the protesters are in control of the streets now. Libya is not Tunis or Egypt. Libya is different, if there was
disturbance it will split to several states. It was three states before 60 years. Libya are Tribes not like Egypt. There are no
political parties, it is made of tribes. Everyone knows each other. We will have a civil war like in 1936. American Oil
Companies played a big part in unifying Libya. Who will manage this oil? How will we divide this oil amongst us? Who
will spend on our hospitals? All this oil will be burnt by the Baltagiya (Thugs) they will burn it. There are no people there.
3/4s of our people live in the East in Benghazi, there is no oil there, who will spend on them? Your children will not go to
schools or universities. There will be chaos, we will have to leave Libya if we can't share oil. Everyone wants to become a
Sheikh and an Emir, we are not Egypt or Tunisia so we are in front of a major challenge.

We all now have arms. At this time drunks are driving tanks in central Benghazi. So we all now have weapons. The
powers who want to destroy Libya have weapons. There will be a war & no future. All the firms will leave, we have 500
housing units being built, they won't be completed. Remember my words. 200 billion dollars of projects are now
underway, they won't be finished.

You can say we want democracy & rights, we can talk about it, we should have talked about it before. It's this or war.
Instead of crying over 200 deaths we will cry over 100,000s of deaths. You will all leave Libya, there will be nothing here.
There will be no bread in Libya, it will be more expensive than gold.

Before we let weapons come between us, from tomorrow, in 48 hours, we will call or a new conference for new laws.
We will call for new media laws, civil rights, lift the stupid punishments, we will have a constitution. Even the LEader
Gaddafi said he wants a constitution. We can even have autonomous rule, with limited central govt powers. Brothers
there are 200 billion dollars of projects at stake now. We will agree to all these issues immediately. We will then be able
to keep our country, unlike our neighbors. We will do that without the problems of Egypt & Tunisia who are now
suffering. There is no tourism there. We will have a new Libya, new flag, new anthem. Or else, be ready to start a civil
war and chaos and forget oil and petrol.

What is happening in Bayda and Benghazi is very sad. How do you who live in Benghazi, will you visit Tripoli with a visa?
The country will be divided like North and South Korea we will see each other through a fence. You will wait in line for
months for a visa. If we don't do the first scenario be ready for the second scenario:

The British FM called me. Be ready for a new colonial period from American and Britain. ou think they will accept an
Islamic Emirate here, 30 minutes from Crete? The West will come and occupy you. Europe & the West will not agree to
chaos in Libya, to export chaos and drugs so they will occupy us.

In any case, I have spoken to you, we uncovered cells from Egypt and Tunisia and Arabs. The Libyans who live in Europe
and USA, their children go to school and they want you to fight. They are comfortable. They then want to come and rule
us and Libya. They want us to kill each other then come, like in Iraq. The Tunisians and Egyptians who are here also have
weapons, they want to divide Libya and take over the country.

We are in front of two choices, we can reform now, this is an historic moment, without it there will be nothing for
decades. You will see worse than Yugoslavia if we don't choose the first option. Gaddafi is not Mubarak or Ben Ali, a
classical ruler, he is a leader of a people. 10,000s of Libyans are coming to defend him. Over coastline Libyans are coming
to support Gaddafi. The army is also there, it will play a big part whatever the cost. The army will play a big role, it is not
the army of Tunisia or Egypt. It will support Gaddafi to the last minute. Now in the Green Square people shoot so that
they show the world that the army is shooting. We must be awake.

Now comes the role of the National Guard and the Army, we will not lose one inch of this land. 60 years ago they
defended Libya from the colonialists, now they will defend it from drug addicts. Most of he Libyans are intelligent, they


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778498 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778498 Date: 09/30/2015




are not Baltagiya (thugs) Benghazi is a million and a half not the few thousands who are in the streets. We will flight to
the last man and woman and bullet. We will not lose Libya. We will not let Al Jazeera, Al Arabiya and BBC trick us.

We will live in Libya and die in Libya.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778498 Date: 09/30/2015
