        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779766 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                              Wednesday, April 13, 2011 9:00 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: Clinton: Arab revolutions could be remembered as only a 'mirage' if not backed by
                                   real reforms




    Original Message
From: Schwerin, Daniel B
Sent: Tuesday, April 12, 2011 10:06 PM
To: Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob
Subject: Clinton: Arab revolutions could be remembered as only a 'mirage' if not backed by real reforms


This is about as good as we could ask for...

Clinton: Arab revolutions could be remembered as only a 'mirage' if not backed by real reforms


By Associated Press,
Tuesday, April 12, 9:23 PM

WASHINGTON — Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said Tuesday that the Arab world's revolutions could be
remembered as "just a mirage in the desert" if leaders fail to make good on demands for greater democracy and
economic opportunity.

The warning from the Obama administration's top diplomat came amid increased signs of a backslide in the so-called
Arab Spring, as Moammar Gadhafi persists with a bloody war against Libyan rebels and leaders from Yemen to Syria to
Bahrain violently resist the calls from their people for a democratic transformation. Even in Egypt and Tunisia, where
revolutions successfully chased out presidents who ruled for a combined 54 years, reform processes are at risk.

Speaking at the annual U.S.-Islamic World Forum, Clinton said this was the first real chance in decades for fundamental
change in the region.

"Will the people and leaders of the Middle East and North Africa pursue a new, more inclusive approach to solving the
region's persistent political, economic and social challenges?" Clinton asked. "Will they consolidate the progress of
recent weeks and address long-denied aspirations for dignity and opportunity? Or, when we meet at this forum in one
year or five years or 10, will we have seen the prospects for reform fade and remember this moment as just a mirage in
the desert?"

The speech was in many ways a sequel to one she gave in Doha, Qatar, in January, when she warned Arab governments
that they risked "sinking into the sand" if they did not meet the needs of their people. A day later, Tunisian President
Zine El Abidine Ben Ali fled his country amid mass protests demanding his ouster. Egypt's Hosni Mubarak stepped down
under similar pressure a month later.

Clinton didn't answer the fundamental question she posed: Will the unrest that has spread across the Arab world
produce truly free societies with economic opportunities for their people, or leave corrupt and repressive systems in
place?



        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779766 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779766 Date: 09/30/2015




She stressed that much has already been accomplished, with protest movements shattering the myth that Arabs don't
share the same aspirations for freedom, dignity and opportunity, or that change could only come through violence. The
use of Facebook, Twitter and other social media networks has helped mobilize younger citizens, who are increasingly
connected, organized and frustrated — and unwilling to be silenced by tanks and missiles.

"Changing leaders alone will not be enough to satisfy them," Clinton said.

She said real change in Egypt and Tunisia demands political parties and civil society campaigns, and the protesters who
brought down their governments need to combine their passion with the practical work of politics. At the same time,
she said, transitional authorities must be inclusive, respect rights such as free assembly and provide basic security on the
streets. Corruption needs to be rooted out, martial law eliminated, independent judicial systems established and fair
elections held, she said.

Clinton spoke as the administration criticized Egypt's military council after a tribunal convicted 26-year-old blogger
Maikel Nabil Sanad of insulting the army and sentenced him to, three years in prison, the latest sign that the army may
be reversing the reform process. Sanad carried reports of abuses by the military and accused it of remaining loyal to
ousted President Hosni Mubarak.

"This is not the kind of progress we're looking for," State Department spokesman Mark Toner said.

Clinton also lamented the continued plight of women in Egypt and Tunisia, where they've been excluded from
transitional processes. When women marched through the site of the Cairo revolution, Tahrir Square, to celebrate
International Women's Day, they were met by harassment and abuse, she noted.

"You cannot have a claim to a democracy if half the population is silenced," Clinton said. "People have the right and
responsibility to devise their own government. But there are universal rights that apply to everyone and universal values
that undergird vibrant democracies everywhere."

Clinton said the U.S. has made clear that security alone cannot resolve the crisis in Bahrain, where the Sunni monarchy
has suppressed Shiite protesters with the help of Saudi Arabia and other neighbors.

In Yemen, Clinton stopped short of calling for President Ali Abdullah Saleh to step down after 33 years in power but
called for "meaningful political change ... in an orderly and peaceful manner."

And she condemned the "abhorrent" violence by Syria's government against protesters she said were right to demand
more freedom from President Bashar Assad.

"All the signs of progress we have seen in recent months will only be meaningful if more leaders in more places move
faster and further to embrace this spirit of reform," Clinton said, evoking the memory of Iran's 1979 revolution which
was "subverted by a new and brutal dictatorship" and warning that Iranian leaders and al-Qaida propagandists are trying
to yoke the Arab world's peaceful protests for their own ends.

Governments need to diversify their economies, open their political systems, fight corruption and ensure the rights of
women and minorities, she said. "Those are the questions that will determine whether the people of the region make
the most of this historic moment or fall back into stagnation."

Copyright 2011 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or
redistributed.

http://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/clinton-arab-revolutions-could-be-remembered-as-only-a-mirage-if-not-
backed-by-real-reforms/2011/04/12/AFHh65SD_print.html



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779766 Date: 09/30/2015
