     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780237 Date: 09/30/2015


                                                                                          RELEASE IN FULL

Explanation of Vote by Ambassador Susan E. Rice, U.S. Permanent Representative to the
United Nations, regarding Western Sahara and MINURSO, in the Security Council
Chamber
Susan E. Rice
United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations
U.S. Mission to the United Nations
New York, NY
April 30, 2009


                                   FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

Thank you Mr. President.
The United States fully supports the Secretary-General and Ambassador Ross in their efforts to
find a peaceful, sustainable, and mutually agreed solution to the Western Sahara conflict.

This conflict has gone on for too long. These ongoing strains, as well as poor relations between
Morocco and Algeria, have prevented regional cooperation on urgent and emerging issues
facing North Africa.

We very much welcome the appointment of Ambassador Ross to serve as the Secretary-
General's Personal Envoy for the Western Sahara. He's a seasoned diplomat with extensive
experience in the region, and he has our full support.

During Ambassador Ross' recent trip to the region, all of his interlocutors confirmed their
commitment to cooperate with the UN to reach a solution to the Western Sahara conflict as
soon as possible. We welcome this news.

We also concur with Ambassador Ross' assessment that informal, preparatory talks may help
pave the way for more substantive, formal talks. We are glad that the parties have agreed to
meet informally, and we encourage all involved to come to the table without preconditions.

Given the current situation on the ground and Ambassador Ross' continuing efforts, we agree
that the presence of MINURSO remains indispensible. The United States supports renewing
MINURSO's mandate for another 12 months.

Thank you, Mr. President.

                                                  ###




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780237 Date: 09/30/2015
