      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785527 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL


From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Monday, May 16, 2011 7:15 AM
To:
Subject:                            FW: Rozen reporting this morning on Toria in her Yahoo blog




    Original Message
From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Monday, May 16, 2011 6:21 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Nuland, Victoria J; Toner, Mark C; Smith, Dana S; Reines, Philippe I
Subject: Rozen reporting this morning on Toria in her Yahoo blog

Press queries are likely soon. We have not confirmed. Let's discuss timing of the announcement this am.

State Department to name new spokesperson

By Laura Rozen

Victoria "Toria" Nuland, the current U.S. special envoy for conventional forces in Europe and a former U.S. ambassador
to NATO, will be named the new spokesperson for the State Department this week, officials and foreign policy hands
told the Envoy.

The State Department did not provide comment in response to queries. Nuland did not respond to a query.

The appointment is expected to be announced by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton as early as Monday, sources told the
Envoy.

Nuland, a career foreign service officer, has previously served as U.S. Ambassador and deputy ambassador to NATO,
former principal deputy national security adviser to then Vice President Dick Cheney, and as chief of staff to Clinton-era
Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott, now President of the Brookings Institution.

The State Department has had an acting spokesperson, Mark Toner, since Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs
Philip "P.J." Crowley resigned earlier this year. Crowley resigned over comments he made in a small university forum
that were critical of the Defense Department's detention treatment of the prime suspect in the leaking of U.S.
government documents to WikiLeaks, Army Pfc. Bradley Manning. There was an international outcry after Manning's
lawyer revealed that Manning was forced to be naked in his cell in solitary confinement at the Marine Corps brig at
Quantico, VA, among other harsh treatment before he has had a trial.

Shortly after Crowley resigned, the Defense Department suddenly announced that after a review of the conditions of
Manning's confinement, it was transferring him that day from Quantico to a medium security detention facility run by
the Army at Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas, in which he would be integrated during meals into the general population, and be
provided more professional mental health supervision, as he awaits his trial.

Several other key U.S. diplomatic appointments are also expected to be announced in the coming days. Among them,
the next U.S. ambassador to Mexico, to succeed Carlos Pascual, who resigned related to tensions over cables released by
Wikileaks, and who was named last week as the head of a new State Department bureau on international energy issues.
Assistant Secretary of State for Western Hemispheric Affairs Arturo Valenzuela also recently announced he would step
down. The White House officially nominated last week veteran diplomat Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785527 Date: 09/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785527 Date: 09/30/2015



William J. Burns to be the next Deputy Secretary of State, making way for the naming of his successor to the
department's top career diplomatic post. Two rumored contenders for the "P" slot: former Clinton-administration NSC
and State Department adviser Wendy Sherman, a North Korea expert; and former U.S. Ambassador to Pakistan Anne
Patterson, who had been tapped to become the next U.S. envoy to Egypt, currently considered one of the most critical
field diplomatic assignments.

(State Department photo.)




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785527 Date: 09/30/2015
