         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782112 Date: 09/30/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL


From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Monday, August 22, 201110:14 AM
To:
Subject:                          FW: INC Chairman's press conference
Attachments:                      MAJ public statement.docx; MAJ public statement.docx


FYI for your call with Jalil.




From: Abbaszadeh, Nlma
Sent: Monday, August 22, 2011 9:49 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3; Abedin, Huma; Hanley, Monica R
Cc: S_SpecialAssistants
Subject: FW: TNC Chairman's press conference


Readout of Jalil's press conference from a short while ago.

Unclassified

Benghazi Report — TNC Chairman's Press Conference

Mustafa Abd al Jalil gave a press conference at 1445 local time on August 22, 2011. The main points are as follows:

    •      Jalil called for the protection of public and private property, citing the words of the Prophet
          Mohammed who forbade such acts of destruction. He also called upon TNC fighters to exhibit restraint,
          mercy, and tolerance toward regime supporters. He condemned all extra-judicial killings, and noted
          that a few elements "affiliated" with the TNC had engaged in behavior that "concerned" him.
    •      He expressed his thanks to the countries that supported the Libyan revolution from the beginning,
          especially the efforts of the international community to pass UNSCRs 1970 and 1973, which prevented
          a massacre in Benghazi. He assured the international community that the TNC would take all measures
          to protect foreigners in Libya.
    •      He praised sacrifices of the rebels in western cities such as Zawiya, Zuwara, Misurata, and the Western
          Mountains, saying that they resisted Qadhafi's attempts to sow internal divisions among Libyans. He
          said that key Libyan cities not yet under TNC control such as Sirte and Sebha will soon rise up from
          within once Qadhafi's "stranglehold" over them lightens.
     •     "I declare with all transparency that the era of Qahdafi is over," he said, but added that the final
          moment of victory will be when Qadhafi is captured. He hoped that Qadhafi would be captured alive
          and given a fair trial. He confirmed that Saif al Islam and Mohammed Qadhafi are in INC custody,
          unharmed and in safe locations. He said that Mohamed's Qadhafi's guards fired upon the INC fighters
          surrounding his house, but that the INC fighters showed restraint despite taking casualties.
     •     He said that there are many challenges ahead, and that Libyans must seek national reconciliation
          while still remaining true to the memories of the martyrs who died.
     •     Jalil would not go into detail about the INC's immediate plans going forward, saying only that the TNC
          will go to Tripoli when it is completely liberated, and that the interim constitution issued last week
          outlines the timeline for a democratic transition.

         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782112 Date: 09/30/2015
