      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782827 Date: 09/30/2015



                                                                                                        RELEASE IN
                                                                                                        FULL


From:                             Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS@state.gov>
Sent:                             Monday, October 10, 2011 1:44 PM
To:
Subject:                          Sirleaf speech



I guess we'll know soon whether Sirleaf makes it or not. The Nobel Prize to the 3 women is a huge boost for our efforts
on the Women, Peace and Security
National Action Plan. Also, Abigail Disney is over the moon because the Liberia episode is what she documented in "Pray
the Devil Back to Hell" and what will be underscored in the "Women, War and Peace" PBS series.

Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMSPstate.gov

Final speech to nation today.




Nationwide Address by H.E. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf

My Fellow Liberians:


 Let me firs t humbly request that we observe a moment of silence for our fellow co untrymen and
women who lost their lives during the course of this campaign season. May the Good Lord receive
their souls and grant them peace as they rest in His Glorious Kingdom.


 As the President of Liberia, as the President of all partisans, it is befitting, on such an historic
night, that I bring you a message of great hope and abiding faith. Our country is at a defining
moment in its historical journey. For more than three decades, we have never had back-to-back
elections. We had free, fair and transparent democratic elections in 2005, and we are about to
repeat it. If we do this well, and I'm convinced that we will, we MUST be proud of ourselves.


I thank all Liberians that have contributed to a campaign that has been violence free, and we call
upon all of you, as we pray, that the election phase will be equally violence free.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782827 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782827 Date: 09/30/2015




As a country, we have seen and experienced too much: our people have suffered; our people have
died; and our people have had to run away in order to survive. In the three decades of struggle for
peace and democracy, I have been personally victimized, jailed more than once, forced into exile
several times, and subjected to many years of verbal abuse. But we all thank God that under my
leadership, the last eight years of peace and tranquility hay e been better than the previous
fourteen years of violence and civil s trife.

We don't want to go back there!

Fellow Citizens:

I need not remind you that Tuesday, October 11, 2011, is Election Day; it is the day that each
Liberian, 18 years old and above, who registered with the National Elections Commission, will
exercise his or her fran chise to vote for the President and Vice President and the members of the
National Legislature who will govern and manage the affairs of our country for the next six years. I
ask you to take this exercise very seriously because it is the most important decision any Liberian
has the opportunity to make for the future of our country. You, every individual Liberian, will decide
on that day what happens to Liberia, what happens to his or her community, and what happens to
his or her personal life.

I, as your incumbent President, and Vice President Joseph Boakai, seek reelection on Tuesday,
October 11; and we will be grateful and appreciative for your votes so that we can together
consolidate the gains we have made over the last six years and usher for you and your children the
kind of enormous economic prosperi ty, tremendous opportunities and social justice you deserve.

If, however, you decide to elect someone else, we commit ourselves to respect your decision; we
commit ourselves to accept the results announced by the National Elections Commission.

 We sincerely believe that respect for your decision and acceptance of the results announced by
the National Elections Commission are absolutely necessary for the promotion and enhancement of
our young democracy; the peace, stability and social justice we have enjoy ed over the last six
years can only be continued if we all commit ourselves to respect your decision and accept the
results of these elections. I therefore call on my fellow compatriots who are competing in these
elections to similarly publicly commit themselves to respect your decision and to accept the
results announced by the National Elections Commission.

 It is also important for our country and your future that these elections are free, fair and
transparent; it is absolutely necessary that these elections will be free of violence or intimidation
during the process and after the process.

 Accordingly, I call on all partisans of the Unity Party and all Liberians who support us or
sympathize with us to be law-abiding, and to avoid engaging in violent or intimidating activities or
inciting anyone to engage in violence or intimidation. This is one time in your individual lives that
you should turn the other cheek, as the Bible advises, so that those who seek to provoke you to
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782827 Date: 09/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782827 Date: 09/30/2015




engage in violence will be disappointed. I call on all politicians, especially those who are candidates
for these elections, to similarly denounce violence and intimidation.

Finally, we thank the religious communities that are now praying for Liberia, to pray for free, fair
and transparent elections, to pray for elections free of violence and intimidation.

We thank all Muslims who, on Friday, said prayers at their various Mosques, offering special
prayers for our country.

Similarly, I implore all Christians, at their Sunday services in their various Churches today, to pray
for our country. Prayers sustained Liberia during the most difficult period of its history, and I
believe that prayers can certainly see us through these elections peacefully.

I t hank all of our international partners who have joined in observing th ese elections, many of our
regional partners, many of the leaders from many places in the world who will be joining us. We
thank them for their contribution to a peaceful election.

May the God of our Fathers, who has brought us this far, guide us through these elections and
continue to save the State. I thank you.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782827 Date: 09/30/2015
