UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760093 Date: 06/30/2015



                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL

   SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

               The Secretary's Participation in the Forum for the Future
                              Tuesday, November 3, 2009

   CONTEXT

   You will participate in the Sixth Annual Forum for the Future and deliver a speech
   that will highlight the importance of partnership within and across societies to
   address common issues and elaborate on the steps the United States has taken to
   enact the President's Cairo vision. This year's co-chairs, Italy and Morocco, and
   civil-society groups selected political, economic, and social themes for discussion,
   the latter of which includes issues such as education and the empowerment of
   women. Your participation in the Forum shows continued U.S. support for
   indigenous efforts of reform and development, and reinforces the importance
   the U.S. attaches to greater cooperation between Broader Middle East and
   North Africa (BMENA) governments and civil-society organizations in the
   region.

   KEY OBJECTIVES/ANNOTATED AGENDA:

   I.     Opening Session

   The Forum's co-chairs, Moroccan Foreign Minister Fassi Fihri and Italian
   Foreign Minister Frattini, will deliver opening remarks. You will then deliver
   remarks for approximately 15-20 minutes.

          Theme 1 — Political Reform / Local Governance and Democracy

   The key to advancing and sustaining progress is action on the local level; civil
   society groups and governments must develop effective working relationships
   to benefit their citizens. While expanding the role of civil society is a long-term
   effort between the citizens of the BMENA countries and their governments, we see
   progress in some areas, including increased women's political participation, such
   as in Morocco and Kuwait. The region's civil society continues to work toward
   broadening the space for citizens to participate actively in public affairs,
   particularly at the local level. Regrettably, some governments in the region have
   sought to curtail the essential freedoms of expression and association. The United
   States supports opening the political space for civil society to contribute ideas and
   priorities to government policy-makers in shaping the future of the BMENA
   countries.



                            SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760093 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760093 Date: 06/30/2015




                            SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
                                        -2-

   HI. Theme 2 — Economic Reform / The Impact of the Financial Crisis on the
        Economics of the BMENA Region

   Sustainable progress requires opening spaces for innovation and creativity,
   particularly for young people and women. Expanding opportunities for
   entrepreneurs is key to addressing job creation, supporting economic development,
   and furthering civic engagement. By assisting the growth of small and medium
   enterprises (SMEs) through easing business regulations, enhancing transparency
   and accountability, and improving access to financing, countries foster economic
   growth and give society new sources of resilience. Additionally, educational
   systems need to be responsive to labor-market needs. The United States supports
   employment-focused approaches to education, as well as engagement with the
   private sector to tackle comprehensively the obstacles that hinder economic growth
   and development in the region.

    IV.   Theme S— Social Development: A New Perspective on Human Security

   The United States supports sustainable development in all sectors of society.
   Women's empowerment — political, economic, social, and cultural — is a
   prerequisite for progress. Women across the region have been breaking silence
   around many controversial issues, from breast cancer to domestic violence. We
   applaud these efforts and will continue to support women who are working to raise
   the levels of education, health, rights, and opportunity in their countries.

    V.    Closing Session

    Concluding remarks will be delivered by the 2009 civil-society co-partners,
    the Moroccan Organization for Human Rights and Italy's No Peace Without
    Justice. Canada, as the next G8 president and Forum co-host in 2010, and the next
    BMENA co-host will discuss plans and priorities for the 2010 Forum. After
    Foreign Minister Frattini's closing remarks, Foreign Minister Fassi-Fihri will
    present the Chair's Summary. The summary is traditionally drafted by the regional
    co-chair and is not subject to negotiations, to avoid being bogged down in conflict.




                            SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760093 Date: 06/30/2015
