UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760205 Date: 06/30/2015
                                                                RELEASE IN FULL


 Afghanistan Education Support                                                   Nicholas Norman
 July — August 2009                                                               AFT Consultant

                                American Federation of Teachers
                                 Education Support Team Mission
                                       Kabul, Afghanistan
                                        July-August 2009

 Assignment

         My plane departed New York Kennedy for Kabul on July 28th and the refrain replayed
 and replayed in my head "you are going where? Afghanistan. And why?" I was recruited by the
 AFT' s international department to support the Afghan Teacher Education Department's RPM
 (Rapid Production of Materials) activity in which two dozen curriculum experts wrote teacher
 training materials for classroom teachers. The other two members of the AFT team, Betty Harris
 (ABC California) and Amber Prentice (St. Paul), arrived in late August

          The RPM took place daily over a period of five weeks at the Sayyed Jumalladin Teacher
 Training College in Kabul. Twenty Afghan educators were organized into three groups, each
 responsible for completing the training manuals for one grade level (4-6, 7-9 and 10-12). For
 each subject at each grade level, a module of five 90-minute training sessions was created. This
 activity was part of the ongoing USAID program aimed at providing in-service training to all
 Afghan teachers across eleven provinces of the country. My primary assignment was to review
 an English translation of sessions as they were produced and to make technical edits which
 facilitated the flow and focus without losing the voice and intent of the Afghan authors.

         The site staff included three translators and three Provincial Monitoring Officers
 (PMO's) who had been diverted from training in the field in order to work on the RPM. The
 PMO's played an important role in facilitating the whole project and in helping the AFT team to
 positively influence the process. They were knowledgeable about pedagogical theories, teacher
 training, and the needs of teachers in the field. We had regular daily conversations about teacher
 and trainer needs and how to meet them. The PMO's then shared these ideas with the RPM
 groups. Before sessions were translated into English for my review, the PMO's also reviewed,
 edited and discussed the material with the drafting groups. This nuanced intervention by the
 PMO's substantially improved the quality of the initial drafts.

         In addition to editing, I was encouraged to monitor the drafting work and interact with
 RPM participants. It soon became clear that Afghan teachers in the field needed low-prep, low-
 resource ideas for encouraging active student learning. I made several short presentations to the
 whole group on low resource teaching tools, such as two sheets of paper folded over into a four-
 section flipbook. This becomes a handy organizer of information for students and teachers alike.
 The PMO's helped to connect the ideas in my presentations to the specific interests of the
 audience.

        The AFT team's experience as working teachers and professional developers was
 valuable in facilitating the RPM at several key points. For example, we were able to apply our
 experience in coordinating the activities and output of large groups of teachers. We created
 graphic organizers which listed all the modules/sessions to be produced so that each stage of
 production could be monitored easily. This helped the groups to establish and maintain a pace of



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760205 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760205 Date: 06/30/2015




 Afghanistan Education Support                                                    Nicholas Norman
 July — August 2009                                                                AFT Consultant

 work which led to the completion of all of their training materials on schedule. We were also
 able to suggest practices, such as deliberate labeling of the teaching strategy and grouping for
 each activity, which helped to produce higher quality drafts.

         A great challenge to the production of effective training manuals was that they would
 have to survive a "cascade" of at least three levels of turnkey training while retaining clarity and
 effectiveness for final delivery to the often under-prepared, under-resourced, teachers in the
 field. The training process had to build the skills of teachers, deepen their content knowledge,
 and establish a foundation for ongoing professional collaboration at the school level. Moreover,
 the teachers in the field, at least, would not be paid for attending the trainings, so the training
 materials had to be coherent and speak to their immediate needs. One of the most important
 AFT team contributions was to address these challenges by refining the five training sessions for
 each subject into templates with standardized formats and language. The templates respected the
 language and content choices of the Afghan drafters, but also helped to ensure that the training
 could be executed effectively by moderately skilled trainers.

         When my colleagues Betty Harris (ABC California) and Amber Prentice (St. Paul)
 arrived in late August, the ground had been prepared for our team to complete the technical
 editing of the Grades 4-6 RPM materials on schedule, to present appropriate teacher training
 ideas to an audience of RPM participants and other Teacher Education Department officials, and
 to consult constructively with the PMO's and NGO partners of Creative regarding the plans for
 the implementation of the training materials.

 Comments
    o An earlier arrival would have helped the AFT team to make more strategic contributions
      to the process, such as deepening participants' understanding of group learning activities
      before they started drafting them.
    o It was an advantage to send one member of the AFT team ahead in order to get a feel for
      the project and prepare the ground for the rest of the team.
    o Close interaction with Afghan educators helped us to discern some important issues.
      These included the importance of recruiting and supporting first grade teachers, who are
      often the first contact with formal education for children and their families, especially in
      towns and villages. We also learned that there is a high dropout rate during Grades 4 to
      6. It emerged that there is substantial variation in attitudes toward education in different
      regions of the country, where local experience and tradition exert such powerful
      influences.
    • Language barriers, despite the help of translators, inhibited the kind of nuanced group
      facilitation in which AFT/Teacher Center trainers are skilled.
    o Helping to refine the flow of the twelve-day trainings is where our AFT experience and
      skills would be especially valuable. We expected that Amber would be involved in this
      for much of September, but there were apparently some delays.
    o Some delays were undoubtedly due to the difficulties of retranslation of our edited
      sessions back into Dani and Pashtu. The similar format and language of the edited
      sessions was expected to save time in translation after the first example was complete,
      but apparently this did not flow as smoothly as we had hoped.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760205 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760205 Date: 06/30/2015




 Afghanistan Education Support                                                   Nicholas Norman
 July — August 2009                                                               AFT Consultant

 Collaboration with Creative Associates

         I was profoundly impressed by the qualities of the local Afghan staff who work with the
 U.S. contractor Creative Associates. They are serious people. In particular, the three Provincial
 Monitoring Officers who worked on the RPM project demonstrated real depth of knowledge
 about pedagogy, understanding of effective practices of professional development, and
 familiarity with conditions in the field which are likely to influence the effectiveness of the RPM
 training materials. The ancillary staff (translators and typists) were sometimes inconsistent in
 their attendance and in the volume of their work. However, they always cheerfully helped with
 presentations and facilitated interactions with non-English speakers.

 Comments
    o Better communication before our arrival would have facilitated better decisions about
      what materials to bring and helped us to plan ahead in order to utilize most fully the skills
      and experience of the AFT team.
    O The practice of regular reporting to the COP and at staff meetings helped us to ensure that
      the priorities, pace and quality of work were consistent with expectations.
    o There was some confusion in working with the Afghan translators. They were cheerful
      and professional, but it was difficult accurately to assess the efficiency of their work as
      they translated the RPM materials back into Dan and Pashtu.

 Living and Working Conditions

         Accomodation at Creative's "Green House" residence in Kabul was comfortable but not
 lavish. The rooms were air-conditioned (a necessity) and mine had its own bath. Local staff
 cooked excellent meals took care of the rooms and our laundry. On a couple of occasions, we
 were able to entertain people to meals. It certainly felt safe, since the gates were secured by
 guards around the clock and the deputy security manager lived in.

         For most of August, there were strict restrictions on movement. Even a short walk down
 the street to the Creative main office involved half a dozen of the security staff. It was easy to
 arrange with the security manager for outings in the evening to guarded restaurants which
 catered to foreigners and for visits to the grocery store and certain secure shops. Tourist
 activities such as strolling through the bazaar or along the main streets were not possible. After
 Betty and Amber arrived, we were able to visit the National Museum (with evidence of multiple
 lootings still visible) and the palace of the former Kings. The latter was an engrossing though
 eerie experience — in many ways a symbol of all the havoc wrought upon Afghanistan by a
 generation of war.

         Conditions out at the teacher training site were rather more challenging. Although
 traveling in an armored vehicle, we were often stuck in traffic jams and the trip sometimes took
 upwards of forty-five minutes. The site was a spacious classroom in the middle of the Kabul
 Teachers' College campus. There were crowds of students everywhere, but one of the Creative
 security staff was always on duty at the door, while the car remained just outside throughout the
 day. Until the election lockdown began in mid-August, we were out at the RPM site five and a
 half days a week. The workday generally ran from 8:30 to about 3:30. We seldom moved from



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760205 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760205 Date: 06/30/2015




 Afghanistan Education Support                                                      Nicholas Norman
 July — August 2009                                                                  AFT Consultant

 the room until leaving at the end of the day. During one week the heat regularly reached 110
 degrees. There were electric fans and water coolers, but the flies and dust steadily swirling
 through the open windows were hard on the people and computer equipment alike. When
 working at the Creative main office, we were given our own desk space.

 Comments

    • Living conditions might seem a bit spartan to person attached to the comforts of home or
      a hotel.
    • Working conditions out at the Sayyed Jumalladin Teacher College site would be difficult
      for a person unaccustomed to heat, dust, flies and minimal amenities.
    • All movement outside of the residences is tightly controlled. One cannot stroll around
      the neighborhood.
    • On several occasions, we were conscious of gunfire and explosions in the general
      vicinity. A person who felt especially nervous about random rockets at night or
      explosions on the streets during the day would have found this mission difficult.
    • Social life in Kabul exists, but is restricted by security considerations.

 Assessment

         This summer's collaboration in Afghanistan between the AFT and Ministry of Education
 was a remarkable success. The skills and experience of the AFT team were well matched to the
 needs of the BESST project. We shared in common with the Afghan educators so many similar
 concerns about the training and support of teachers that it was it was easy to step in and support
 the production of training manuals. The Provincial Monitoring Officers were remarkably
 effective in helping us to understand and respond to the needs of Afghan teachers. The Creative
 team in Kabul were practical, open-minded, and welcomed our participation in the project. Our
 full AFT team of three persons, although only together for a week, was able to collaborate
 frankly and efficiently from the start. Our primary tasks — supporting the rapid production by
 Afghan educators of teacher training materials and preparing the Grades 4-6 manual for
 publication — were completed on time and to a high standard of quality. The project could not
 have been more serious. Our AFT Team, in my opinion, made a substantive contribution to the
 idea that Afghan teachers can be a community of educators.

         This was a marvellous professional experience. It has convinced me that if Americans
 listen carefully and lead pragmatically, we can help Afghans to build a professional community
 of educators which could be a sturdy foundation for civil society. The AFT, with our tradition of
 practical support in response to the needs of teachers in the classroom, can fill an essential role in
 the process.

 Recommendations for the AFT in responding to the needs of educators in Afganistan
    • Train Afghan educators in the use of low-prep, low-resource dependent strategies for
      supporting active student learning, including graphic organizers and paper manipulatives;
    • Share and support practices for developing reading materials which are both
      developmentally and culturally appropriate, such as collections of stories about local
      families, occupations, traditions, and history;



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760205 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760205 Date: 06/30/2015




 Afghanistan Education Support                                                   Nicholas Norman
 July — August 2009                                                               AFT Consultant

    •   Share experience and help develop techniques for handling large classes (sometimes of
        100 students or more), especially in the early grades;
    •   Share experience in effective instructional planning and execution under circumstances
        where the school day, school year, and student attendance are not consistent;
    •   Help Afghan Teacher Education Department officials and the teachers whom they train
        and monitor to understand the value of formative assessments in monitoring student
        learning, especially with regard to proficiency in reading and writing;
    •   Provide training in Curriculum Mapping and strategies for sustaining the practice so that
        Afghan educators are enabled to coordinate their efforts among subjects, grade levels and
        schools;
    •   Disseminate aspects of brain research with immediate, obvious application to instruction,
        such as how the link between age and the length of attention span can inform lesson
        planning;
    •   Support more efficient planning and instruction by teachers in the field by providing
        templates, strategies for setting priorities, and techniques for self-evaluation;
    •   At the policy level, in training for school leaders, and in training for teachers, present a
        paradigm of differentiated instruction which synthesizes common sense experience with
        theories of learning into an agenda for sustained improvement of teaching and learning.
        In support of this objective, I would recommend translating and adapting Judy Dodge's
        Differentiation in Action and 25 Short Formative Assessments. These ideas are
        digestible in small bites by teachers with limited resources;
    •   Support the expansion and refinement of Teacher Learning Circles (school-based
        professional groups);
    •   Introduce and support effective practices for organizing, mobilizing, and sustaining
        structures for local collaboration, such as Teacher Learning Circles, Lead Teachers,
        community sponsorship of school activities, and provincial/district resource centers;
    •   Share experience in techniques for building connects between schools and parents;
    •   Help to develop a plan for teacher induction, development and retention;
    •   Share experience in developing supports for 1st Grade teachers, who play a critical role in
        Afghanistan as the first point of contact with formal education for many children and
        their parents;
    •   Help Afghan educators to widen the area of common language, experience and
        benchmarks for proficiency in the teaching profession;
    •   Through training of administrators, lead teachers, and instructional specialists, facilitate
        supportive school supervision and provincial leadership;
    •   Support analysis of the high drop-out rate in Grades 4-6 and help to develop strategic
        responses so that more children move on to middle and high school;
    •   Share low-cost but effective practices for acknowledging and encouraging professional
        accomplishment by teachers;
    •   Share techniques for building professional connections among teachers across provincial
        boundaries. (The current set-up seems to be of the hub and spokes variety, with national
        TED in Kabul at the hub, provincial TED's at the end of the spokes, and very little
        reciprocal communication even between the national and provincial administrative
        centers);




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760205 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760205 Date: 06/30/2015




 Afghanistan Education Support                                               Nicholas Norman
 July — August 2009                                                           AFT Consultant

    o   Support development of a growing cadre of master teachers and skilled supervisors
        embedded in the Teacher Education Department, other parts of the Ministry of Education,
        and Provincial education headquarters. The RPM process and involvement of TED staff
        in the "Expert" level training has established a good foundation.

 Nicholas Norman
 UFT Teacher. Center, New York City
 7 October, 2009




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760205 Date: 06/30/2015
