      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761918 Date: 06/30/2015



                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                    B6


From:                           Cheryl Mills
Sent:                           Thursday, May 14, 2009 9:34 PM
To:
Subject:                        FW: the Cable"



fyi


From: Margaret V. W. Carpenter [mailto:
Sent: Thursday, May 14, 2009 6:25 PM
To: Cheryl Mills; Cheryl Mills
Subject: FW: "the Cable"




                                            The New ForeienPolicv.com
                   Passport : Tom Ricks : Dan Drezner : Stephen Walt : David Rothkopf : Marc Lynch
                  The Cable : Madam Secretary : Net Effect : Shadow Govt. : The Argument : The Call


US Embassy Beijing "decapitated"
Thu, 05/14/2009 - 10:04am
Citing the desire to spend more time with his wife, the charge d'affaires of the U.S. embassy in Beijing,
Dan Piccuta, has announced his retirement, a notice issued to embassy employees and obtained by The
Cable says. Piccuta's departure will leave the embassy "decapitated" as of July 1, a source said. "If the
process for selecting an ambassador to Beijing wasn't in high gear before, we better hope it is now," the
official said. The U.S. embassy in Beijing will also need a formal, actual deputy chief of mission. One
possibility -- that Bill Weinstein, who has been the effective DCM in Beijing for four months now, would
be able to drop the "acting" title.
(The Cable previously reported that several people had turned down the Beijing ambassador job.)
Piccuta's retirement announcement here:
From: Beijing All Embassy
Sent: Monday, May 11, 2009 5:36 PM
To: ALL EMBASSY BEIJING
Subject: BROADCAST NOTICE: Dan Piccuta - Retirement
It seems to me that for some time now we have been living in a non-stop diplomatic highlights film.
I won't soon forget the thrill of supporting our US Olympic family, the President and other Americans
during the Beijing 2008 Summer Olympic Games. We can be proud to have safely and securely
consolidated employees at our beautiful new embassy where proximity to colleagues and techno wizardry
have catalyzed collaboration in our professional efforts. To that list we can now add our contributions to
the engagement with China of a new U.S. administration through mutual efforts to build a positive,
cooperative and comprehensive bilateral relationship. Your accomplishments are too numerous to mention
in more detail, but the depth, breadth and excellence of our agencies and posts in China are acclaimed as
without equal among U.S. diplomatic missions.
Just as important have been successes in improving work-life balance throughout the Mission, in
facilitating employment of our family members, and in promoting the sense of community and mutual
support among employees, sections, and agencies as well as with constituent and neighboring posts.
I am hopeful that some have noticed the effort to provide deserving officers, specialists, family members
and LES employees with opportunities for professional growth including in supervisory and leadership
roles. Because of the ever-increasing diversity and talent of our team, the exit of any one colleague has
never diluted our combined strength nor caused us or the Department concern. I am therefore confident
that we will manage the many transitions we'll address in the coming months with exceptional
competence and that we can count on each others' support as we prepare for new leadership throughout
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761918 Date: 06/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761918 Date: 06/30/2015




this terrific Mission.
As many of you know, Christina has been preparing our Hawaii home since March. No future challenge or
incentive nor any measure of past success could fully repay two decades of sacrifice as a trailing
spouse. Reflecting on our experience, I have great empathy for colleagues who meet the tandem,
hardship and expeditionary demands of the military and our Foreign Service that require long periods of
separation from loved ones.
Mindful of all of the above, I have earlier today asked the Office of Retirement and the EAP Bureau to act
now on the retirement application I submitted for their review some months ago, and to initiate the formal
DCM selection process, as I prepare to join Christina on the Big Island and to retire from the Foreign
Service with effect from July 1.
Dan Piccuta




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761918 Date: 06/30/2015
