     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762421 Date: 06/30/2015



                                                                                        RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                        B6



From:                         sbwhoeop
Sent:                         Thursday, June 18, 2009 9:53 AM
To:
Subject:                      fYi



FYI, Gary Sick's latest analysis on Iran below (posted on his blog). Sick has independent sources and
is very well informed.

June 17, 2009
Is this another Iranian revolution?
To someone who has watched and studied the Iranian revolution of 1979 with fascination, developments
in Iran today have an eerie reminiscence. Then there were massive protests that filled the streets, often
marching in dignified but ominous silence; there was bloodshed as nervous security men with guns faced
determined but unarmed crowds; there were sullen mourning parades;20there were catchy chants and
ritual calls of "Down with the shah!"; at night the rooftops rang with shouts of allahu akbar.
You need only change "shah" to "dictator," and you have a description of what is happening in Iran
today.
But there is one very big difference. Thirty years ago, Iran had a charismatic cleric named Ayatollah
Khomeini who had a refined sense of strategy and a willingness to risk everything for the cause he
represented. On the other side was Mohammed Reza Shah, who had been on the throne for some 37
years and who commanded one of the most powerful military and security regimes in the world. On the
surface it appeared to be an uneven battle — guns against turbans — but the ruler with the guns wavered
and the turbans grew in size and confidence until the old order collapsed.
Today the nominal leader of the opposition forces is a reformed radical, Mir Hossein Mousavi, who is
notably lacking in personal charisma. On the other side is the constitutional Leader, Ayatollah
IChamene' i, who is widely perceived as a cautious political animal with limited qualifications for his
religious post and who compensates for his own lack of charisma by manipulation of the political system
and the institutions most loyal to him — particularly the politically minded clergy and the powerful
security forces, including the Revolutionary Guards.
Neither of these men seems to be fully in control of their own forces, let alone the situation. The
fraudulent election defeat of Mousavi was a triggering event, but the energy behind these unprecedented
demonstrations is due more to the sense of outrage and betrayal at the gross manipulation of numbers by
the regime than it is about any undying devotion to Mousavi. Yesterday Mousavi ordered that people
stay home in face of a conflicting pro-regime demonstration. They marched anyway (and the daughter of
 former president Rafsanjani joined them and urged them on). Mousavi then "ordered" everyone to
 march the following day (which they were probably going to do with or without his orders).
 IChamene'i announced the "divine assessment" of the election outcome — even before it would probably
 have been physically possible to count the more than 40 million ballots. Then, in the face of mass protests,
 he ordered an investigation of the results by the Guardian Council— the same organization that was
 responsible for managing the election in the first place. No one believed him in either case, and no one
 expected anything of importance from the Guardian Council. Khamene'i has ordered peace and
 reconciliation. No one paid any attention.
 I deliberately did not mention president-elect Ahmadinejad. After celebrating his "victory," he went off
 to a largely symbolic meeting in Moscow. He seems to be out of the decision loop and more of a passive
 player than a major actor in these events.
 So who is calling the shots? Mousavi seems to be running along after the crowd, not leading it. But that is
 probably all that is required to keep the protest in motion.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762421 Date: 06/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762421 Date: 06/30/2015




On the other side, the very little evidence we have suggests that the important decisions are being made
by the ultra-conservative leadership of the Revolutionary Guards, whose political role has ballooned over
the past decade, perhaps in cooperation with their extremist counterparts in the clergy. They are utterly
ruthless and ideologically fueled.
New York Times columnist Nick Kristoff reminded us several days ago (see blog item on June 15 below)
at the end of the day, as I saw at Tiananmen 20 years ago, when Might and Right do battle, it's often prudent
to bet on Might, at least in the short run.
The regime seems to have miscalculated badly. They seemed to believe that a sudden coup — the
announcement of dramatic election results followed by a show of force — would intimidate and silence the
opposition and consolidate their control. That is perhaps more understandable if the decisions were being
made by military leaders who tend to see the battle in Manichaean terms, rather than politicians such as
IChamene'i who are accustomed to seeing shades of gray. In any event, it b ackfired and they now have a
much larger crisis on their hands than if they had simply arranged for Ahmadinejad to win by a slim
margin (which was at least believable).
All parties are now in uncharted territory. A significant portion of the Iranian population seems to have
concluded that their social contract with the rulers — accepting Islamic rule in return for a respectful
regard for the opinion of the governed, an Islamic Republic — is no longer valid. They do not trust their
rulers.
The rulers, whose support has been declining for years in the face of their own inept management of the
country, are increasingly replacing popular support with repression. This election seems to have called
that tactic into question. For the military, the obvious answer is more repression. So it would appear to
be a moment to bet on Might.
But nobody is fully in command of events. Decisions taken in the next weeks will be fateful and could
determine the future path of the Iranian revolution.
There is another lesson as Iran's leaders contemplate a Tiananmen moment. When the Tiananmen
crackdown occurred almost exactly ten years ago, one of the leaders of China at the time was Zhao
Ziyang, General Secretary of the Communist Party. He was later fired and placed under house arrest.
His smuggled memoirs have just appeared, revealing the depth of disagreements within the lea dership
about how to proceed.
Is it possible that ten years from now we will have a volume describing the intense debates that one can
only presume are underway today in the highest councils of the Islamic Republic of Iran?




Dell Days of Deals! June 15-24 - A New Deal Everyday!




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762421 Date: 06/30/2015
