      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761448 Date: 06/30/2015


                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                 B6


From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Sent:                              Monday, March 30, 2009 5:30 AM
To:
Cc:                                Abedin, Huma
Subject:                           Fw: Bonn clips: AP & Reuters



Read this - it says todd stern sent chills up someone's spin (in a good way)!

    Original Message
From: Stern, Todd D (S/SECC)
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacobi
Cc: Steinberg, James B; Lew, Jacob
Sent: Sun Mar 29 19:31:21 2009
Subject: Fw: Bonn clips: AP & Reuters

Hi guys from Germany. HRC might be interested in press clips below, especially the AP story. Good day today.

    Original Message                                                                                                  B6
From: susan povenmire
To: Stern, Todd D (S/SECC); Pershing, Jonathan; Ogden, Peter R; Talley, Trigg (OES); celesteconnors
<celesteconnors                                                                                            DeRosa-Joynt,
Barbara M (OES);                                                   Rochberg, Daniel R
Cc: Povenmire, Susan L (OES); Cassetta, Matthew V; Gross, Billie R (OES)
Sent: Sun Mar 29 17:05:04 2009
Subject: Bonn clips: AP & Reuters




Obama envoy: Time to act on climate change By ARTHUR MAX –2 hours ago

BONN, Germany (AP) — Once booed at international climate talks, the United States won sustained applause Sunday
when President Barack Obama's envoy pledged to "make up for lost time" in reaching a global agreement on climate
change.

Todd Stern also praised efforts by countries like China to reign in their carbon emissions, but said global warming
"requires a global response" and that rapidly developing economies like China "must join together" with the industrial
world to solve the problem.

The debut of Obama's climate change team was widely anticipated after eight years of obdurate participation in U.N.
climate talks by the previous Bush administration.

"We are very glad to be back. We want to make up for lost time, and we are seized with the urgency of the task before
us," Stern said to loud applause from the 2,600 delegates to the U.N. negotiations.

They clapped again when Stern said the U.S. recognized "our unique responsibility ... as the largest historic emitter of
greenhouse gases," which has created a problem threatening the entire world.

The two-week meeting by 175 countries that began Sunday was the latest stage of talks aimed at forging a climate
change agreement to replace the 1997 Kyoto Protocol on emissions targets for rich countries, which expires in 2012.

                                                     22
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761448 Date: 06/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761448 Date: 06/30/2015




The United States was instrumental in negotiating Kyoto, but failed to win support at home. When George W. Bush took
office, he renounced it, calling Kyoto a flawed agreement that would harm the U.S. economy and unfair because it
demanded nothing from countries like China or India.

Stern said his team did not want a repeat of the Kyoto debacle. The latest agreement is due to be finalized in December
in Copenhagen, Denmark.

"Ultimately, this is a political process," he said. "The way forward is steered by science and pragmatism."

Stern said no one on his team doubted that climate change is real. "The science is clear, the threat is real, the facts on
the ground are outstripping the worst-case scenarios. The cost of inaction or inadequate action are unacceptable," he
said — a total change of tone from his predecessors.

Scientists warned recently that climate change is happening more rapidly that previously calculated and said the Earth
could be in danger of major climatic changes that would trigger widespread social disruption. U.N. scientists say rising
sea levels caused by global warming threatens to swamp coastlines and entire island states, and predicted increasing
drought for arid countries, especially in Africa.

Obama has set aside $80 billion in his economic stimulus package for green energy, promised $150 billion for research
over 10 years, and was tightening regulations on auto emissions, Stern said.

"America itself cannot provide the solution, but there is no solution without America," he said.

"It sent chills up my spine seeing the U.S. applauded," Keya Chatterjee of the Worldwide Fund for Nature said after
Stern's speech.

It was only 15 months ago at Bali, Indonesia, that U.S. negotiators were booed when they threatened to veto an accord
laying down a two-year negotiating process to replace Kyoto. They backed off when the delegate from Papua New
Guinea, Kevin Conrad, told them if "you are not willing to lead ... please get out of the way."

Stern urged delegates Sunday to adopt a long-range vision for reducing climate change, rather than to focus on "a series
of short-term, stopgap measures," and repeated Obama's determination to cut emissions by 80 percent by mid-century.

His speech was meant to shift the debate from persistent demands by developing countries for industrial nations to
reduce emissions by 25-40 percent below 1990 levels by 2020. Stern has said previously that goal was unattainable for
the U.S.

Speaking earlier to reporters, Stern defended the U.S. administration's goal of reducing U.S. carbon emissions by roughly
16 percent over the next dozen years from current levels.

"We don't think (the target) is low at all," he said, adding it was "consistent with what other countries are willing to do."

Others disagreed.

"The target that the United States has put forward is not going to be sufficient," said Chatterjee.

Jake Schmidt of the Nature Resources Defense Council said the Obama administration was talking behind the scenes
about setting an annual emissions reduction target leading up to 2050.

"It's hard to turn a big ship around, but it would show we are serious about our commitments to cut emissions from the
medium to the long term," Schmidt said.

                                                    23
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761448 Date: 06/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761448 Date: 06/30/2015




With time running out before the pact is due to be completed in December, delegates are trying to narrow vast
differences over how best to fight climate change.

Issues include how much countries need to reduce emissions, how to raise the tens of billions of dollars needed annually
to fight global warming and how to transfer money and technology to poor countries who are most vulnerable to
increasingly fierce storms, droughts and failing crops.

Stern said the U.S. position will be guided by whatever deal Obama can strike with Congress.

"I do not think that it is realistic to believe that we will then be able to go into an international setting and get a higher
number than that," he said.




AP correspondent Vanessa Gera contributed to this article.

(This version CORRECTS name of Natural Resources Defense Council.)



US to push for UN climate deal but no "magic wand"
Sun Mar 29, 2009 11:04am EDT
* Obama to push for new climate treaty

* Climate envoy says no magic wand, sets limits to U.S. cuts

(Adds details, quotes)

By Alister Doyle, Environment Correspondent

BONN, Germany, March 29 (Reuters) - U.S. President Barack Obama's administration promised to push for a new global
treaty to fight global warming at United Nations climate talks on Sunday but cautioned it had no magic wand.

"The United States is going to be powerfully and fully engaged," U.S. special envoy for climate change Todd Stern said at
the opening of 175-nation U.N. talks in Bonn.

"But we are all going to have to do this together, we don't have a magic wand," he told a news conference at the March
29-April 8 meeting in Bonn, the first since Obama took office. The U.S. delegation was greeted by applause at the
opening.

Stern said the United States wanted to work for a treaty that was economically "doable" and that countries could not
expect Washington to "ride in on a white horse" to solve the problem. "We can't," he said.

Some nations, racked by recession, have been waiting to hear Obama's policies before unveiling their own. The Bonn
talks are due to consider issues including the levels of greenhouse gas cuts needed to slow global warming.

Obama has promised to cut U.S. greenhouse gas emissions by about 16-17 percent from current levels to take them
back to 1990 levels by 2020 as part of a new U.N. climate deal meant to be agreed in Copenhagen in December.

Under former President George W. Bush, the United States was isolated among industrialised nations in opposing caps
on emissions under the U.N.'s existing Kyoto Protocol. Delegates even booed U.S. delegates at a meeting in Indonesia, in
2007.

                                                                24
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761448 Date: 06/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761448 Date: 06/30/2015




"Everyone is very excited" by signs of a stronger U.S. commitment, Yvo de Boer, head of the U.N. Climate Change
Secretariat, told a news conference. China and the United States are the top greenhouse gas emitters.


NO WHITE HORSE


Stern said, however, that the United States could not make the deepest cuts in greenhouse gases advised by the U.N.
Climate Panel for 2020 to avoid the worst of global warming, of between 25 and 40 percent below 1990 levels.


"We should be guided by a combination of science and Pragmatism," Stern said. Many developing nations, led by China,
want rich nations to make deep cuts.


Almost no developed nations have laid out goals within the 25-40 percent range. Among the most ambitious, the
European Union plans cuts of 20 percent below 1990 levels by 2020.


The U.N. Climate Panel projects more floods, droughts, more powerful storms, heatwaves and rising sea levels from a
gradual build-up of heat-trapping gases from burning fossil fuels.


De Boer has in the past called Obama's goals an "opening offer" that he hopes will be toughened in Copenhagen.


Stern said that it was unclear whether Congress will manage to pass climate legislation before the Copenhagen meeting
in December. If a law is passed by then, he said, it would be unrealistic for Washington to sign up to any tougher cuts.


On Saturday, an estimated one billion people turned out the lights for an Earth Hour to show concern about global
warming. The action also dimmed landmarks from the Eiffel Tower to the Sydney Harbour Bridge.


"Earth hour was probably the largest public demonstration on climate change ever," de Boer said.


-- For Reuters latest environment blogs click on: blogs.reuters.com/environment/ (Editing by Louise Ireland)




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F:2014-20439 Doc No. C05761448 Date: 06/30/2015
