      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761188 Date: 06/30/2015



                                                                                                                       RELEASE IN
                                                                                                                       PART B6


From:                               Cheryl Mills <cheryl.mill!
Sent:                               Monday, May 4, 2009 8:15 PM
To:                                 'Cheryl Mills'
Subject:                            FW: [InsidersOut] my latest: Iraqi Gays Face Gruesome Torture/ Murder Technique



FYI



From: Richard Soca rides
Sent: Monday, May 04, 2009 5:11 PM
To: Cheryl Mills1; Cheryl Mills; Melanne Verveer; Jim Kennedyl
Subject: Fwd: [InsidersOut] my latest: Iraqi Gays Face Gruesome Torture/ Murder Technique

You guys will have to deal with this at some point if not already.




Iraqi Gays Face Gruesome Torture/ Murder
Technique •
By: DOUG IRELAND
GAY CITY NEWS, 04/30/2009
http://gavcitynews.com/site/news.cfm?newsid=20307475&BRD=2729&PAG=461&dept id=569346&rfi=6

As the murder campaign targeting Iraqi gays intensifies, a leading Arabic television network last week revealed the use of
a horrifying new form of lethal torture against Iraqi gay men - anti-gay Shiite death squads are sealing their anuses with a
powerful glue, then inducing diarrhea, which leads to a painful and agonizing death. The use of this stomach-turning new
torture was first reported by the Al Arabiya network, which is headquartered in the United Arab Emirates and was alerted
to the story by a leading Iraqi feminist and human rights activist.

Yanar Mohammed, president of the Organization of Women's Freedom in Iraq (OWFI), told Al Arabiya that the torture
substance "is an Iranian-manufactured glue that, if applied to the skin, sticks to it and can only be removed by surgery.
After they glue the anuses of homosexuals, they give them a drink that causes diarrhea. Since the anus is closed, the
diarrhea causes death. Videos of this form of torture are being distributed on mobile telephones in Iraq."

  Al Arabiya said its reporter confirmed the use of this anal torture by "visiting the Baghdad morgue in Bab-al-Moazaam in
  central Baghdad, where Neman Mohsen, the medical examiner, confirmed they have the bodies of seven homosexuals
in the morgue. He said, 'We were not able to identify the culprits, who dumped the bodies in front of the morgue and fled
without being seen." A two-person team from Human Rights Watch (HRW) currently in Iraq to investigate persecution of
LGBT people has also confirmed the use of this form of torture. In a widely-circulated email from Iraq, the head of HRW's
LGBT desk, Scott Long, said he and his colleague had gathered evidence which confirms the Al Arabiya report and that
HRW would make its own detailed report after the organization's two staffers return to the United States next week.

OWFI's Mohammed, the woman responsible for gathering information about the use of this sadistic anal torture and
passing it on to Al Arabiya, told Gay City News that "the story was so horrific that when I first heard it from gay friends I
didn't believe it. But then I investigated and found it was really true that the anuses of gay men were being glued shut."
Speaking by telephone from Toronto, where she was on a brief visit to relatives before a scheduled return to Iraq next
week, Mohammed told this reporter that, "Fortunately, Al Arabiya has a very good human rights reporter, to whom I told
what I had found, and he was able to confirm it by visiting the morgue."

She said that "many older women in my organization.were quite opposed to taking up the question of the persecution of
homosexuals and didn't understand why it was important. But I firmly believe that misogyny and homophobia are two
sides of the same coin, and that we had a duty to speak out against the persecution of gays in Iraq, which is so little

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761188 Date: 06/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761188 Date: 06/30/2015




known that I was surprised by the extent of it when I began to look into it."

Mohammed, 49, is well known for her courageous human rights work. She co-founded OWFI in Baghdad in June 2003 in
the wake of the U.S. invasion and occupation, and the organization has led campaigns against so-called honor killings,
the abduction of women, and trafficking in women and children. She also co-founded Iraq's first feminist newspaper, Al
Mousawat (Equality), which has been published quarterly for the last three years. Trained as an architect, Mohammed told
Gay City News she has abandoned that profession to work full time for OWFI. She has received numerous awards for her
work for women's rights and human rights, including the Eleanor Roosevelt Global Rights Award given by the US Feminist
Majority Foundation.

Ali Hili, the 33-year-old gay Iraqi exile who coordinates the association Iraqi LGBT, which is headquartered in London but
has members and informants throughout Iraq, told Gay City News that he has also been able to confirm the use of lethal
anal torture. "We have had reports, increasingly over the last four or five days, about the use of this technique not just in
Baghdad but in smaller town and cities all over Iraq," Hili said by telephone. "We have reports on seven young men who
have been through this horrible experience in which they were arrested in the south of Iraq and had their anuses sealed,
or 'locked' as the torturers say. Our sources told us that hospitals all over Iraq's southern region have received so many
cases of similar incidents where men have had their anuses glued, but that what makes the situation even worse and
more lethal is that they have been refused treatment in hospitals when they sought it because of homophobia."

As of this week, Hili and Iraqi LGBT have documented 617 cases of assassinations of LGBT people since a death-to-all-
gays fatwa was issued by Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the spiritual leader of all Shiite muslims in Iraq, in 2005. The
murder campaign of "sexual cleansing" of homosexuals has intensified in recent months, with 70 new killings since
December alone (see this reporter's April 16-29 article, "Iraqi Gay Murders Surge; World Finally Takes Note").

Now, Hili says, "I have just received word of seven new murders of gays in one week, last week." He provided Gay City
News with the names and towns of origin of the most recent victims of the anti-gay-death squads. They are Abbas Mosa,
33, from Al Hay; Saeed Majeed, 27, from Al Samawa; Jabar Khothayer, 19, from Al Dewaniya; Majed Alawi, 41, from Al
Hindiya; Hazim Hussein, age unknown, from Al Najaf; Mohammed Qasim, 25, from Al Dewaniya; and Rama Sabri, 19,
from Al Mohanawiya.

At the same time, the Iraqi news website niqash.org reported last week that "AI-Baghdadiya, a satellite television channel
based in Cairo... broadcast a report on April 7 saying that 20 young men accused of homosexuality were taken to Ibn al-
Nafis hospital in Baghdad with mutilated genitals."

Hili told Gay City News that much of the most recent wave of assassinations appears to be the work of the Mahdi Army,
the militia led by fundamentalist Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr. He said that one of Iraqi LGBT's informants "is connected
to high-ranking religious within the Mahdi Army, and he has been told of a campaign to target anyone who is suspected of
being gay." Increasingly, Hili said, leaflets and "Wanted" posters are appearing with lists of men targeted to be killed for
what are called "crimes against morality," meaning homosexuality. A list of Iraqi LGBT members to be eliminated is also
circulating, Hili said, and he's been told his own name is at the top of this list.

Hili also said that pharmacists have been reporting to the police about male customers who were regularly buying female
hormones and cosmetic creams. In one such recent instance, two of these supposed transgendered men were arrested
and taken to an unknown location, and have not been heard from since.



Reminder: This list is an invitation only lists and all posts are OFF THE RECORD.
You received this message because you are subscribed to the Google Groups "InsidersOut" group.
To post to this group, send email to InsidersOut@googlegroups.com
To unsubscribe from this group, send email to InsidersOut-unsubscribeAgooglegroups.com
For more options, visit this group at http://groups.google.com/group/InsidersOut?h1=en
  ---------- ---------------- ------  ------ -------




Richard Socarides
Brady Klein Weissman LLP
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761188 Date: 06/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761188 Date: 06/30/2015




501 Fifth Avenue, 19th Floor, New York, NY 10017
m: 917.400.6178 w: 212.949.5800




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761188 Date: 06/30/2015
