      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761682 Date: 06/30/2015


                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL



From:                               Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                               Thursday, June 04, 2009 1:20 PM
To:                                 H
Subject:                            FW: Gay groups grow impatient with Obama



fyi

From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Thursday, June 04, 2009 12:03 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3; Reines, Philippe I; Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Gay groups grow impatient with Obama




POLITICO
Gay groups grow impatient with Obama
By: Ben Smith and Jonathan Martin
June 4, 2009 04:32 AM EST

President Barack Obama's promises of change are falling short for one core Democratic
constituency: gays and lesbians, whose leaders say Obama's administration isn't keeping
up with the times.

Gay rights campaigners, most of them Democrats who supported Obama in November,
have begun to voice their public frustration with Obama's inaction, small jokes at their
community's expense and deafening silence on what they see as the signal civil rights
issue of this era.

His most important campaign promises repealing the Defense of Marriage Act and the
military ban on openly gay and lesbian service-members have not been fulfilled.

And the news, which emerged quietly earlier this year, that he'd supported same-sex
marriage back in 1996, then changed his mind, especially rankles. As mainstream
Democratic politicians such as Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) move to support same-sex
marriage, gay rights advocates say that the barrier-breaking president looks increasingly
odd for opposing what they see as full equality.

"Obama is out of step with his party, which is overwhelmingly in favor of marriage at this
stage," said David Mixner, a veteran gay rights activist who is among the organizers of a
march on Washington for same-sex marriage scheduled for this fall. "He's out of step with
the next generation."

Gay rights issues have been moving at breakneck speed, none faster than same-sex
marriage. Most public opinion polls now show more than 40 percent of Americans support
same-sex marriage, seen as a fringe issue just a few years earlier. Already, five New
England states and Iowa have same-sex marriage laws on the books.

"Politicians are finding out that their voters are moving faster than they anticipated," said
Democratic pollster Celinda Lake, who called Obama's place behind that curve
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. V-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761682 Date: 06/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761682 Date: 06/30/2015




"surprising, because he is the next-generational candidate."

She noted that Obama could be concerned about alienating older voters in the Midwest
who would be turned off if he came out in support of same-sex marriage.

The Politico 44 Story Widget Requires Adobe Flash Player.


The White House has been reluctant to spend its political capital pushing Obama's
highest-profile pro-gay positions believing, White House allies say, that it could detract
from priorities like health care. And it may be even less likely to do next year, with
midterms approaching.

But officials have told restive gays and lesbians to give them until the end of this month to
show movement on a number of lower-profile issues they support, including restrictions on
visas for people with HIV. The Pentagon also has toned down public opposition to
reversing the gay ban, and the new secretary of the Army's job will be, in part, to smooth
the way for that move.

"The president remains fully committed to advancing LGBT rights. His positions on all of
these issues are well-established and well-known. His staff continues to work with
Congress on a variety of LGBT issues," said Jim Messina, the deputy White House chief
of staff who is the point man on gay and lesbian issues, citing White House efforts to
move hate crimes legislation through the Senate. "While we recognize that some in the
community are anxious, the president's commitment has not wavered."

Meanwhile, however, marriage equality has emerged as the movement's central issue, a
question that's seen as a simple matter of justice and fairness by a growing number of
Democrats.

"There's going to come a point where's he going have to deal with it," former Democratic
National Committee Chairman Howard Dean, who now supports same-sex marriage, said
of Obama. "I'm in favor of giving him a little more time. He's got an awful lot on his plate."

"But he is a politician like everybody else, and he's going to respond to pressure. And I
don't blame the LGBT community for trying to push," Dean said.

Rep. Jared Polis (D-Colo.), who is openly gay and was a major Democratic donor before
being elected last year, said he was "very hopeful [Obama's] position will evolve."

But Polls warned, "If his position doesn't evolve, it could turn off some strong supporters."

Gay leaders in Washington, though, have been loath to publicly criticize the president.
They say they still view Obama as an ally and think private talks are more promising than
public pressure.

Still, it was especially frustrating for some left-leaning gay figures to see the otherwise
dreaded former Vice President Dick Cheney publicly express his support this week for
letting states allow gay marriage -- a position that puts him to theleft of Obama.


                                                    21
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761682 Date: 06/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761682 Date: 06/30/2015




"I think that freedom means freedom for everyone," Cheney said in an appearance
Monday at the National Press Club.

Obama also has been criticized for a joke at the expense of same-sex marriage. After the
White House Correspondents Association dinner, columnist Dan Savage fumed that
Obama's only reference since being sworn in to the high-profile drive toward same-sex
marriage in Iowa had been a joke about going to the state with longtime friend and adviser
David Axelrod to "make it official."

"The best he can do — all he's willing to do — is toss off an Adam Sandler-level joke,"
Savage wrote.

Another Obama ally, writer Andrew Sullivan, recently referred to Obama's stance on gays
as "the fierce urgency of whenever."

And on the front line, in the states, gay rights advocates are also growing increasingly
impatient with Washington.

"His position has been causing some problems for those of us working in the states, those
who are against it are using him for cover," said Alan Van CapeIle, the executive director
of New York's Empire State Pride Agenda, who called on Obama to fulfill another
neglected campaign promise and back the full repeal of the Defense of Marriage Act,
which blocks the federal government from extending benefits to married same-sex
couples.

Gay activists cringed recently when reminded by Donald Trump, of all people, that Miss
California Carrie Prejean shared the same position on gay marriage as the progressive
president.

"I'm still optimistic that the president is going to be good on his word," said Aubrey Sarvis,
the executive director of the Servicemembers Legal Defense Networks, which opposes
the military ban.

"No one believes that [anti-gay federal policies] will be miraculously changed overnight,"
said Human Rights Campaign president Joe Solmonese, who added nevertheless that his
group is "frustrated at the pace of progress."

Behind the scenes, patience is wearing thin.

"People are far angrier than they're saying publicly, because they don't want to jeopardize
[White House] relationships with the groups," said John Aravosis, an openly gay blogger
who speaks to gay leaders. "But everyone is feeling like we've entered a danger zone
where the administration is backing away from us fast, and I can tell you that the
professional gay crowd in Washington, D.C., to a person, feels a sense of impending
betrayal."

The most heated battle is in California, where some of the same voters who
overwhelmingly elected Obama also passed a referendum barring same-sex marriage.
Proposition 8 has since energized the state's gay rights movement.


                                                    22
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761682 Date: 06/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761682 Date: 06/30/2015




The Army linguist, Dan Choi, spoke at a rally across the street from the Beverly Hills Hilton
while Obama spoke inside at a high-dollar fundraiser late last month. The group
organizing the rally, the Courage Campaign, has gathered 140,000 signatures on a letter
to Obama asking him to rescind the ban.

Back at the fundraiser, Messina had the same message delivered in a somewhat more
intimate setting.
He was walking through the men's room at the Beverly Hilton when Mike Bonin, an activist
and former Obama campaign staffer who loves the president "the way Walt Whitman
loved Abe Lincoln," confronted him.

"I told him I was disappointed that [Obama] talked about justice and equal opportunity and
across the street stands Dan Choi, who's about to be booted out of the Army," he recalled
of the faucet-side chat.

Messina, Bonin said, responded that the White House hadn't forgotten, and complained
that the administration hasn't gotten enough credit for pushing to outlaw hate crimes
against gays and lesbians, but was ultimately "noncommittal." Bonin, who said he kept
Messina standing by the sinks for about ten minutes before letting him proceed to his
destination, said marriage advocates in California have been using Obama campaign
tools and strategies to push the White House.

"All the people who signed this petition for Choi, all the people who are outside across the
street at this rally, all the people who are coming to these [political training camps] are
Obama people who love and support our president," he said. "But he didn't stand up for
us, and until he does we're going to love him enough to be tough on him."

Correction: Hate crimes legislation has passed the House, but not the Senate; an earner
version of this story wrongly reported that it had become law.
© 2009 Capitol News Company, LLC                                            I 1;:,




Nora Toiv
Office of the Secretary
202-647-8633




                                                    23
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761682 Date: 06/30/2015
