       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762786 Date: 06/30/2015


                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                         B6


From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Sunday, July 12, 2009 6:19 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: OpEd I A Dose of Realism in Honsuras By Edward Schumacher-Matos




From: Sullivan, Jacob 3
To: Shannon, Thomas A; Abedin, Huma; Llorens, Hugo; Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Sat Jul 1114:54:29 2009
Subject: RE: OpEd I A Dose of Realism in Honsuras By Edward Schumacher-Matos

Very interesting.


From: Shannon, Thomas A
Sent: Saturday, July 11, 2009 2:46 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3; Abedin, Huma; Llorens, Hugo; Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Fw: OpEd I A Dose of Realism in Honsuras By Edward Schumacher-Matos

This will appear in tomorrow's Post.


From: pburellii
Sent: Sat Jul 11 08:05:33 2009
Subject: OpEd I A Dose of Realism in Honsuras By Edward Schumacher-Matos


Washington Post I A Dose of Realism in Honduras
By Edward Schumacher-Matos
Sunday, July 12, 2009

Sometimes you have to give political leaders credit.

President Barack Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton are on the verge of achieving their own coup in
Honduras and advancing American interests with a deftness not seen from Washington in many years.

The president's reference to Honduras during his trip to Moscow reflects how the small Central American
country is but a pawn as the administration pushes the reset button globally and in the hemisphere.

Justice may not be totally served in Honduras, but the country is likely to end up better off anyway.

"America cannot and should not seek to impose any system of government on any other country," Obama said
in Russia, "nor would we presume to choose which party or individual should run a country. . . . Even as we
meet here today, America supports now the restoration of the democratically elected president of Honduras,
even though he has strongly opposed American policies. We do so not because we agree with him. We do so
because we respect the universal principle that people should choose their own leaders."




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case NOTF-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762786 Date: 06/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762786 Date: 06/30/2015




The immediate lesson was to teach Russia to stay out of Georgia and Ukraine. The message, however, also
resonated throughout Latin America, undercutting the polarization efforts of Venezuelan President Hugo
Chavez.

That the administration has joined with the Organization of American States in condemning the ouster of
Honduran President Manuel Zelaya has left Chavez puffing a lot of hot air with no one to fight against.

When three Chavez allies -- the presidents of Argentina, Ecuador and Paraguay -- sought unsuccessfully to
escort Zelaya back to Honduras on Venezuelan planes, they looked irresponsible for setting off violence that
resulted in one death. Clinton, meanwhile, working quietly with Brazil, Mexico, Colombia, Chile and other
moderate countries, has brought the two opposing Honduran camps together in a mediation with one of the
grand old men of Latin America, Costa Rican Oscar Arias, a Nobel Peace laureate.

There is now genuine movement toward a peaceful resolution of the crisis.

The United States, long seen as a bully in the region, is suddenly being seen as respectful and wise. The
flummoxed Chavez could only come up with a patently hilarious formula in which the "Yankee empire" was
still the villain in Honduras but Obama may not be responsible because he is more like a prisoner of the
empire."

More fundamentally, Obama and Clinton, perhaps because neither is particularly experienced in Latin America,
have approached the region with fresh eyes and wonder what all the fuss is about. The Moscow speech and their
actions in Honduras underline that the Cold War really is over.

Chavez is a nuisance, but Washington has no enemies in Latin America. Our major interests are immigration,
crime and trade, not ideologies, as much as the extremists on the right and the left there and here might want to
make it so.

So, are we sacrificing Honduras? No. Zelaya is the main culprit in this crisis, but what counts is the rule of law.
His hand has been slapped very hard. Allowing him to serve out the last six months of his term while not
holding the referendum that would have opened the way to succession has a better chance of bringing peace and
stability to the country than the current standoff.

The bigger question will be: What have the rest of us learned? We have all been pushing Latin Americans to
uphold the rule of law, but beyond simply insisting that Zelaya was elected, few in the OAS, the European
Union or other critics have been willing to give much credence to Hondurans for trying to do just that.

The Honduran Supreme Court, as it is empowered to do under the constitution, ordered the army to arrest
Zelaya after he began to carry out a referendum for a constitutional convention that the court, Congress and his
own attorney general said was illegal. Yet, many Latin American and European governments still call it a
"military coup" or, as the Associated Press called it several days afterward, a "military power grab." Clinton and
Obama dropped calling it a coup.

There are gray areas having to do with presidential powers and the fact that the Honduran constitution prohibits
extradition of citizens. The army exiled Zelaya in consultation with civilian leaders to avoid precisely the sort of
violence seen when Zelaya tried to return. He forced the country and its institutions against the wall, and for
that he should take his medicine.

Edward Schumacher-Matos is syndicated by the Washington Post Writers Group. His e-mail address
is edwardschumachermalosgvahoo.com.


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762786 Date: 06/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762786 Date: 06/30/2015




[-Post a Comment




                                                   ILA

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762786 Date: 06/30/2015
