      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761738 Date: 06/30/2015


                                                                               RELEASE IN PART
                                                                               B6



From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Monday, May 11, 2009 3:51 AM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: NYU


Fyi in case you wanted to see raw input



From: Jim Kennedy                                                                                                    B6
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Muscatine, Lissa; Tillemann, Tomicah S; Sullivan, Jacob 3
Sent: Mon May 11 02:13:50 2009
Subject: NYU

Thanks for the opportunity to suggest a line or two -

1. As a Yankees fan (though not as expert as Kris), and an eyewitness to the "cap" fiasco, I share everyone's
sensitivity to sports references. But I'm not dead set against trying to leverage that sensitivity in a self-
deprecating, appropriately funny way. A couple thoughts along those lines:

a.   "As you can see, I resisted the urge to wear my Yankees cap."

b. (if the stage is set up near, for example, second base; substitute whatever part of the field she's near) "This
is about as close as I'm going to get to playing second base for the Yankees"

c. "I kind of feel at home here in Yankee Stadium, because ever since January, I've been playing on a team
with a bunch of guys wearing pinstripes."

(on the other hand, I'm a little concerned about suggesting that the 1923 team "looked the same, talked the
same, and came from the same cities and towns" - seems to be a little dismissive of a team that included such
outsized personalities as Babe Ruth and Lou Gehrig.

Also, saying "Today's Yankees play with the strength of a global team" could provoke an unintended laugh
because they are playing so poorly this year, so far. Maybe safer to broaden it to all of baseball - like "Major
League Baseball is comprised of truly global teams."

And the "I don't care whether you bring us home a World Series" seems like stretching too far for a sports
metaphor, but in a way that doesn't really make sense in context. maybe better as "I have every confidence that
you will. ..You are starting your post-graduate life on a field of dreams, and you have every reason to believe
that your own dreams of a better world can come true." (or something akin to that).

2. I think the speech could benefit from one clear "soundbite" that more succinctly captures the essence of her
remarks. More of a clarion call to service, something like:

"...And I hope some of you will join our ranks. But the State Department cannot go up against the great
challenges of our time alone. And so my message to you today is this: be the special envoys of your ideals,
using the vast communications tools at your disposal to help advance the interests of this nation and every
nation. Be citizen ambassadors in the course of your personal and professional lives, helping to forge
partnerships built on mutual interest in the face of global crises. By creating diplomatic social networks, you
                                                     isz
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761738 Date: 06/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761738 Date: 06/30/2015




can extend the powers of our and every government to meet the needs of this generation.. .and help lay the
groundwork for the kind of public-private alliances we need to end hunger, defeat disease, combat global
warming and give every child the chance to live up to her or his God-given potential."

(and maybe go from there into a little riff like "Don't sell yourselves short. Many of you showed your capacity
to bring change by helping bring Barack Obama to the presidency." (And then, after the inevitable applause at
that line, follow with this quip, with a smile: "Where were you when I needed you?")

Finally, just a couple small notes:

-- "half of my senior staff used to work here" - the word "here" given that it's in Yankee Stadium might confuse
a little - better perhaps to say "used to work at NYU."

-- "swine flu" - hasn't the government been trying to avoid using that phrase? (I like that sentence overall)

-- nice examples with Colombia and Kilimanjaro - though just wondering, since I'm ignorant of the facts, is it
too much to say that the Facebook project really did more than years of military action?

-- if you happen to like the Obama reference above, then it would supplant the "social networking platforms"
line in the speech - but if you don't like my suggestion, I would still suggest changing the "I am told" as that
sounds a little gratuitous - better to be a little more self-deprecating, like "And there was also a recent
presidential election in which social networks brought legions of young people into the electoral process. ..a few
more into certain campaigns than others, I'm afraid to say..." or something like that.

-- also, if you don't use the suggested Obama reference, I do think his name should be used somewhere in the
speech.

-- "suited up" doesn't sound like HRC to my ear.

love the examples of things people can do online to make a difference, also like and agree with idea of being
short and punchy.

thanks again for the chance to suggest a couple thoughts...




                                                         1"

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761738 Date: 06/30/2015
