     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758579 Date: 06/30/2015


                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                              B6



From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Sunday, May 24, 2009 9:25 PM
To:                                'sullivanjj@state.gov'; 'shapiroa@state.gov'; 'preines
Subject:                           Fw: Edinburgh Film Festival israeli Boycott
Attachments:                       image001jpg

Importance:                        High



Pls read Brian's message and all the email traffic below. What can we do about this? Let me know if you have ideas. Thx.

    Original Message
From: Brian Greenspun
To: H2
Sent: Sun May 24 17:21:40 2009
Subject: Fw: Edinburgh Film Festival israeli Boycott

Hi hillary,
Please call me about this if you have a moment. The message is self-explanatory, apparently there is no american voice
in place to speak out or lead on this issue so --there is no voice. I believe you know Bruce Ramer who is my brother-in-_
law, former president of american jewish committee and well-respected entertainment lawyer in la. And, he is right.
Look forward to seeing you next week in washington. Best, brian


Sent from my BlackBerry Wireless Handheld




From: Bruce M. Ramer
To: Brian Greenspun
Sent: Sun May 24 14:08:16 2009
Subject: FW: Edinburgh Film Festival israeli Boycott



Brian, First, thanks for a nice family morning and for breakfast. Always fun, always interesting and always fulfilling.

Below is a sample of the kind of emails I sent to various people (studio heads; Dan Glickman; etc), which have started to
generate concern, interest and action. AJC is also active on other fronts, as well.

Just below the email you will find the news item which first called this abomination to my attention.

I hope you can enlist Hilary's support (and please give her my personal best). We need, for many reasons, to have the
US protest and condemn this outrageous boycott and to oppose the anti-Semitism inherent in it; cf Durban. The
organizers of the festival must be convinced to reverse themselves. This, because of the inherent wrongness of it and
that if it succeeds, it will encourage and motivate those who fomented the boycott to other, probably even worse,
action. For example, there is in effect or pending (I am not certain which) a UK-Israeli treaty on film production; we
should cut off at the pass any attempts to derail it.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758579 Date: 06/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758579 Date: 06/30/2015




Our Embassy in London does not yet have our Ambassador. The charge d'affaires is Robert Lebaron who I hope will
receive appropriate instructions from DOS. If he acts quickly, it is likely that other nations will follow suit; again,
compare Durban.

This is truly appalling and serious and I earnestly solicit your assistance with the Secretary, and through you my earnest
solicitation of her assistance.

With appreciation and love, Bruce

PS Naturally, you are free to share this email.




Dear Michael, This is disgusting and outrageous.

If you have any films in the festival or can lean on anyone else who does, please get them withdrawn. We would not
boycott the films of any other nation, even those we consider outlaws. Neither should they. And they should learn that
boycotts beget boycotts.

Thanks for whatever help you can be.

Warmest regards. Bruce




May 20, 2009



Edinburgh film festival bows to pressure from Ken Loach over Israeli boycott




Mike Wade

A row threatened to engulf the Edinburgh International Film Festival yesterday after it bowed to pressure from the
director Ken Loach and returned a £300 grant it had received from the Israeli Embassy.

'Sir Jeremy Isaacs, the former chief executive of Channel Four, accused the festival's organisers of making "an appalling
 decision" and called on them to rescind it. Describing Loach's intervention as an act of censorship, he said: "They must
 not allow someone who has no real position, no rock to stand on, to interfere with their programming."

The grant was intended to enable Tali Shalom Ezer, a graduate of Tel Aviv University, to travel to Scotland for a
screening of her film, Surrogate.

After days of protest against the award from pro-Palestinian organisations, Loach, an outspoken opponent of Israel's
policies in Lebanon and Gaza, urged filmgoers on Monday to boycott Edinburgh.

"The massacres and state terrorism in Gaza make this money unacceptable," he said. "With regret, I must urge all who
might consider visiting the festival to show their support for the Palestinian nation and stay away."


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758579 Date: 06/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758579 Date: 06/30/2015




The intervention brought an immediate capitulation from the organisers. In a statement the festival said it accepted that
Loach spoke "on behalf of the film community, therefore we will be returning the funding issued by the Israeli Embassy".

Sir Jeremy said that he was disgusted both by Loach's actions and by the capitulation of the festival organisers. "Ken
Loach has always been critical of censorship of his own work, albeit it was many years in the past. The idea that he
should lend himself to the denial of a film-maker's right to show her work is absolutely appalling," he said. He was
"equally horrified" that festival organisers should accept that Loach was speaking on behalf of all British film-makers.

Sir Jeremy worked closely with Loach in the 1980s when, as chief executive of Channel Four, he commissioned a number
of controversial documentaries from him. One, A Question of Leadership, was made in 1981 but never broadcast,
leading to accusations of political censorship from Loach. The irony of the director's present position was all the more
obvious, given the spirit of the Edinburgh festival, Sir Jeremy said.

"It must be good for cinemagoers at an international film festival to see films by Jews, Arabs, Israelis and Palestinians, to
the benefit of all," he said.

"I have admired the Edinburgh International Film Festival for many years and would like to think that this appalling
decision will be rescinded."

Loach's acclaimed new film Looking for Eric has made him the toast of the Cannes Film Festival. It is, uncharacteristically,
a comedy, although its lead character is an authentic Loach creation — a Mancunian postman who goes off in search of
his idol, the footballer Eric Cantona.

Ezer's film makes no reference to war or politics. It is a romance set in a sex-therapy clinic. It won the audience award at
an international women's film festival in Israel recently.

Lord Janner of Braunstone, a Labour peer and former chairman of the Board of Deputies of British Jews, said that he was
disappointed by the festival's decision. "By banning the Israeli Embassy from supporting a film-maker the festival is
helping to exclude Israelis from British cultural life, something that is clearly unfair."

Last night a spokesman for the EIFF said that although it had returned £300 to the Israeli Embassy, the festival itself
would fund Ms Shalom-Ezer's travel to Edinburgh out of its own budget




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758579 Date: 06/30/2015
