UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761972 Date: 06/30/2015


                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                   1.4(B),B1,1.4(D)




 Trip Report; Shanghai, Beijing, Seoul, Rome
 Anne-Marie Slaughter

 Shanghai: I was driven around the expo site and saw how far advanced the Chinese pavilion is, also
 the Canadian and Brazilian pavilions that are facing and adjacent to us, and many spectacular
 European pavilions. In addition to the overwhelming size and grandeur of the expo site as a whole -
 it will be like the New York World's Fair on steroids - what struck me is that we must also hold up
 our end with the many visitors who will be coming from the Americas. The video of the history of
 world expositions that plays in the Shanghai exposition building and will help open the expo itself is
 a visual of rising American power - repeated expos in the 19th and 20th centuries in New York,
 Chicago, St. Louis, San Francisco and other American cities. Expos are the soft power Olympics and
 hence a key part of smart power; we should be willing to ask Congress for money and consider it
 extremely well spent in terms of building American power in the world - and cheap at the price.

 I also had several meals and meetings with members of what I am coming to think of as "the
 American cliaspora" - talented and entrepreneurial Chinese-Americans and Chinese raised/educated
 in America who have come back to China to live on the economic frontier - and who are spreading
 American values with them. They gave a very optimistic picture of the Chinese economy.

 Reiiincr T had dinner with "new merlin firniren"                                                          1.4(D)
                                                                                                           B1

                                                                      In my official meetings on the
 S&ED we made real progress, getting the Chinese to agree to a dosed meeting just with the four
 principals and getting them to agree to consider a model of a joint statement that we will now
 provide; I made very clear that a joint statement was critical to getting results. Later in the day we
 had a breakthrough with the Deputy Minister of Commerce, who agreed to working level meetings
 and concrete "bottom-up" joint projects on development assistance. His staff agreed to meet w/ the
 AID person at our embassy for the first time - as the embassy said, clearly the Chinese have decided
 to move forward w/ us on multiple fronts.

 The most striking thing to emerge from many conversations with officials and academics in
 Shanghai and Beijing was how often the G-2 was raised - always in the context of "we don't believe
 in the G-2, but ..." One official said "we can just take away the 'G' and leave the `2.' I was at pains
 to emphasize that the U.S. has no interest in a G-2,


 Seoul: a conversation with faculty and the dean of the school of international studies at Ewa
 University revealed a perception that "China does not object to a nuclear-armed DPRK because that
 would prevent reunification permanently, as Japan and China itself would never agree to a nuclear
 reunited Korea." Talks with my Japanese and Korean                   I yielded agreement                  1.4(B)
                                                                                             The           1.4(D)
 Japanese raised and the Koreans welcomed the prospect of China-U.S.-Korea talks to match the              B1
 new China-U.S.-Japan talks. Both the Koreans and the Japanese raised the idea of an "Asian G-8" -
 U.S., China, Japan, Russia, Korea, Australia, India, and one other .." I raised the idea of convening
 the Asian members of the G-20 plus us, which would include all those countries plus Indonesia.              1.4(B)
                                                                                                             1.4(D)
                                                                                                             B1

                  Classified by DAS, A/GIS, DoS on 06/30/2015 - Class: CONFIDENTIAL - Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D)
                  - Declassify on: 06/06/2034
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761972 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761972 Date: 06/30/2015




                                                                                                          1.4(B) '
                                                                                                          1.4(D)
                                                                                                          B1
 Rome: I met with my G-8 counterparts over dinner and then w/ G-8 policy planners plus
 representatives from South Africa, Mexico, Brazil, and Egypt. The G-8 discussion yielded strong
 agreement that rriponsibiliy for outcomes should be a key determinant of who gets to sit at the table,
 although the Germans and Italians want to expand the core "convening" group to at least the G-8
 plus the Heiligendarrim 5. Canada, France, Britain and Japan very much liked my tentatively floated
 idea that each G-8 member be able to decide as host which other countries to invite as full
 members, depending on the problem chosen as the focus of the agenda. Strikingly,             did not       1.4(D)
 even bother to send a Rome-based representative to the talks the next day, underlining my point that       B1
 some of these countries really are not ready for regular responsibility for global issues. The
          representative, a truly impressive director general in their DFA, said              was not
 pushing for a G-13, as it felt uncomfortable being anointed when so many African countries were
 not represented. In the substantive discussion of Af-Pak and central Asia, the              ambassador
 to Rome emphasized that the Rio Group was taking a political position on Af-Pak as a sign of
 increasing hemispheric engagement with the outside world.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761972 Date: 06/30/2015
