        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761571 Date: 06/30/2015

                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                       B6




From:                              Cheryl Mills
Sent:                              Friday, May 22, 2009 10:41 PM
To:
Subject:                           Obama picks financial backer for UK ambassador post



FYI

      Original Message

To see this story with its related links on the guardian.co.uk site, go to
http://wwvti.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/may/20/obama-uk-ambassador-louis-susman

Obama picks financial backer for UK ambassador post Chicago friend Louis Susman chosen for plum posting despite
president's promise to end cronyism in Washington Ewen MacAskill in Washington Wednesday May 20 2009
guardian.co.uk



A little bit of Chicago's ruthless and combative political machine is soon to descend on the decorous calm of the Court of
St James. Despite promising to end cronyism in Washington, Barack Obama is about to appoint one of his home town
friends and financial backers to the plum posting of US ambassador to London.

The next ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary will be Louis Susman, a lawyer and financier with little
experience of foreign affairs.

The appointment will end months of speculation. Susman's name first surfaced in a diary column in the Washington Post
in February, but Caroline Kennedy was also mentioned, as was Oprah Winfrey, another of Obama's Chicago supporters.

There was no official confirmation of Susman's nomination today, but the Guardian has learned that the paperwork has
been completed. Buckingham Palace approved the appointment this month and Obama will announce it shortly.

London has become a retirement posting for many backers of US presidents, offering a comfortable home in one of the
best mansions in the city, Winfield House in Regent's Park.

Recent ambassadors have been political appointees more interested in country walks than Iraq or nuclear non-
proliferation. Most of the work is left to the number twos at the embassy, career diplomats.

Susman, 71, a vice-president of Citigroup until he retired in February, has long been a backer of the Democrats,
nicknamed the Vacuum Cleaner by the Chicago Tribune for his ability to hoover up campaign funding. "I don't think
anyone enjoys raising money, but for some reason I seem to have a knack," he told the paper. Susman, who lives in an
expensive neighbourhood of Chicago overlooking Lake Michigan, raised at least $500,000 (?320,000) for Obama's
campaign and a further $300,000 for his inauguration.

He is so much a part of Obama's inner circle that he was invited to an exclusive party on the Sunday before the
inauguration. Other guests included Rahm Emanuel, Obama's chief of staff, who typifies the sharp-suited, foul-mouthed
approach of those brought up on Chicago politics.

London is not the only posting being used to reward political supporters.
Other positions in Europe are expected to be filled on the basis of patronage. Dan Rooney, owner of the Pittsburgh
Steelers football team, who campaigned for Obama, is to be the ambassador to Dublin.

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761571 Date: 06/30/2015
          UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761571 Date: 06/30/2015




    The appointments will disappoint former US career diplomats who have been pressing Obama to end the practice,
    especially since he promised to offer more of the top jobs to diplomats. In the Washington Post in December, a retired
    diplomat with 30 years' service, Morton Abramowitz, called on Obama to "declare that he will not appoint ambassadors
    who have secured their posts through financial contributions and who have little background to merit any such
    appointment".

    Ronald Neumann, a former career diplomat and ambassador and president of the Washington-based American
    Academy of Diplomacy, wrote to Obama last year, saying ambassadors should have had experience of the country they
    are being appointed to. Neumann said today: "You would think with our most important ally we might occasionally send
    someone with some experience."

•   Historically, about 25% to 30% of the diplomatic posts have been political appointees. It is too early to say, but Obama's
    ratio could yet be lower.

    The president's choice of Susman could be viewed as a snub to the UK. The relationship between the Obama
    administration and the UK government got off to a bad start. At least one member of the administration was irritated
    over the leaking during the campaign of a memo from the British ambassador, Sir Nigel Sheinwald, assessing Obama as
    "aloof". But the minor rows over the memo, the removal of the Churchill bust from the Oval office, the DVD present to
    Gordon Brown and other perceived slights have been presentational problems rather than a sign of ruptured relations.

    Obama's predecessor, George W Bush, sent two of his financier backers to the
    UK: William Farish, a Texas multimillionaire, and Robert Tuttle, a California car dealer. The lack of an experienced
    diplomat in London was felt most in the runup to the war in Iraq in 2003, with Farish invisible when a figure was needed
    to put the US case on camera and in print.

    Copyright Guardian Newspapers Limited 2009

    If you have any questions about this email, please contact the guardian.co.uk user help desk: userhelp@guardian.co.uk.



    Please consider the environment before printing this email.

    Visit guardian.co.uk - the UK's most popular newspaper website http://guardian.co.uk http://observer.co.uk

    To save up to 33% when you subscribe to the Guardian and the Observer visit http://www.guardian.co.uk/subscriber



    This e-mail and all attachments are confidential and may also be privileged. If you are not the named recipient, please
    notify the sender and delete the e-mail and all attachments immediately.
    Do not disclose the contents to another person. You may not use the information for any purpose, or store, or copy, it in
    any way.

    Guardian News & Media Limited is not liable for any computer viruses or other material transmitted with or as part of
    this e-mail. You should employ virus checking software.

    Guardian News & Media Limited
    A member of Guardian Media Group PLC
    Registered Office
    Number 1 Scott Place, Manchester M3 3GG
    Registered in England Number 908396




          UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761571 Date: 06/30/2015
