      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761498 Date: 06/30/2015



                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Tuesday, June 02, 2009 12:03 PM
To:
Subject:                           RE: Huff Post Renegade Excerpt



Author of Renegade is Richard Wolfe (wrote for Newsweek)

    Original Message
From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Tuesday, June 02, 2009 11:21 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Re: Huff Post Renegade Excerpt

Who wrote this?

    Original Message
From: Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
To: Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent: Tue Jun 02 10:42:25 2009
Subject: FW: Huff Post Renegade Excerpt




From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Tuesday, June 02, 2009 10:41 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Huff Post Renegade Excerpt




Of all his transition choices, none was easier to make, or more complex to execute, than Hillary Clinton as secretary of
state. Obama had long wanted his former rival on his team, no matter what his friends and aides said about her
aggressive campaign... His staff opposed the idea for the most part, arguing that Clinton would never be truly loyal. But
Obama was willing to leave the primaries behind, including his own strong feelings at the time. "I don't hold grudges,"
he told his aides. "I don't worry about the past. I'm concerned about what happens now. If she can help me and Bill
Clinton isn't too much of a liability, we should seriously look at this." ...


 Obama was under no illusion about the legacy of the long primary season. During one transition meeting, Obama said he
 wanted to offer Clinton the diplomatic job. "I'm really interested in pursuing this, but I know she has some hard feelings
 coming out of this campaign." Emanuel and John Podesta, the former Clinton official who ran the transition, assured
 Obama that she was over those hard feelings now. Obama smiled and said, "Believe me. She's not over it yet."

 His decision to offer her the job of secretary of state came surprisingly early. Well before the end of the primaries, when
 his staff and friends still felt hostile to her, Obama decided that Clinton possessed the qualities to carry his diplomacy to
 the rest of the world. "We actually thought during the primary, when we were pretty sure we were going to win, that
 she could end up being a very effective secretary of state," he told me later. "I felt that she was disciplined, that she was

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-1014-20439 Doc No. C05761498 Date: 06/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761498 Date: 06/30/2015




precise, that she was smart as a whip, and that she would present a really strong image to the world...I had that mapped
out."

Recruiting and managing a team of rivals would not be easy, and Clinton came with her own set of issues. Chief among
them was her campaign debt, which she wanted eliminated before she took the job of secretary of state. Would the
president-elect go out and help her to do so? "I'm not begging her to take this job," Obama told his senior aides. "If she
wants it, I could help. But I'm not willing to go out in these difficult economic times to do a flashy fundraiser in
California." As it happened, plenty of people in the Senate were begging Obama to offer Clinton the job. Obama's aides
believed that many Senate Democrats thought Clinton had extended her presidential campaign far beyond the point
where she had lost the election. Her negative advertising wasted Democratic money, threatened to undermine the
party's nominee, and suggested that she was disloyal to the party. They were unwilling to offer the junior New York
senator a position ahead of her lowly rank, and she stood little chance of becoming majority leader. "There was a lot of
encouragement from inside the Senate to get her into this job," said one senior Obama aide. "They wanted her out of
there." ...

As for controlling the uncontrollable Bill Clinton, Obama's aides drew up a series of checks on his fundraising for both
Clinton Global Initiative and his work on HIV/AIDS across the world. But they really counted on Hillary to be the ultimate
safeguard - against both her husband and her own ambition. "It's in her interests to keep him in line," warned one senior
Obama aide. Others in Obama's inner circle said the president-elect believed Clinton needed to demonstrate that she
was a team player and to shape her own career and legacy. "There are plenty who don't trust her and think she still
harbors something," said another senior adviser. "It's still potentially problematic down the road. Barack's thinking on
this is that it's not in her interests to mess with us. She can't win thaffight internally and she's smart enough that she
won't want that fight publicly."

Several weeks into the administration, even Clinton's internal critics believed the relationship was a success. "They have
both worked really hard at it," said one senior White House official. "There's a natural affinity and respect that ironically
grew out of being opponents. You get to know someone really well after all that."




Nora Toiv

Office of the Secretary

202-647-8633




                                                     118
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761498 Date: 06/30/2015
