      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761810 Date: 06/30/2015



                                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL

NNW


From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Sent:                             Friday, June 05, 2009 4:52 PM
To:                               H; Doug Band
Cc:                               Justin Cooper
Subject:                          FW: Many Haitians See Bill Clinton Appointment as Setting Up Protectorate



For HRC/WJC


From: Curtis, Meghann A
Sent: Friday, June 05, 2009 4:00 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Toiv, Nora F
Subject: FW: Many Haitians See Bill Clinton Appointment as Setting Up Protectorate

FYI — I think Port-au-Prince Le Matin is a summary of Haitian radio programming.

Many Haitians See Bill Clinton Appointment as Setting Up Protectorate
Port-au-Prince Le Matin
June 5, 2009

UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon's recent appointment of former US President Clinton to serve as special envoy to
Haiti has been perceived by many groups, including lawmakers, political analysts, political leaders, and media
commentators, as a step toward putting Haiti in a protectorate or trusteeship status. They questioned in particular the
extent of Clinton's powers and the term of his mandate, wondering what role will be attributed to Haiti's elected
representatives. Several pointed out that Heidi Annabi, Ban's special representative in Haiti, and President Rene Preval
would be subservient to Clinton, their senior in rank and described by some media as Haiti's new chief. As expected,
Haitian Government officials and most foreign diplomats hailed this nomination and expressed their optimism about it.

Several political leaders objected to Clinton's being named special envoy to Haiti, saying that it showed the international
community wanted to bring Haiti under its control.

o Former Senate President Belizaire, president of the National Council of the Haitian Political Parties, pointed out that
Haiti has had a foreign force in the country, the UN Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), since 2004 and now has
an envoy such as President Clinton who is in a "higher position than any other UN personnel." These both indicate the
country is being considered a "genuine protectorate," according to Belizaire (Signal FM, 27 May).

o Socialist Identity and Liberty Collective spokesman Cherubin referred to Clinton's mission as an umpteenth "civil
commission," alluding to the administrative steps France took to restore order and peace when Haiti was under French
rule, intended to speed up the process of "taking charge" of Haiti. Cherubin added that in the current international
jargon this is called "colonialism of a third type, or colonialism of necessity"
(www.alterpresse.org, 22 May).

o According to Christian Movement for a New Haiti leader Mesadieux, Ban's decision will further help put Haiti under
foreign supervision. He asserted that the international community wants to reinforce its control over Haiti's
administration (Radio Vision 2000, 21 May).

o Dr. Eugene of the Haitian Social Christian Party, speaking on the "Pickup Talk Show" live from the United States, said
that "Clinton's responsibility is to control events in Haiti and he will control them in a firm manner" (Radio Caraibes FM,
23 May). Eugene was "offended" by this appointment and called it "a shame for all Haitians" and "a slap in the face of
the entire nation" (Radio Galaxie, 29 May).
                                                      24
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761810 Date: 06/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761810 Date: 06/30/2015




Lawmakers and political analysts, who questioned how far Clinton's powers would extend and described him as a
colonial administrator, also concluded that Haiti was under trusteeship or protectorate status.

o Senate President Bastien, who said the UN usually sends special emissaries only to "places where there are crises and
conflicts," wondered why former President Clinton had been named special envoy to Haiti. He particularly questioned
the extent of Clinton's mandate, asking "where do his powers end?" and concluded that the ongoing rumors of Haiti
being put under trusteeship will be confirmed if clarifications are not offered (Radio Vision 2000, 26 May).

o Professor Lalanne, a former ambassador under the Duvalier regime, described Clinton as "the new administrator of
the colony called Haiti." Lalanne said this nomination shows that the international community is not happy with Annabi's
work. He added that he had "no other interpretation [of the appointment other than it Is]... a reinforcement of the
occupation" (Radio Kiskeya, 25 May).

o Reacting to the appointment, political analyst Gracien Jean referred to Article 76 of the UN fundamental charter and
said that although Haiti is not a classic protectorate with an administrator, the very fact that it cannot administer itself
and has foreign forces in charge of ensuring its security, is an indication that the country is "under trusteeship or
protectorate status because in principle there is partial restriction of its sovereignty" (Radio Vision 2000, 26 May).

Media commentators highlighted the powers conferred to President Clinton as minimizing the role of Haitian or UN
officials.

o The oldest and most famous Haitian newspaper, Le Nouvelliste, questioned in an editorial what mandate former
President Clinton would have in his new role. The paper noted that even though Clinton was presented as "an
international lawyer for Haiti," the country's moderate national ists consider him the new "governor general," recalling
the title given by France to colonial Haiti's highest authority. The paper further asked what role Haiti's elected
representatives would have if President Clinton has responsibility for "a complete political program." Moreover, the
editorial questioned how long the program would last (20 May).

o In an article entitled "Haiti Under High Surveillance," journalist Nancy Roc, host of Radio Metropole's famous weekly
talk show "Metropolis," reported: "This nomination establishes the eviction of the Latin Americans and represents the
response of the Obama Administration to the powerlessness and irresponsibility of the Haitian rulers.... Through this
nomination, Haiti has a new chief.... Annabi and Preval are relegated to a position of secondary importance and will have
to execute to the letter any instructions from [Clinton] their senior in rank (Le Matin, 25 May).

Predictably, government officials and foreign diplomats hailed Clinton's mission and emphasized its beneficial
socioeconomic influence.

o Le Nouvelliste reported on 19 May that "President Preval received this nomination favorably," saying that it is "a vital
push" for assuring Haiti's needs remain "a priority for the international community." Responding to a journalist who
asked him about Haiti being put under protectorate status, Preval replied that he knew Haiti, as a UN member, was like
many countries with problems who have accepted UN help (Radio Vision 2000, 26 May).

o Prime Minister Pierre-Louis saw in the naming of President Clinton a positive sign all the more so since he is "a long
time friend of Haiti." She said it was in the interest of the country to take advantage of all international opportunities
(Radio Caraibes FM, 21 May).

o MINUSTAH spoke of its limits to help social and economic problems, and stressed the appropriateness and the
importance of President Clinton's mission after the hurricanes that hit Haiti last year (Le Nouvelliste, 20 May).




                                                              25
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761810 Date: 06/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761810 Date: 06/30/2015




o The Chilean Chancery said in a communique issued on 26 May that it received this nomination with "total
approbation" and expected it to help put Haiti's economic and social development and reconstruction on the
international agenda (www.radiokiskeya.com, 26 May).

On another note, however, OAS representatiave in Haiti, Ricardo Seitenfus reacted defensively to rumors about
President Clinton's appointment, telling Signal FM that "Haiti will never fall under the protectorate of another country"
even if it is a "disguised protectorate." He further said that the "OAS will constantly watch to make sure that does not
happen" (26 May).




                                                     26
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761810 Date: 06/30/2015
