       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762902 Date: 06/30/2015
                                                                                RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                B6




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Sunday, June 28, 2009 9:19 AM
To:                                williamsbarre0
Subject:                           Fw: Ye of little FAITH: Hello from INTERPOL


Fyi



From: NOBLE Ronald
To: 'Cheryl Mills'
Cc: Cheryl Millsl                           ; Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Sun Jun 28 09:03:34 2009
Subject: Ye of little FAITH: Hello from INTERPOL

Cheryl,

Can you believe that I doubted you ????????? I am so, so embarrassed! It is June 28th and I am now just reading your
message of March 22d in response to my message of March 22d!!!

For three months I have been thinking that I must have done something unknowingly and stupidly to have offended you. I
have been struggling to remember what I might have done except to praise you too much!

I just feel so, so good, but also ashamed for having doubted you! I might be pathetic, but at least I am honest and
transparent!

(By the way, please extend SoS my best wishes for a speedy recovery.)

Warmest regards,

Ron


From: Cheryl Mills [mailto.
Sent: Sunday, March 22, 2009 11:56 PM
To: NOBLE Ronald
Cc: Cheryl Mills1; millscd@state.gov
Subject: Re: Hello from INTERPOL


Hey dear - so great to hear from you.

She travels on wed - let me see if we can do tues and if not then in april.

Cdm

    Original Message
From: NOBLE Ronald
To: Cheryl Mills
Sent: Sun Mar 22 18:50:59 2009
Subject: Hello from INTERPOL

Cheryl,

Wow, it has been 10 or so years since the "trial" before the U.S. Congress where I last saw you. Of course, I have followed your
career ever since through John who as you know still calls you one of "his" stars.

                                                                     04
          UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762902 Date: 06/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762902 Date: 06/30/2015




I am sorry to bother you on a weekend, but our mutual friend was kind enough to give me your email address and to suggest that I
send you a copy of the letter concerning INTERPOL that I have drafted for the SOS. Although I have finalized the draft, I can't put it
on INTERPOL letterhead until tomorrow.

The purpose of the letter is to seek a meeting with the SOS at a time and place of her choosing. I will be in Washington this Tuesday
and Wednesday which I know would be too soon to schedule a meeting. But, I can return on April 8th or thereafter if you believe that
a meeting would be possible.

In closing, you know me; so if my request has not been expressed in just the right way, please forgive me.

Let me know what you would like me to do next after reading my letter for the SOS which follows.

Best regards,

Ron

"Madame Secretary,

Under the Obama Presidency and your leadership at the U.S. State Department, the U.S. Government has shifted its strategic focus
from a predominantly military-led approach to one using "smart power" based on diplomacy, defense and development. The direction
you've chosen and the commitments you have made - to international organizations that advance collective security, to embracing and
implementing global solutions to security - are a vast improvement over prior policy and constitute the best approach to safeguarding
the United States and countries around the world against terrorism.

During my eight years as INTERPOL's Secretary General and based on having visited 123 countries to learn firsthand what their
security concerns were and how to best address them, my INTERPOL team and I have identified a number of serious global security
gaps which put Americans and citizens all over the world at risk to acts of terrorism and other serious crimes but which could be easily
closed. Surprisingly, and until now, no government has made INTERPOL and the role of international law enforcement in protecting
its citizens from acts of terrorism a real priority. Consequently, significant gaps in global security remain which require the immediate
attention of Heads of State or Ministers of State, Justice and Interior and the private sector.

These dangerous but resolvable problems include

1.The 850 million international arrivals that pass through the world's airports each year without being checked against the only global
database of over 10 million stolen and lost passports developed and managed by INTERPOL.

2. The culture which discourages countries from issuing international alerts when terrorists escape from prison.

3. The gap in policing where terrorists are arrested without their fingerprints and DNA profiles being compared against global
databases.

4. The failure of far too many countries to notify INTERPOL when their citizens' passports have been reported lost or stolen, which
significantly undermines any screening of passports used to enter the U.S. or other counties.

5. The lack of global anti-crime and anti-corruption centers, which leaves us under-protected against the scourge of human
trafficking, slavery, and other serious transnational crimes.

6. The absence of robust facilities world-wide where police can work, train and exchange information under the umbrella of
INTERPOL.

7. The threat to the rule of law that requires well-trained police at the national and international levels especially in post-conflict
areas like Afghanistan.

INTERPOL has launched its Global Security Initiative in order to enhance support for developing effective and growing programs in
each of these seven areas. Our capacity to address these threats can grow not only with greater resources but also with a larger
personal commitment to the kinds of policies that reflect the direction that you and President Obama have chosen in the name of
national security.

INTERPOL is a global international police organization with 187 member countries. Our Constitution prevents us from getting
involved in matters of a political, religious, military or racial nature. We have one goal and one goal only: to help law enforcement
worldwide keep their citizens and visitors to their country safe from terrorism and other forms of serious international crime.
                                                     89
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762902 Date: 06/30/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762902 Date: 06/30/2015




Our successes over the last several years have been nothing short of extraordinary. More terrorists and dangerous international
criminals have been identified, located and arrested than ever before. The security of more borders has been enhanced. More police
information has been exchanged globally. More international pedophiles have been caught. More transnational crime groups have
been exposed.

Against the backdrop of this success, it remains the case that neither Heads of State nor Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Justice and
Interior have made the kind of investment in INTERPOL worldwide that can help to keep their citizens safe at home and
abroad. They should and you can be a leader among them.

It is my strong belief that in your capacity as U.S. Secretary of State, you can show the world that by making INTERPOL an integral
part of the U.S.'s new "smart power" strategy, all of the world's citizens will be safer than they otherwise would be. I would welcome
any opportunity to travel to Washington or anywhere in the world to meet with you to offer recommendations for solving the problems
outlined above and to discuss the range of resources required to meet these challenges.

Sincerely,


Ronald K. Noble
Secretary General
INTERPOL"

Sent from my BlacicBerry Wireless Handheld



This message, and any attachment contained, are confidential
and subject of legal privilege. It may be used solely for the
designated police/justice purpose and by the individual or
entity to whom it is addressed. The information is not to be
disseminated to another agency or third party without the
author's consent, and must not be retained longer than is
necessary for the fulfilment of the purpose for which the
information is to be used. All practicable steps shall be taken
by the recipients to ensure that information is protected
against unauthorised access or processing. INTERPOL
reserves the right to enquire about the use of the information
provided.

If you are not the intended recipient, be advised that you have
received this message in error. In such a case, you should not
print it, copy it, make any use of it or disclose it, but please
notify us immediately and delete the message from any computer




This message, and any attachment contained, are confidential and subject of legal privilege. It may be used solely for the designated police/justice
purpose and by the individual or entity to Whom it is addressed. The information is not to be disseminated to another agency or third party without the
author's consent, and must not be retained longer than is necessary for the fulfilment of the purpose for which the information is to be used. All
practicable steps shall be taken \m\jby the recipients to ensure that information is protected \mlagainst unauthorised access or processing. INTERPOL
\mIreserves the right to enquire about the use of the information provided.
If you are not the intended recipient, be advised that you have received this message in error. In such a case, you should not \Mprint it, copy it, make
any use of it or disclose it, but please notify us immediately and delete the message from any computer




*******.*******Ifele*************




                                                        90
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762902 Date: 06/30/2015
