UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761499 Date: 06/30/2015




                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL


   Memorandum
   To: Department of State
   From: Long Term Strategy Group
   Re: Consulting agreement

   Issue: The Long Term Strategy Group would undertake by means of a consulting
   agreement to explore major shifts in American strategy for interacting with the major
   powers of Asia. This would involve simulations of alternative interactions among Asian
   powers, and the impact of alternative American strategies on the outcome of those
   interactions. Because these explorations involve speculative contingencies they are most
   appropriately conducted through non-governmental institutions, though they can
   ultimately be used to inform debate within the American government.

   Background: The strategic landscape of Asia has clearly changed substantially over the
   last few decades, and may shift suddenly in ways that are currently under-explored. The
   growth of Chinese power is altering the Asian balance of power; the government of India
   is exploring new defense alignments; and Japanese officials are openly discussing
   subjects that were previously off limits, up to and including a nuclear weapons option for
   Japan. The current economic crisis will very likely lead to higher levels of political
   instability within major Asian countries, including China, which may, in turn lead to
   discontinuities in their external policies, creating a need to explore a range of possible
   new political configurations within the region, and possible new modes of American
   interaction with traditional allies, new friends, and potential rivals. The explicit
   examination of these new configurations and modes of interaction calls for combinations
   of activities (e.g., conduct of simulations of long-range regional interactions, some of
   which entail non-incremental shifts in American foreign policy) and consideration of
   scenarios that are inevitably politically sensitive that are most appropriately conducted
   outside the American government.

   The role of non-government groups working with the American government to explore
   speculative contingencies and potentially controversial departures from current policy is
   well established. The Center for New American Strategy has been exploring strategic
   options in Afghanistan. The Brookings Institution and Center for Strategic and
   International Studies have regularly worked on plans to restructure agencies and
   departments within the American government that are not as well positioned to conduct
   that sort of planning themselves.

   The Long Term Strategy Group has specialized in the analysis of modes of strategic
   decision-making and behavior that differ from those anticipated by the United States. It
   has focused on China, Iran, India, Pakistan, and Japan, and has presented its work to the
   Office of the Director of National Intelligence, National Intelligence Council, NSC staff
   members, and the Office of the Secretary of Defense, and participated in and organized
   multiple simulations for the American government to explore the nature and outcome of
   complex interactions among states that do not behave in ways commonly anticipated by
   the United States. As a private, for-profit organization, it can conduct work that remains
   the exclusive, not-for-publication property of the contracting party (i.e., the government).




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761499 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761499 Date: 06/30/2015




    The initial issues to be explored by LTSG would include:

    --The impact of a potential severe and prolonged economic contraction on the foreign
    policies of China, Japan, and Russia; the resulting shifts in alliances and relationships of
    conflict within the region; and the alternative strategies for interacting with Asia that
    might be considered by the United States.

    --The impact of a potential end of effective central government in Pakistan that leaves a
    Punjab state co-existing with a Baluch/Sindh state and an Afghanistan that expands to
    control the border regions now part of Pakistan.

    --The impact of the acquisition of nuclear weapons by Iran on intra-Asian relations.

    In each case, the deliverables would constitute one monograph, the conduct of one
    simulation exercise involving non-government participants (and government
    observers/participants if desired), and one workshop report.

    Action: To approve the general plan of work set forth above, and to initiate
    administrative measures to complete the work within 15 months of initial approval.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761499 Date: 06/30/2015
