UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




                                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL




                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                              June 14, 2009


 For: Hillary
 From: Sid
 Re: Latest articles on Iranian election fraud and CIA/torture


     1. I've copied below texts of three articles you might not have seen. The first, by Juan Cole,
        leading expert from University of Michigan on Iraq/Iran, lays out evidence so far on the
        stolen election. Second, I've included the key graphs from Bill Keller's piece today in the
        Times on same. And, third, Jane Mayer's article in the new issue of The New Yorker, out
        tomorrow. (She sent me a digital copy.) The piece includes an interview with Panetta,
        who himself discloses the internal administration debate—he was initially for a
        commission but was overruled by Rabin and Axelrod.
     2. On the Iranian election, the international press will obviously pursue the story of the
        rigging of the vote, which will damage the legitimacy of regime. It's clear from reports
        that even the Iranian man-on-the-street is affected by global public opinion and receives
        international news through a wide variety of media. Ahmadinejad post-election continues
        to ratchet up paranoia to consolidate support. After his statement and post-Bibi today,
        there may be a remark to be made to address and defuse paranoia. If anything, whatever
        the facts about the integrity of democracy in Iran, there is more reason than ever for all
        sides to dispense with the politics of paranoia and discover that there are overriding
        shared interests for peace, etc. But when to say anything depends upon how long to let
        internal bitterness over the aftermath in Iran to simmer and the pressure from press for a
        statement from you.
     3. Jane Mayer's piece details the many moving and uncontrolled parts of the torture debate,
        which has become chronic and will flare up again and again. The "distraction" will not go
        away. I would avoid ever being drawn into commenting on any aspect.
     4. One additional thought: The Iranian election points to the truism that things can
        potentially go awry. Building up "the brand" of the president as the solvent for entangled
        and often intractable diplomatic crises creates the basis for an opposite reaction. Raised
        expectations can foster even greater disillusionment. After Lebanon's election, the US
        press built up the magic of the brand as the new dynamic factor causing change. So
        there's a fine line here to be walked. I would attribute positive changes or movements to
        those people making them themselves, to the extent US commendation does not injure
        their causes, and underline that a new global community will serve those and their
        nation's interests who participate as active and responsible actors. But to reemphasize:




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




         the danger of attributing any and all change in the world to presidential charisma is that
         the bad will get assigned as well as the good.




  http://www.truthoutorg/061409Z


 Stealing the Iranian Election

 Saturday 13 June 2009

 by: Juan Cole I Visit article original @ Informed Comment

    Top Pieces of Evidence that the Iranian Presidential Election Was Stolen

   1.It is claimed that Ahmadinejad won the city of Tabriz with 57%. His main opponent, Mir
 Hossein Mousavi, is an Azeri from Azerbaijan province, of which Tabriz is the capital. Mousavi,
 according to such polls as exist in Iran and widespread anecdotal evidence, did better in cities
 and is popular in Azerbaijan. Certainly, his rallies there were very well attended. So for an Azeri
 urban center to go so heavily for Ahmadinejad just makes no sense. In past elections, Azeris
 voted disproportionately for even minor presidential candidates who hailed from that province.

    2. Ahmadinejad is claimed to have taken Tehran by over 50%. Again, he is not popular in the
 cities, even, as he claims, in the poor neighborhoods, in part because his policies have produced
 high inflation and high unemployment. That he should have won Tehran is so unlikely as to raise
 real questions about these numbers. [Ahmadinejad is widely thought only to have won Tehran in
 2005 because the pro-reform groups were discouraged and stayed home rather than voting.)

    3. It is claimed that cleric Mehdi Karoubi, the other reformist candidate, received 320,000
 votes, and that he did poorly in Iran's western provinces, even losing in Luristan. He is a Lur and
 is popular in the west, including in Kurdistan. Karoubi received 17 percent of the vote in the first
 round of presidential elections in 2005. While it is possible that his support has substantially
 declined since then, it is hard to believe that he would get less than one percent of the vote.
 Moreover, he should have at least done well in the west, which he did not.

    4. Mohsen Rezaie, who polled very badly and seems not to have been at all popular, is alleged
 to have received 670,000 votes, twice as much as Karoubi.

   5. Ahmadinejad's numbers were fairly standard across Iran's provinces. In past elections there
 have been substantial ethnic and provincial variations.

    6. The Electoral Commission is supposed to wait three days before certifying the results of the
 election, at which point they are to inform Khamenei of the results, and he signs off on the




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




 process. The three-day delay is intended to allow charges of irregularities to be adjudicated. In
 this case, Khamenei immediately approved the alleged results.

    I am aware of the difficulties of catching history on the run. Some explanation may emerge for
 Ahmadinejad's upset that does not involve fraud. For instance, it is possible that he has gotten the
 credit for spreading around a lot of oil money in the form of favors to his constituencies, but
 somehow managed to escape the blame for the resultant high inflation.

    But just as a first reaction, this post-election situation looks to me like a crime scene. And here
 is how I would reconstruct the crime.

    As the real numbers started coming into the Interior Ministry late on Friday, it became clear
 that Mousavi was winning. Mousavi's spokesman abroad, filmmaker Mohsen Makhbalbaf.,
 alleges > that the ministry even contacted Mousavi's camp and said it would begin preparing the
 population for this victory. The ministry must have informed Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei,
 who has had a feud with Mousavi for over 30 years, who found this outcome unsupportable.
 And, apparently, he and other top leaders had been so confident of an Ahmadinejad win that they
 had made no contingency plans for what to do if he looked as though he would lose.

   They therefore sent blanket instructions to the Electoral Commission to falsify the vote counts.

   This clumsy cover-up then produced the incredible result of an Ahmadinejad landlside in
 Tabriz and Isfahan and Tehran.

    The reason for which Rezaie and Karoubi had to be assigned such implausibly low totals was
 to make sure Ahmadinejad got over 51% of the vote and thus avoid a run-off between him and
 Mousavi next Friday, which would have given the Mousavi camp a chance to attempt to rally the
 public and forestall further tampering with the election.

   This scenario accounts for all known anomalies and is consistent with what we know of the
 major players.

    More in my column, just out, in Salon.com: More in my column, just out, in Salon.com:
 "Ahmadinejad reelected under cloud of fraud," where I argue that the outcome of the presidential
 elections does not and should not affect Obama's policies toward that country - they are the right
 policies and should be followed through on regardless.

    The public demonstrations against the result don't appear to be that big. In the past decade,
 reformers have always backed down in Iran when challenged by hardliners, in part because no
 one wants to relive the horrible Great Terror of the 1980s after the revolution, when faction-
 fighting produced blood in the streets. Mousavi is still from that generation.

   My own guess is that you have to get a leadership born after the revolution, who does not
 remember it and its sanguinary aftermath, before you get people willing to push back hard
 against the rightwingers.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




     So, there are protests against an allegedly stolen election. The Basij paramilitary thugs and the
  Iranian Revolutionary Guards will break some heads. Unless there has been a sea change in Iran,
  the theocrats may well get away with this soft coup for the moment. But the regime's legitimacy
  will take a critical hit, and its ultimate demise may have been hastened, over the next decade or
  two.

    What I've said is full of speculation and informed guesses. I'd be glad to be proved wrong on
  several of these points. Maybe I will be.

    PS: Here's the data:

     So here is what Interior Minister Sadeq Mahsouli said Saturday about the outcome of the
  Iranian presidential elections:

    "Of 39,165,191 votes counted (85 percent), Mahmoud Ahmadinejad won the election with
  24,527,516 (62.63 percent)."

    He announced that Mir-Hossein Mousavi came in second with 13,216,411 votes (33.75
  percent).

    Mohsen Rezaei got 678,240 votes (1.73 percent)

    Mehdi Karroubi with 333,635 votes (0.85 percent).

    He put the void ballots at 409,389 (1.04 percent).

  http://vvww.nytimes.com/2009/06/14/world/middleeast/14memo.html? r=l&hp
  Memo From Tehran


  Reverberations as Door Slams on Hope of Change
  By Bill Keller

  On the street, the speculation focused more on how the election was manipulated, as many voters
  insisted it must have been for Mr. Ahmadinejad to score such a preposterous margin of victory.
  One version (from somebody's brother who supposedly knew someone inside) had it that vote
  counters simply were ordered to doctor the numbers: "Make that 1,000 for Ahmadinejad a
  3,000."
  Others pointed out that the ballots seemed designed to lead opposition voters astray. Voters were
  obliged to choose a candidate and fill in a code. Though Mr. Moussavi was candidate No. 4, the
  code No. 44 signified Mr. Ahmadinejad.
  One employee of the Interior Ministry, which carried out the vote count, said the government
  had been preparing its fraud for weeks, purging anyone of doubtful loyalty and importing pliable
  staff members from around the country.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




"They didn't rig the vote," claimed the man, who showed his ministry identification card but
pleaded not to be named. "They didn't even look at the vote. They just wrote the name and put
the number in front of it."


50 THE NEW YORKER, JUNE 22,2009
the political scene

the secret h istory
Can Leon Panetta move the CIA. forward without confronting its past?
BY JANEMAYER


T   he Central Intelligence Agency
typically fights distant enemies, but
on May 21st its leaders were preoccupied
with a local opponent. A few miles
from the agency's headquarters, which
are in Langley, Virginia, former Vice-
President Dick Cheney delivered an extraordinary
attack on the Obama Administration's
emerging national-security
policies. Cheney, speaking at the American
Enterprise Institute, accused the
new Administration of making "the
American people less safe" by banning
brutal C.I.A. interrogations of terrorism
suspects that had been sanctioned by the
Bush Administration. Ruling out such
interrogations "is unwise in the extreme,"
Cheney charged. "It is recklessness
cloaked in righteousness."
Leon Panetta, the C.I.A.'s new director- •
and the man who bears much of the
responsibility for keeping the country
safe—learned the details of Cheney's
speech when he arrived in his office, on
the seventh floor of the agency's headquarters.
An hour earlier, he had been
standing at the side of President Barack
Obama, who was giving a speech at the
National Archives, in which he argued
that America could "fight terrorism while
abiding by the rule of law." In January,
the Obama Administration banned the
"enhanced" techniques that the Bush
Administration had approved for the
agency, including waterboarding and
depriving prisoners of sleep for up to
 eleven days. Panetta, pouring a cup of
coffee, responded to Cheney's speech
with surprising candor. "I think he smells
some blood in the water on the nationalsecurity




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




 issue," he told me. "It's almost, a
 little bit, gallows politics. When you read
•behind it, it's almost as if he's wishing
 that this country would be attacked again,
 in order to make his point. I think that's
 dangerous politics."
 Panetta was also absorbing criticism
 from the left. The day before, a group of
 progressive human-rights advocates had
 been given an off-the-record briefing
 with Obama, where they discussed his
 plans for handling terrorism suspects;
 some of the advocates were enraged at
 what they saw as a tacit continuation of
 the Bush approach. According to a participant,
 Obama warned the group that
 such comparisons were "not helpful."
 Nevertheless, Kenneth Roth, the executive
 director of Human Rights Watch,
 who also attended the briefing, went on
 to denounce the Administration for considering
 "preventive detention"—incarcerating
 certain terror suspects indefinitely,
 without trial. Obama's position, Roth
 said, "mimics the Bush Administration's
 abusive approach."
 Since January, the C.I.A. has become
 the focus of almost daily struggle, as
 Obama attempts to restore the rule of
 law in America's fight against terrorism
 without sacrificing safety or losing the
 support of conservative Democratic and
 independent voters. So far, he has insisted
 on trying to recalibrate the agency's
 policies without investigating past mistakes
 or holding anyone responsible for
 them. Caught in the middle is Panetta,
 who is seventy years old and has virtually
 no experience in the intelligence field.
 Indeed, his credentials for running the
 world's foremost spy agency are so unlikely
 that when John Podesta, the head
 of Obama's transition team, asked him to
 take the job he responded, "Are you
 sure?" Podesta assured Panetta that his
 outsider status was actually an advantage:
 "He said, 'You don't carry the scars of the
 past eight years. Besides, the President
 wants somebody who will talk straight to
 him on these issues.' "
 Although Panetta served briefly in the
 military, half a century ago, his reputation
 has been built almost entirely on his




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




   mastery of domestic policy. For sixteen
   years, he was a Democratic congressman
   from his home town, Monterey, California.
   In 1989, he became the chairman of
   the House Budget Committee, making
   him a natural choice as President Bill
   Clinton's first budget director. In 1994,
   he became Clinton's chief of staff.
   Panetta, the son of Italian immigrants,
   grew up washing dishes in his parents' restaurant.
   He is disarmingly forthright,
   with an easy laugh; he is also a stern disciplinarian
   and a workaholic. Colleagues
   say that Panetta, who attends Mass regularly,
   can be principled to the point of rigidity.
   It was partly Panetta's rectitude
  that got him the C.I.A. job. During the
   Bush years, he decried the country's loss
  of moral authority; in a blunt essay for
   Washington Monthly last year, he declared
  that Americans had been transformed
  "from champions of human dignity and
  individual rights into a nation of armchair
  torturers." He concluded, "We either believe
  in the dignity of the individual, the
  rule of law, and the prohibition of cruel
  and unusual punishment, or we don't.
  There is no middle ground."
  Panetta's impassioned essay unexpectedly
  became an asset during the
  Obama transition, after John Brennan—
  the initial candidate for C.I.A.
  director—was pressured to withdraw.
  Critics accused Brennan, who had been
  a top agency official during the Bush
  years, of complicity with the torture
  program. (A friend of Brennan's from
  his C.I.A. days complained to me,
  "After a few Cheeto-eating people in
  the basement working in their underwear
  who write blogs voiced objections
  to Brennan, the Obama Administra-
  tion pulled his name at the first sign of
  smoke, and then ruled out a whole class
  of people: anyone who had been at the
  agency during the past ten years couldn't
  pass the blogger test.")
  Panetta had one other strong qualification:
  he was close to Rahm Emanuel,
  the new chief of staff. During the
  Clinton Administration, Emanuel, serving
  as the White House political director,
  was suspected by former First Lady




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




   Hillary Clinton and others of leaking
   steve brodner
   Panetta has no C.I.A. experience, but, an ex-officer says, it's not "a bad thing to have a powerful guy
   with access to the President."
   52 THE NEW YORKER, JUNE 22,2009
    information, and was very nearly fired.
    Emanuel entered what he calls his "wilderness
    period." When Panetta became
    chief of staff, however, he reinstated
    Emanuel as a top aide. "I thought he
    had a lot of street smarts and good political
    sense," Panetta told me.
    In 1994, Panetta discovered, to his
    dismay, that the President had quietly
    turned to Dick Morris, a political consultant
    with a dubious ethical reputation.
    Harold Ickes, a former White
    House aide, recalls Panetta walking the
    halls late one night and saying that he
    needed a shower after attending a meeting
    with Morris. Later, a tabloid newspaper
    reported that Morris had been
    meeting with a prostitute in a nearby
    Washington hotel. In 1997, Panetta left
   the White House, by mutual agreement;
    he and his wife, Sylvia, founded
   the nonpartisan Panetta Institute for
    Public Policy, in Northern California.
   In January, 1998, it was revealed that
   Clinton had conducted an extramarital
   affair with Monica Lewinsky—Panetta's
   former intern. An associate described
   Panetta then as "very disappointed
   in Bill Clinton, because of
   Monica Lewinsky. He saw him as a
   man with no personal discipline."
   Eleven years later, Barack Obama
   called Panetta for advice on who might
   make a good chief of staff. Panetta recommended
   Emanuel, telling him that
   "Rahm knows the Hill, he certainly
   knows the White House, and he's got
   the tough side" necessary for the job. In
   January, Emanuel recommended Panetta
   for the C.I.A. post. Emanuel said
   of Panetta, "Leon has great judgment, a
   great compass.,He's a great manager, and
   he's trusted by both parties." (Panetta
   was a Republican until 1971.) Some former
   C.I.A. officers, such as Tyler Drumheller,
   who retired in 2005 as the head of
   clandestine operations in Europe, welcome
   the choice. "It's not such a bad
   thing to have a powerful guy with access




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




to the President," he told me. Panetta, he
predicted, "will restore the integrity of
the intelligence process. After what we've
been through on Iraq and torture allegations,
that's a big deal."
Michael Waldman, who was President
Clinton's chief speechwriter, and
who now runs the Brennan Center for
Justice, at the New York University
School of Law, describes Panetta as
"one of the more honorable, decent, and
principled people in government," but
considers it "amazing that he was such
an outspoken critic" of the agency.
Given Panetta's reputation for integrity,
and the C.I.A.'s central role in the interrogations
scandal, Waldman wondered,
"can he ride the tiger without
being eaten?" He added, "An agency
like that can turn on a director. That's
the challenge: he's got to both lead it
and reform it."

T   he record of outsiders taking over the
C.I.A. is mixed. John McCone, a
California shipping magnate who ran the
agency in the Kennedy and Johnson years,
is often cited as being among the most
successful directors; having been trained as
a mechanical engineer, he was skilled at
assessing threats posed by both conventional
and nuclear weapons. But other
outsiders have been met with intense hostility.
James Schlesinger was named C.I.A.
director by President Richard Nixon after
heading the Atomic Energy Commission.
Given instructions to "get rid of the
clowns," Schlesinger dismissed or forced
into retirement more than five hundred
analysts and a thousand clandestine
officers. He faced death threats, and his
tenure lasted six months. In 1995, President
Clinton appointed John Deutch,
who had previously served at the Pentagon.
Deutch tried to improve the oversight
of clandestine operatives after evidence
surfaced that an agent in Guatemala
had covered up two murders. Deutch was
reviled by many operatives, and he left the
agency after eighteen months. Eventually,
he was accused of mishandling classified
documents and stripped of his security
 clearance. "You pick on the C.I.A. at your



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




  own peril," Michael Waldman says.
  Nevertheless, many critics believe
  that the agency must reckon with the
  legacy of the Bush era. In the past few
  years, irrefutable evidence has emerged
  that after 9/11 the agency lost its moral
  bearings. A confidential Red Cross report
  has come into public view, along
  with formerly classified government
  documents, leaving no doubt that the
  agency subjected scores of terror suspects
  to prolonged physical and psychological
  cruelty. Officers shackled prisoners
  for weeks in contorted positions;
  chained them to the ceiling wearing
  only diapers; exploited their phobias;
  propelled them head first into walls. At
  least three prisoners died.
  Torture is a felony, and is sometimes
  treated as a capital crime. The Convention
  Against Torture, which America ratified
  in 1994, requires a government to prosecute
  all acts of torture; failure to do so is
  considered a breach of international law.
  The issue of torture assumed symbolic im-
  "For God's sake, have some populist rage."
  • •
  THE NEW YORKER, JUNE 22, 2009 53
 portance during the 2008 campaign, and
 when Obama took office many of his liberal
 supporters expected him to hold the '
 perpetrators of abuse accountable. Democratic
 leaders in Congress pushed particularly
 hard for action. Senator Carl Levin,
 the chairman of the Armed Services Committee,
 had investigated the military's role
 in detention and interrogation abuse but
 was kept by his committee's limited jurisdiction
 from investigating the C.I.A.; he
 urged the new Attorney General, Eric
 Holder, to open an inquiry, saying, "There
 needs to be an accounting of torture in this
 country." Senator Patrick Leahy, the
 chairman of the Judiciary Committee, argued
 for the creation of an independent
 "truth commission," which could grant
 immunity to witnesses—thus helping to
 insulate the Obama Administration from
 charges that it was exploiting the torture
 issue for partisan gain.
 The C.I.A.'s role in providing misleading
 intelligence about the presence
 of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




  has also provoked calls for reform. Senator
  Dianne Feinstein, the new chairman
  of the Intelligence Committee,
  told me, "There's no vote that I regret
  more than the vote to authorize war
  with Iraq"; her vote was based on intelligence
  that she describes as "flat wrong."
  Feinstein went on, "I am absolutely determined
  to reform the process of gathering
  and analyzing intelligence."
  As soon as Obama took office, he overturned
  most aspects of the Bush Administration's
  interrogation policy. He issued
  an executive order banning inhumane
  treatment of prisoners by any government
  officials, and one closing the C.I.A.'s network
  of secret "black site" prisons, which
  stretched from Poland to Thailand. He
  also vowed to close the military prison in
  Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where fourteen
  former C.I.A. prisoners are being held.
  But Obama's message has been uncharacteristically
  muddled on the question of accountability.
  He has said that Attorney
  General Holder should be the one to decide
  whether to take criminal action; he
  has also said that he would support further
  congressional investigation, as long as it
  was done in a bipartisan fashion. At the
  same time, he has signalled that he has no
  appetite for "looking backwards," and in
  late April, during a private White House
  meeting with congressional leaders, he rejected
  the idea of an outside truth commission.
  In the meantime, Republicans
  have seized the political initiative, expressing
  grave concern about the plans to close
  Guantanamo and transfer the prisoners to
  U.S. facilities.
  Tim Weiner, the author of "Legacy
  of Ashes," a recent history of the C.I.A.,
  says that Panetta is facing a series of
  "unappetizing choices." Weiner believes
  that the country is in a period similar to
  the Watergate era, when a series of disturbing
  state secrets—such as the existence
  of the Phoenix Program, a C.I.A.-
  supported initiative, in which the South
  Vietnamese were alleged to have tortured
  civilians—spilled out. Speaking of
  Panetta, he said, "It can't be comfortable
  for a man who said, 'This is un-American,'
  to be put in the position of saying,




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




   'Well, we hold no one accountable.'"

  Panetta, whose conversation with me at
   C.I.A. headquarters was his first
   lengthy interview on the topic of abusive
   interrogations, said that when he took
   over the agency he "wanted to be damn
   sure" that there was nobody on the payroll
   who should be prosecuted for torture or
   related crimes. He asked John Helgerson,
   then the C.I.A.'s inspector general, to
   conduct a review. In theory, the inspector
   general is politically independent, and
  therefore able to render unbiased judgments.
   In 2004, Helgerson had written
  a classified report on the C.I.A.'s secret
   detention-and-interrogation program, in
  which he questioned both the legality and
  the effectiveness of the agency's brutally
  coercive techniques. Panetta cited Helgerson's
  "credibility" as a reason to trust his assessment.
  According to Panetta, Helgerson,
  who is not a lawyer, assured him that
  no officer still at the agency had engaged
  in actions that went beyond the legal
  boundaries as they were understood during
  the Bush years. Helgerson, who retired
  from the agency in May, says he told
  Panetta only that he was not aware of any
  cases that merited prosecution, though
  "continuing work was being done."
  Panetta told me, "I'm going to give
  people the benefit of the doubt. . . . If they
  do the job that they're paid to do, I can't ask
  for a hell of a lot more." His words echo
  those of President Obama, who on April
  16th promised immunity from prosecution
  to any C.I.A. officer who relied on the
  advice of legal counsel during the Bush
  years. Jeffrey H. Smith, a former general
  counsel to the C.I.A., points out that this
  is a low standard, given that "what the Justice
  Department approved was outrageous."
  For example, for more than a century
  the U.S. had prosecuted waterboarding
  as a serious crime, and a ten-year prison
  sentence was issued as recently as 1983. Indeed,
  the memos authorizing interrogators
  to torment prisoners clashed so glaringly
  with international and U.S. law that some
  of them were later withdrawn by lawyers in
  Bush's own Justice Department.
  Smith, who has advised Obama informally




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




on how to handle the C.I.A.'s legacy
of abuse, thinks that prosecutions are
not politically viable at this point, and
would in any case be unfair to officers who
thought they were adhering to the law.
And many Republicans, from Newt Gingrich
to John McCain, have argued that
pressing charges against government
officials would threaten morale and inhibit
risk-talcing at a time when the agency
faces wars on two fronts and a continuing
threat from Al Qaeda. The Harvard law
professor Laurence Tribe disagrees. "It's
hard not to do something to those who
performed the act," he says. "It's not beyond
the pale to imagine that even people
armed with legal opinions might be held
legally responsible for violating the criminal
law in the area of torture."
Panetta told me, "Frankly, I didn't
support these methods that were used,
or the legal justification for why they did
it. . . . I also believed if I were to take this
job it was about dealing with the threats
that are out there, and trying to really
bring the C.I.A. into a new chapter." He
said that once he felt confident that
there was no criminal liability inside the
agency he "didn't want to spend a lot of
time dealing with the past and what
mistakes were made."
It turns out, however, that Panetta initially
supported the creation of a truth
commission. "I'm not big on commissions,"
Panetta told me. "On the other
hand, I could see that it might make some
sense, frankly, to appoint a high-level
54 THE NEW YORKER, JUNE 22, 2009
commission, with somebody like Sandra
Day O'Connor, Lee Hamilton—people
like that." The appeal was that Obama
could delegate to others the legal problems
stemming from Bush Administration actions,
allowing him to focus on his ambitious
political agenda. "In the discussion
phase"—early in the spring, before Obama
decided the issue—"I was for it," Panetta
said. "Because every time a question came
up, you could basically say, 'The commission,
hopefully, is looking at this.' "But by
late April Obama had vetoed the idea,
fearing that it would look vindictive and,
possibly, inflame his predecessor. "It was
the President who basically said, 'If I do



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




 this, it will look like I'm trying to go after
 Cheney and Bush,' "Panetta said. "He just
 didn't think it made sense. And then everybody
 kind of backed away from it."
 Ken Gude, an associate director at the
 Center for American Progress, who specializes
 in national-security issues, and who
 has close ties to the White House, believes
 that Obama's instinct, like Panetta's, was
 to set up a truth commission of some sort.
"I think the political staff walked it back,"
 he says. "They said it would be a distraction."
Obama's political advisers dread any
 issue that could trigger a culture war and
diminish his support among independent
voters. They also see little advantage in
picking a fight with the C.I.A. But the decision
to discourage an accountability process,
Gude says, has backfired. The Administration
has lost control of the story, as
revelations about C.I.A. misdeeds have
continued to emerge through lawsuits and
the press. "It's now become the distraction
they wanted to avoid," Gude says. "The
White House briefings have been dominated
by questions about releasing documents
and photos." It's understandable, he
says, that Obama wouldn't want to spend
his energy on Bush's mistakes. But, he
warns, "they can't leave the impression that
they're trying to cover it up."

Panetta may not have scars from the
past eight years, but he is surrounded
by people who do. Some of his closest
advisers have connections to the torture
program. Panetta brought only one person
with him to the agency: Jeremy
Bash, the well-regarded former chief
counsel to the House Intelligence Committee,
who now serves as his chief of
staff. Phil Trounstine, a California-based
political consultant and analyst who has
known Panetta for years, says of him,
"Here's a guy who has been very critical
of the Bush world view, who has to enforce
a new set of guidelines and policies
by leading the same agency and the same
people as in the past."
Several of Panetta's top deputies worked
closely with George Tenet, the agency's
director from 1997 until 2004. Under
Tenet, the C.I.A. took the lead role in



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




fighting terrorism, and its officers became
the jailers, and sometimes the tormentors,
of many U.S.-held detainees. Tenet, who
is now a managing director of the investment
bank Allen & Company, has all but
disappeared from public sight in Washington.
He recently cancelled an appearance
scheduled at the Panetta Institute this
month. ("George has not wanted to do
stuff in front of a camera," Panetta noted.)
But in his 2007 memoir, "At the Center of
the Storm," Tenet defended the use of
"enhanced" interrogation techniques on
terror suspects, claiming that the information
they elicited had prevented other attacks
and saved American lives. (He also
assured President Bush that the case for
going to war in Iraq was "a slam dunk.")
But a former senior agency official who
worked with many of Tenet's top team
members says, "These people carried out
this policy. . . but they'll muddy the waters
by explaining why what they did was O.K.
They will say that 'Bush was bad' but they
weren't. A lot of it is just to protect their
own positions. It's amazing to me that all
these Tenet people survived!"
Behind Panetta's desk—next to a
framed, tattered American flag that was
rescued from the ruins of the World
Trade Center—is a door leading to the
office of Stephen Kappes, whom Panetta
has kept on as the agency's second-incommand.
Kappes, a former U.S. marine,
is widely admired within the agency, in
particular for his role in persuading the
Libyan leader Muammar Qaddafi to
abandon his nuclear-weapons program, in
2003. "Kappes is the case officer's case
officer," John Radsan, who was a lawyer at
the C.LA. during President Bush's first
term, says. Intense, serious, and fluent in
Russian and Farsi, Kappes has served as a
station chief in Moscow, New Delhi, and
Frankfurt, and has supervised many clandestine
operations. In April, President
Obama paid a visit to C.I.A. headquar-
ters and singled out Kappes as the wise
"graybeard" in the building. Senator Fein-
stein insisted to Obama Administration
officials privately that Kappes continue as
deputy director; it was a condition of her
support for Panetta, whose lack of experience




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




 in covert operations she questioned.
 During the first term of the Bush Administration,
 Kappes was a top official
 in the Directorate of Operations. This
 group oversaw the agency's Counterterrorist
 Center, which, in turn, managed
 the secret detention-and-interrogation
 program. Few doubt that he was aware
that the C.I.A. was engaging in brutality.
 One former officer recalls that Kappes
 voiced qualms, warning that the program
amounted to "torture." According to the
former officer, once Kappes was overruled
he went along; Kappes was "the brains" of
the directorate, the former officer says.
(Kappes, through a spokesman, denied
having had a direct role in the interrogation
program, or having called its tactics
torture.) Another former C.I.A. operative
says, "It would be hard to say someone so
involved could be robustly objective" in
advising Panetta.
Panetta says that most of the individuals
who managed the secret interrogation
program have since left the agency. One of
the holdovers is Jonathan Fredman, who
was formerly the chief counsel to the division
that ran the interrogation program;
he is now on temporary assignment with
the director of National Intelligence. According
to notes from a 2002 meeting,
which were disclosed at a recent Senate
hearing, Fredman advised that torture "is
basically subject to perception. If the detainee
dies, you're doing it wrong." The
notes, whose accuracy Fredman has disputed,
describe him saying that videotapes
of interrogations would look "ugly." Fredman's
former boss is John A. Rizzo, the
C.I.A.'s acting general counsel, who
was the recipient of many of the Justice
Department's torture memos. (Rizzo is
scheduled to leave the agency once a replacement
has been confirmed.) And the
current head of the Counterterrorist Center—
the officer, who is undercover, cannot
be identified—ran the interrogation
program for part of Bush's second term.
Several current station chiefs and division
chiefs were also deeply involved in brutal
interrogations, as were pilots, logistical experts,
medical personnel, and others.
Meanwhile, John Brennan—the man




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




who was considered too politically toxic for
the top C.I.A. job—has become a senior
official on the National Security Council.
Brennan, who, as one former C.I.A. officer
puts it, was once "joined to George Tenet
at the hip"—he served as Tenet's chief of
staff—now advises Obama on terrorism
and other national-security issues. He has •
reportedly lobbied hard to maintain secrecy
on past abuses. According to Newsweek,
Brennan recently persuaded Panetta
to join him in protesting Obama's plan to
release four shocking Justice Department
memos about the interrogation program.
The documents, written by lawyers in the
Office of Legal Counsel, showed that the
C.I.A. had waterboarded one suspect at
least a hundred and eighty-three times and
subjected many others to harrowing mistreatment.
Opponents have argued that
exposing such details could spark an anti-
American backlash. Panetta also argued
forcefully in favor of indemnifying any
C.I.A. officers whose actions, as described
in the memos, might have opened them
up to criminal charges.
Several well-respected former C.I.A.
officials—including Fred Hitz, a former
inspector general, and Paul Pillar, a former
Middle East analyst—told me that •
they saw no harm in releasing the documents.
Dennis C. Blair, the director of
National Intelligence, who oversees the
U.S. intelligence establishment, including
the C.I.A., also supported the release
of the documents, after his staff concluded
that the disclosures would likely
do no damage.
After intense consideration, and a latenight
meeting in Rahm Emanuel's office,
Obama rejected Panetta's arguments for
secrecy, deciding that it was in the public
interest to release the memos. But Obama
also endorsed the notion of giving blanket
amnesty to any C.I.A. officers performing
authorized work.
Panetta's resistance to public disclosure
seemed out of character to some longtime
colleagues. "I was surprised by Leon's
position on the O.L.C. memos," Phil
Trounstine told me. "It's tough to maintain
your principles when you're head of
the C.I.A., because you need to be seen as




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




   someone that the people inside the agency
   want to follow." Panetta had become an
   advocate for secrecy so quickly, a White
   House official joked, that "it's like 'Invasion
   of the Body Snatchers.'"
   Panetta's advisers may have had a personal
   stake in opposing transparency. Another
   former C.I.A. official, who knows
   Brennan well, noted that, if the Bush torture
   program were to be further investigated,
   "potentially, both Brennan and
   Kappes could have a lot to lose." Brennan's
   supporters have argued that he had no operational
   control over the interrogation
   program, and point out that his tenure
   as Tenet's chief of staff ended in March,
   2001, before the Al Qaeda attacks. But he
   was subsequently named deputy executive
   director, and served in that position until
  March, 2003—the period when the most
   brutal detainee treatment occurred. In addition,
  Brennan often briefed President
  Bush about daily developments in the war
  on terror. Brennan has described himself
  as an internal critic of waterboarding—a
  position that friends, such as Emile Nakhleh,
  a former senior officer, confirm. Yet,
  in an interview with me two years ago,
  Brennan defended the use of "enhanced"
  interrogation techniques and extraordinary
  renditions,
  in which the C.I.A. abducted
  terror suspects around the globe
  and transported them to other countries to
  be jailed and interrogated; many of those
  countries had execrable human-rights records.
  He also questioned some people's
  definition of "torture." "I think it's torture
  when I have to ride in the car with my kids
  and they have loud rap music on," he said.
  Asked if "enhanced" interrogation techniques
  were necessary to keep America
  safe, he replied, "Would the U.S. be handicapped
  if the C.I.A. was not, in fact, able
  to carry out these types of detention and
  debriefing activities? I would say yes."
  Anthony Lake, who was the national-
  security adviser under Clinton,
  said of Brennan, "I've known John a long
  time, and he's a really good guy. I would
  argue, you can't throw out the whole
  agency." Lake, in fact, recommended
  Brennan to the Obama campaign when




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




it was looking for intelligence advisers—
after consulting with their mutual friend
George Tenet. America's intelligence
community is an incestuous one, making
it difficult for a President to break
with old ways of thinking.
Indeed, a well-informed analyst with
close ties to the White House says that the
C.I.A. has been lobbying hard to get
Obama to support some form of preventive
detention for terror suspects. An agency
spokesman denies this. But the analyst
56 THE NEW YORKER, JUNE 22, 2009
says, "They definitely want the flexibility to
hold people in some form of detention.
They have been saying, 'We need deep
authorities.' They've been presenting the
President with nightmare scenarios."
Panetta, for his part, has been persuaded
that renditions are a tool worth
keeping. The rendition program began, in
a more carefully monitored form, during
the Clinton Administration, but in the
Bush years it was transformed into what
John Radsan, the former C.I.A. lawyer,
called "an abomination." As many as
seven detainees were misidentified and
abducted by mistake; many other suspects
have alleged that they were hideously tortured
by foreign governments. Panetta
told me, "The worst part of rendition was
rendition to a black site. That will not be
the case anymore. If we render someone,
it will be to a country with jurisdiction
over that individual." During the Bush
years, however, some of the most horrific
allegations of abuse were made by detainees
rendered not to black sites but to
Egypt, Syria, and Morocco. The Obama
Administration, Panetta says, will take
precautions to insure that rendered suspects
are treated humanely, as the law requires.
"I've talked to the State Department,
and our people have to make very
sure that people won't be mistreated," Panetta
said. "Some places, obviously, it's
more difficult to do. But we're going to
have to press to make sure it doesn't happen,
because it would fly in the face of everything
the President has said we stand
for." The Bush Administration professed
to be taking similar precautions.
The C.I.A. has apparently done nothing
to penalize the officer who oversaw one




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




  of the most notorious renditions—that of
  a German car salesman named Khaled el-
  Masri. He was abducted while on a holiday
  in Macedonia, and flown by the agency
  to Afghanistan, where he was detained in
  a dungeon for five months without charges,
  before being released. From the start, the
  rendition team suspected that his case was
  one of mistaken identity. But the C.I.A.
 officer in charge at Langley—the agency
 asked that the officer's name be withheld—
  insisted that Masri be further interrogated.
 "She just looked in her crystal ball
 and it said that he was bad," a colleague recalls.
 Masri says that he was chained in a
 freezing cell with no bed, and given water
 so putrid that he could smell it across the
 room. He was threatened and stripped,
 and could hear other detainees crying all
 around him. After several weeks, the
 C.I.A. officer in charge learned that Masri's
 German passport was not a forgery, as
 was originally suspected, and that he was
 not the terror suspect the agency thought
 he was. (The names were similar.) Even so,
 the officer in charge refused to release him.
 Eventually, Masri went on a hunger strike,
 losing sixty pounds. Skeptics in the agency
 went directly over the officer's head to
 Tenet, who realized that his agency had
 been brutalizing an innocent man. Masri
 was released after a hundred and forty-nine
 days. But the officer in charge was not disciplined;
 in fact, a former colleague says,
 "she's been promoted—twice." Masri,
 meanwhile, has been unable to sue the
 U.S. government for either an apology or
 damages, because the courts consider the
 very existence of rendition a state secret—
 a position that the Obama Justice Department
 has so far supported.
 No criminal charges have ever been
 brought against any C.I.A. officer involved
 in the torture program, despite the
 fact that at least three prisoners interrogated
 by agency personnel died as the result
 of mistreatment. In the first case, an
 unnamed detainee under C.I.A. supervision
 in Afghanistan froze to death after
 having been chained, naked, to a concrete
 floor overnight. The body was buried in
 an unmarked grave. In the second case, an
 Iraqi prisoner named Manadel al-Jamadi




 UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




died on November 4, 2003, while being
Bere avement
Behind his house, my father's dogs
sleep in kennels, beautiful,.
he built just for them.
They do not bark.
Do they know he is dead?
They wag their tails
& head. They beg
& are fed.
Their grief is colossal
& forgetful.
Each day they wake
seeking his voice,
their names.
By dusk they seem
to unremember everything—
to them even hunger
is a game. For that, I envy.
For that, I cannot bear to watch them
pacing their cage. I try to remember
they love best confined space
to feel safe. Each day
a saint comes by to feed the pair
& I draw closer
the shades.
I've begun to think of them
as my father's other sons,
as kin. Brothers-in-paw.
 THE NEW YORKER, JUNE 22, 2009 57
 interrogated by the C.I.A. at Abu Ghraib
 prison, outside Baghdad. A forensic examiner
 found that he had essentially been
 crucified; he died from asphyxiation after
 having been hung by his arms, in a hood,
 and suffering broken ribs. Military pathologists
 classified the case a homicide.
 A third prisoner died after an interrogation
 in which a C.I.A. officer participated,
 though the officer evidently did not cause
 the death. (Several other detainees have
 disappeared and remain unaccounted for,
 according to Human Rights Watch.)
 During his tenure at the C.I.A., John
 Helgerson, the former inspector general,
 forwarded the crucifixion case, along with
 an estimated half-dozen other incidents, to
 the Justice Department, for possible prosecution.
 But the case files have languished.
 An official familiar with the cases told me
 that the agency has deflected inquiries by
 the Senate Intelligence Committee seeking




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




  information about any internal disciplinary
 action. (Helgerson told me, "Some
  individuals have been disciplined. And
 others no longer work at the agency.")
 Panetta acknowledges that there are
 some people still at the C.I.A. who may be
 tainted by the torture program. Nevertheless,
 he says, "I really respect the people
 who say we shouldn't have gotten involved
 in the interrogation business but we had to
 do our jobs. I don't think I should penalize
 people who were doing their duty. If
 you have a President who exercises bad
 judgment, the C.I.A. pays the price."

 O    n June 1st, former Vice-President
  Cheney asserted in a speech that the
  C.I.A., rather than the White House, first
  proposed hurting prisoners during interrogations.
 "It was their initiative," he said.
 "They had a couple of cases where they
 thought enhanced interrogation techniques
 would provide information." Panetta
 has a different view. "There is no
 question in my mind," he said. "The interrogation
 thing, to some extent, was cast
 upon us, because the military walked away
 from it, and the F.B.I. walked away from
 it, and so everybody came down on the
 C.I.A.," he said. This is technically true, although
 the F.B.I. "walked away" from interrogations
 of terrorism suspects after its
 director, Bob Mueller, heard complaints
 from an agent, Ali Soufan, that the C.I.A.'s
 interrogation methods amounted to "borderline
 torture." John Helgerson told me
 that he holds the           the Pentagon,
 and the White House equally responsible:
 "They went arm in arm into it."
 Without a thorough public investigation,
 it's difficult to assess the truth behind
 such contradictory accusations. "Everyone
 says, 'It's over, it's known,' "Nathaniel
 Raymond, who works with the advocacy
 group Physicians for Human Rights, told
 me. "But what is known? We still don't
 know how many detainees were in the
 black sites, or who they were. We don't
 fully know the White House's role, or the
 C.I.A.'s role. We need a full accounting,
 especially as it relates to health professionals."
 The recently released Justice Department
 memos, he noted, contain numerous




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




 references to C.I.A. medical personnel
 participating in coercive interrogation
sessions. "They were the designers, the
 legitimizers, and the implementers,"
Raymond said. "This is arguably the single
greatest medical-ethics scandal in
American history. We need answers."
Some conservatives are also calling for
greater openness. Will Taft, the general
counsel to the State Department in the
Bush Administration, told me, "There are
some twenty or thirty people whom the
My eyes each day thaw.
One day the water cuts off.
Then back on.
They are outside dogs—
which is to say, healthy
& victorious, purposeful
& one giant muscle
like the heart. Dad taught
them not to bark, to point
out their prey. To stay.
Were they there that day?
They call me
like witnesses & will not say.
I ask for their care
& their carelessness—
wish of them forgiveness.
I must give them away.
I must find for them homes,
sleep restless in his.
All night I expect they pace
as I do, each dog like an eye
roaming with the dead
beneath an unlocked lid.
—Kevin Young
58 THE NEW YORKER, JUNE 22, 2009
C.I.A. said it formerly held but no longer
does. Those names have never been released.
The government should identify
all the people in the program and account
for them."
The Senate Intelligence Committee
recently embarked on its own, closed-door
investigation of the torture program; Panetta
told me that he has been assured that
the committee members' work "would be
about lessons learned, as opposed to going
after people." So the C.I.A. is "cooperating
with them, giving them whatever information
they need to try to conduct their
review." He says that the committee has




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




 already identified some ten million relevant
 documents. "It's going to take a
 while," he said.
 The Senate investigation will, among
 other things, probe the question of torture's
 efficacy. Dick Cheney has repeatedly
 claimed that "enhanced" interrogations
 yield results. Opponents say that torture is
 counterproductive. Panetta is more agnostic.
 He told me, "The bottom line would
 be this: Yes, important information was
 gathered from these detainees. It provided
 information that in fact was acted upon.
 Was this the only way to obtain this information?
 I think that will always be an open
 question." But he is certain that "we did
 pay a price for using those methods."
 A number of recently released documents
 call into question the notion that the
 C.I.A. played a passive role in relation to
 torture policy. A 2008 report by the Senate
 Armed Services Committee indicates
 that the agency hired contract psychologists
 who went on to design and implement
 specific forms of abuse—such as
 locking a detainee, doubled up, in a tiny,
 airless cage—months before August, 2002,
 when the Justice Department granted legal
 authorization with its infamous "torture
 memo." More troublingly, footnotes in the
 Office of Legal Counsel memos suggest
 that some C.I.A. interrogators may have
 egregiously exceeded the legal boundaries
 set down by the Justice Department and
 the White House—which seemingly puts
 them outside the legal safety zone demarcated
 by Obama and Panetta. In 2002, the
 Bush Administration authorized interrogators
 to re-create the ostensibly safe waterboarding
 techniques used in military
 training. But, instead of limiting the sessions
 to a maximum of two twenty-second
 bouts of controlled drowning, as prescribed
 in military training, the C.I.A. interrogators
 forced one detainee to undergo at least
 a hundred and eighty-three sessions, and
 another at least eighty-three. And, instead
 of using a very small amount of water, as
 the Justice Department stipulated, the
 C.I.A. interrogators subjected the detainees
 to "large volumes" of water. The memos
 quote Inspector General Helgersott's
 finding, in his secret 2004 report on coercive




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




 techniques, that the interrogators
 amplified the pain deliberately, in order to
 make the sensation of drowning "more
 poignant and convincing." Helgerson also
 found that the psychologists and interrogators
 who designed the agency's protocols—
 and who claimed that their judgments
 were based on knowledge of military
 standards—had "probably misrepresented"
 their "expertise." In addition, the C.I.A.'s
 Office of Medical Services found that
 there was "no reason to believe that applying
 the waterboard with the frequency and
 intensity with which it was used by the
 psychologist/interrogators . . was either
 efficacious or medically safe."
 In April, Panetta fired all the C.I.A.'s
 contract interrogators, including the former
 military psychologists who appear to
 have designed the most brutal interrogation
 techniques: James Mitchell and
 Bruce Jessen. The two men, who ran a
 consulting company, Mitchell, Jessen &
 Associates, had recommended that interrogators
 apply to detainees theories of
 "learned helplessness" that were based on
 experiments with abused dogs. The firm's
 principals reportedly billed the agency a
 thousand dollars a day for their services.
 "We saved some money in the deal, too!"
 Panetta said. (Remarkably, a month after
 Obama took office the C.I.A. had signed
 a fresh contract with the firm.)
 According to ProPublica, the investigative
 reporting group, Mitchell and Jessen's
 firm, which in 2007 had a hundred
 and twenty people on its staff, recently
 closed its offices, in Spokane, Washington.
 One employee was Deuce Martinez,
 a former C.I.A. interrogator in the blacksite
 program; Joseph Matarazzo, a former
 president of the American Psychological
 Association, was on the company's board.
 (According to Kirk Hubbard, the former
 head of the C.I.A.'s research and analysis
 "I've put everything in your name in case my creditors come after me."
 • •
 THE NEW YORKER, JUNE 22, 2009 59
 division, Matarazzo served on an agency
 professional-standards board during the
 time the interrogation program was set
 up, but was not consulted about the
 interrogations.)




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




 Lawsuits against abusive contractors
  remain a possibility, and any one of them
 could expose a line of authorizations leading
 directly up the chain of command at
 the C.I.A., and into the Bush White
 House. George Brent Mickum IV, a lawyer
 representing Abu Zubaydah, a C.I.A.
 prisoner who was repeatedly waterboarded,
 said, "I'd like to sue Mitchell and
 Jessen in a minute." (Mitchell was an adviser
 on Zubaydah's interrogation.) After
 Zubaydah was waterboarded, his lawyers
 say, his mental state deteriorated, and he
 has since been prescribed the antipsychotic
 drug Haldol.
 Few activists expect lawsuits against
 the C.I.A. or its contractors to succeed.
 But John Sifton, an attorney who specializes
 in human-rights law, and who is part
 of Zubaydah's legal team, notes that there
 are other ways for the detainees' grievances
 to become public. "The act of prosecuting
 the high-value detainees will be
 the accountability process," Sifton said.
 "It's impossible to try these detainees
 without allowing them to air all the information
 about their torture."

 O    ther legal actions threaten to expose
 yet more secrets of the C.I.A.'s torture
 program. A prosecutor appointed by
 the Justice Department, John Durham, has
 convened a grand jury in Washington to
 weigh potential criminal charges against
 C.I.A. officers who were involved in
 the destruction of ninety-two videotapes
 documenting the interrogations of Abu
 Zubaydah and other detainees. Mickum
 told me that he has met several times with
 Durham, and believes that the scope of his
 inquiry may have expanded to include a review
 of whether the C.I.A. began using
 brutal methods on Zubaydah before it received
 written authorization from the Justice
 Department. (This would provide an
 extra motive for destroying the videotapes.)
 Mickum said, "I got the sense he was very
 serious." (Durham declined to comment.)
 The A.C.L.U., meanwhile, is suing to get
 access to classified descriptions of what was
 on the destroyed videotapes. Last week,
 Panetta filed an affidavit opposing the disclosure,
 which he said "could be expected




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




to result in exceptionally gave damage to
the national security." Once again, he was
protecting Bush-era interrogation secrets.
Pressure is also coming from abroad.
In Italy, two dozen C.I.A. officers are on
trial in absentia for participating in a 2003
rendition. Robert Seldon Lady, the agency's
station chief in Milan at the time, can
no longer travel to Italy without danger of
arrest, nor can the other C.I.A. officers
named in the case. Spain has opened a
criminal investigation of six Bush Administration
officials in connection with torture.
And in London a former rendition
victim is suing the British authorities.
After a British judge ruled that the
plaintiff; Binyam Mohammed, should be
given access to C.I.A. intelligence documents
that the agency shared with British
authorities, the Obama Administration
surprised liberals by pressuring the British
government to stop the disclosures.
Several other legal challenges to the
agency's interrogation program are working
their way through the U.S. court system.
A judge in California recently rejected
the Justice Department's claims of
blanket state secrecy in a case brought by
five rendition victims against Jeppesen
Dataplan, a subsidiary of Boeing, which
provided the flight plans for the C.I.A.'s
renditions. In a press conference in April,
Obama indicated that he had had second
thoughts about the Justice Department's
assertion of blanket state secrecy in the
case, but on June 12th the Administration
reasserted its original claim.
Earlier this month, Philip Mudd,
Obama's nominee for a top Homeland
Security post, withdrew from consideration
after it became clear that his Senate
confirmation would turn into a fight over
his previous role in the C.I.A.'s interrogation
program. Rahm Emanuel, speaking
of the many challenges posed by the torture
scandal, told me, "It's a day-to-day—
I won't say struggle—but problem. There
are a lot of cases in the queue that require
response. Many of them. But I've seen the
President in the Situation Room, and I
know he wants to move forward."
Panetta is already forging ahead on one
important reform: he plans to replace the




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




 abusive interrogation program with a legally
 acceptable, non-coercive alternative.
 A task force led by the Harvard Law
 School professor Philip Heymann has
 been advising him on a proposal to create
 an elite U.S. government interrogation
 team, staffed by some of the best C.I.A.,
 F.B.I., and military officers in the country,
 and drawing on the advice of social scientists,
 linguists, and other scholars. "What
 I'm pushing for is to establish a facility
 where we develop a team of interrogators
trained in the latest techniques," Panetta
said. "That's the one thing I'm worried
about, frankly. There just aren't that many
 people who have the interrogation abilities
we're going to need." Heymann describes
the effort to create "the best non-coercive
interrogation team in the world" as the
equivalent of "a NASA-like, man-on-themoon
effort" for human-intelligence gathering.
He said that members of his task
force have travelled to France, England,
Japan, Australia, and Israel, in order to
compile comparative information on what
interrogators do. "We also went to the best
people in the U.S.," he added.
Panetta has many ambitions for his tenure
at the agency. He spoke to me of the
need for the C.I.A. to increase its foreignlanguage
skills, and to recruit officers of
more diverse backgrounds, who can more
easily infiltrate hostile parts of the world.
But, as Panetta sees it, the C.I.A.'s effort to
"disrupt, destroy, and dismantle" Al Qaeda
remains its top priority. The agency continues
to acquire intelligence suggesting
that Al Qaeda is planning attacks on America,
he told me. "We're conducting pretty
robust operations in Pakistan, and I think
we're doing a good job of trying to disrupt
Al Qaeda. But, clearly, that is a threat."
The greatest danger, he said, is that Al
Qaeda will "find other safe havens to go
to," in states such as Somalia and Yemen.
"Our mission is to make sure they can't find
a place to hide." Finding and bringing
to justice Al Qaeda's leaders—in particular,
Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-
Zawahiri—"remains
a focal point," Panetta
said. "It's not easy, as you can imagine."
Last week, the Times reported on escalating




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015




 friction over jurisdiction between
 Panetta and Dennis Blair, the National
 Intelligence director. "I'm surprised at
 the number of challenges you have to
 confront in this job," Panetta confided.
 "You're a traffic cop, in many ways."
 When he was the White House chief of
 staff, Panetta said, he could delegate the
 big decisions to the President. "Here,
 though," he said, gazing out over the
 C.I.A.'s serene grounds, "the decisions
 come to me. And a lot of them involve life
 and death." Sometimes, he added, all
 he can do is "say a lot of Hail Marys." o




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762308 Date: 06/30/2015
