      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762382 Date: 06/30/2015


                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                   B6


From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov >
Sent:                              Tuesday, June 16, 2009 11:08 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: Remarks by President Obama and Prime Minister Berlusconi in press availability,
                                   6/15/09


See below - just spoke to denis. Calling
                                                                                                                  B6

From: McDonough, Denis R.
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Cheryl Mills                     Cheryl Mills
Sent: Tue Jun 16 23:06:46 2009
Subject: FW: Remarks by President Obama and Prime Minister Berlusconi in press availability, 6/15/09

     "As I said before, Prime Minister Berlusconi's assistance on our
efforts to close Guantanamo is very important to us. I have to say, by
the way, that Bermuda has done us a great service, as well, on that front,
and I'm grateful to them."


From: Eckert, Ellen E.
Sent: Monday, June 15, 2009 7:49 PM
Subject: Remarks by President Obama and Prime Minister Berlusconi in press availability, 6/15/09

                                                 THE WHITE HOUSE

                                      Office of the Press Secretary


For Immediate
Release                                                                                                        June
15, 2009

                                    REMARKS BY PRESIDENT OBAMA
                              AND PRIME MINISTER BERLUSCONI OF ITALY
                                       IN PRESS AVAILABILITY

                                                    Oval Office

5:48 P.M. EDT

     PRESIDENT OBAMA: Good evening, everybody. Buona sera. I want to
welcome Prime Minister Berlusconi here. He has proved to be a great
friend of the United States. And he and I got to know each other at the
G20 summit. We are now in the process of planning the G8 summit that
Italy will be hosting. We emphasized the strong, historic ties between
the United States and Italy. Our bilateral relationship has been marked
by cooperation across the board. And I am extremely grateful for his
friendship.

                                                    129
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762382 Date: 06/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762382 Date: 06/30/2015




     Just a couple of things that we specifically discussed. First of
all, I thanked the Prime Minister for his support of our policy of closing
Guantanamo. This is not just talk. Italy has agreed to accept three
specific detainees, and has also been part of the leadership in Europe
that today announced a framework in which European nations can accept
detainees. And that was something that I was very appreciative of. It
will give us an opportunity to create a lasting and durable international
legal framework for dealing with terrorism that I think is very important
on both sides of the Atlantic.

     We discussed Afghanistan and Pakistan, where Italy has been a
critical part of the coalition that is trying to assist Afghanistan in
stabilizing itself and ensuring that it's not a safe haven for
terrorism. We had an extensive discussion about my interest in pursuing
nonproliferation as an important agenda for all people. And given that
I'll be visiting Russia before I visit Italy for the G8, Prime Minister
Berlusconi, who has strong relationships with the Russians, was able to
offer some insight in terms of how to approach reductions in nuclear
arsenals. And that hopefully is going to be a topic at the G8 summit, as
well.

     And in addition to discussing the general situation in the world
economy, which obviously will be a central topic of the G8, we also
discussed specifically the issue of food security and how G8 nations can
assist people who are in most desperate poverty to ensure that they're not
slipping into hunger and further poverty. And that is going to be a major
topic of the G8 summit. And so I'm very appreciative of the leadership
that Prime Minister Berlusconi has shown on that front.

     So overall I am very grateful to Prime Minister Berlusconi's
leadership, his consistent friendship towards the United States. We have
some of the strongest bilateral relations in the world. I am confident
that that will continue as long as both of us are occupying our positions.

     And so thank you very much for taking the time to visit.

     PRIME MINISTER BERLUSCONI: (As translated.) First of all, I would
like to thank President Obama for his welcome and for the possibility
offered us to provide our perspective, our opinions on many of the most
difficult and hardest issues at the international level. And we've
discussed, as he already briefed you, many of the issues and the topics,
and we went through in a detailed manner the three days of the G8
summit. We want this G8 to reach concrete solutions. And we want to
reach concrete solutions on many extremely important issues.

     Clearly, the first issue is the world economy, the economic crisis
and how to get out of this crisis. And we also discussed the work that
our ministers of economy are carrying out right now to try and develop a
body of principles and to prevent similar situations from happening,
similar situations to the one we are experiencing right now.


                                                  130
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762382 Date: 06/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762382 Date: 06/30/2015




     We both agreed on the fact that the G8 will certainly not be able to
produce this body of rules, but this is going to be just one of the steps
leading to that drafting of rules. There will be then the G20 summit in
Pittsburgh, which will work on it, but the hope is to finally reach a body
of rules which can be shared by everybody which -- which are not going to
affect or hinder the free expansion of the economy and trade.

     And we discussed two important issues. One of them, which will be
discussed in L'Aquila as well, is food security, as President Obama has
already said. We hope that the countries there will make concrete efforts
and concrete proposals. The United States has already promised to
increase the aid to other countries and they're going to make in the next
three years huge amounts of money available. We try and will push the
other countries in the G8, trying to persuade them to do the same.

     And another important issue is that of climate change. And another
important achievement we are aiming at is to reduce CO2 emissions --
something, however, which has to be contributed to by all countries and
not only a limited number of them. And since the Doha Round has reached a
stop, we hope that by inviting Lamy, who is the director of the WTO, to
attend the G8 summit, that we can try and give another push to the Doha
Round, hoping to achieve positive results.

     Probably what I forgot to mention up to now is that the meeting in
L'Aquila is not going to be confined to the G8 countries. The next day,
the second day, will be G8-plus-6. The major economies of the world will
be there; India, China, South Africa, Mexico, Brazil, and Egypt will
attend the second day of meetings. There will be the major economies
forum with the participation of South Korea, Indonesia, and Australia, and
then there is another meeting which will be attended also by the
Netherlands, Spain, and Denmark -- and we are going to have before all of
these meetings together.

     The dinner will be attended also by the representatives of the main
international organizations. And the third day, we are going to have the
President of the African Union, the representatives of the main African
organizations, together with the representatives of some of the main
African countries. We are going to discuss the development of this
continent and the issue of hunger in that area.

     And I can't but thank President Obama and express my warmest felt
appreciation to him for -- and this position is coming from a person
that's been long enough in international politics to chair for the third
time the G8 summit; the first one was in the 1994; the second one in 2001;
and now the third one -- I want to express my appreciation for his deep
knowledge and precision and accuracy with which he discusses all of the
issues.

     And the positions that he expresses are not only innovative positions
looking at a different future, but they're always very concrete and
absolutely based on common sense. And it is extremely comforting and a

                                                  131
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762382 Date: 06/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762382 Date: 06/30/2015




pleasure to see that the destiny of the biggest democracy in the world is
in very good hands.

      PRESIDENT OBAMA: I hope my staff all caught
that.    (Laughter.) Gibbs, write that down. (Laughter.)

       Let me call on a couple people. Steve Thomma, McClatchy. There you
are.

          Mr. President, on Iran, does the disputed election results
affect -- there's been violence in the street -- in any way change your
willingness to meet with Mr. Ahmadinejad without preconditions? And also,
do you have anything to say, any message to send to people who are on the
streets protesting, who believe their votes were stolen and who are being
attacked violently?

     PRESIDENT OBAMA: Obviously all of us have been watching the news
from Iran. And I want to start off by being very clear that it is up to
Iranians to make decisions about who Iran's leaders will be; that we
respect Iranian sovereignty and want to avoid the United States being the
issue inside of Iran, which sometimes the United States can be a handy
political football -- or discussions with the United States.

     Having said all that, I am deeply troubled by the violence that I've
been seeing on television. I think that the democratic process -- free
speech, the ability of people to peacefully dissent -- all those are
universal values and need to be respected. And whenever I see violence
perpetrated on people who are peacefully dissenting, and whenever the
American people see that, I think they're, rightfully, troubled.

     My understanding is, is that the Iranian government says that they
are going to look into irregularities that have taken place. We weren't
on the ground, we did not have observers there, we did not have
international observers on hand, so I can't state definitively one way or
another what happened with respect to the election. But what I can say is
that there appears to ba a sense on the part of people who were so hopeful
and so engaged and so committed to democracy who now feel betrayed. And I
think it's important that, moving forward, whatever investigations take
place are done in a way that is not resulting in bloodshed and is not
resulting in people being stifled in expressing their views.

     Now, with respect to the United States and our interactions with
Iran, I've always believed that as odious as I consider some of President
Ahmadinejad's statements, as deep as the differences that exist between
the United States and Iran on a range of core issues, that the use of
tough, hard-headed diplomacy -- diplomacy with no illusions about Iran and
the nature of the differences between our two countries -- is critical
when it comes to pursuing a core set of our national security interests,
specifically, making sure that we are not seeing a nuclear arms race in
the Middle East triggered by Iran obtaining a nuclear weapon; making sure
that Iran is not exporting terrorist activity. Those are core interests
not just to the United States but I think to a peaceful world in general.
                                                  132
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762382 Date: 06/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762382 Date: 06/30/2015




     We will continue to pursue a tough, direct dialogue between our two
countries, and we'll see where it takes us. But even as we do so, I think
it would be wrong for me to be silent about what we've seen on the
television over the last few days. And what I would say to those people
who put so much hope and energy and optimism into the political process, I
would say to them that the world is watching and inspired by their
participation, regardless of what the ultimate outcome of the election
was. And they should know that the world is watching.

     And particularly to the youth of Iran, I want them to know that we in
the United States do not want to make any decisions for the Iranians, but
we do believe that the Iranian people and their voices should be heard and
respected.

     PRIME MINISTER BERLUSCONI: ANSA.

          (As translated.) President Obama, after this meeting with Prime
Minister Berlusconi, what do you expect, in concrete terms, from the
relationship between United States and Italy? And to Prime Minister
Berlusconi, you had very strong relations with President George W.
Bush. Do you expect and do you hope to build the same type of relations
with President Obama, as well?

     PRIME MINISTER BERLUSCONI: I took an oath of gratitude towards
United States, which gave me freedom and which gave my country dignity
after World War II. So I'm here to cooperate with the President of the
United States. I'm here to cooperate with President Obama, as I
cooperated with President Clinton and as I did with President Bush.

     So if I can express a hope, I really hope we can build a direct and
friendly relationship with President Obama. I would be more than happy to
do so. And facts will tell.

     But anyway, I think we had a good start.

     PRESIDENT OBAMA: Absolutely. We've had a very good start. What I
expect from the Prime Minister is an honest, frank sharing of views and a
recognition that the United States and Italy share common values, common
interests. Our economies have very strong commercial ties. And if we're
acting on those mutual interests, then I have no doubt that we'll continue
to see strong cooperation.

     As I said before, Prime Minister Berlusconi's assistance on our
efforts to close Guantanamo is very important to us. I have to say, by
the way, that Bermuda has done us a great service, as well, on that front,
and I'm grateful to them.

     When it comes to Afghanistan and Pakistan, we are part of the same
coalition that wants to make sure that the Afghan government is able and
strong to sustain development for the Afghan people, but also to make sure
that they're not serving as a safe haven for extremists.
                                                  133
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762382 Date: 06/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762382 Date: 06/30/2015




     When it comes to the world economy, I think all of us have an
interest in improving the kinds of financial regulations that will prevent
the kinds of crises that we saw happening most recently.

     So, across the board, I think we have a host of common interests. In
addition to liking Prime Minister Berlusconi personally, our peoples like
each other and recognize that we have shared interests. And that, I
think, will make the path for continued cooperation that much easier.

     (After translation.) I must say, my answers sound very elegant in
Italian. (Laughter.)

     Steve Collinson.

          Thank you, Mr. President. Of the conditions that Prime Minister
Netanyahu laid out yesterday for a Palestinian state, the basis for
negotiation, do you think they will likely prove a stumbling block, given
the broadly negative reaction from the Arab states and the Palestinians?

     PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, first of all, I think it's important not to
immediately assess the situation based on commentary the day after a
speech. I think any time an Israeli Prime Minister makes a statement, the
immediate reaction tends to be negative on one side. If the other side is
making a statement, oftentimes the reaction is negative in Israel.

     Overall, I thought that there was positive movement in the Prime
Minister's speech. He acknowledged the need for two states. There were a
lot of conditions, and obviously working through the conditions on
Israel's side for security, as well as the Palestinian side for
sovereignty and territorial integrity and the capacity to have a
functioning, prosperous state, that's exactly what negotiations are
supposed to be about. But what we're seeing is at least the possibility
that we can restart serious talks.

     Now, I've been very clear that, from the United States' perspective,
Israel's security is non-negotiable. We will stand behind their
defense. I've also made very clear that both sides are going to have to
move in some politically difficult ways in order to achieve what is going
to be in the long-term interests of the Israelis and the Palestinians and
the international community.

     On the Israeli side, that means a cessation of settlements. And
there is a tendency to try to parse exactly what this means, but I think
the parties on the ground understand that if you have a continuation of
settlements that, in past agreements, have been categorized as illegal,
that's going to be an impediment to progress. On the Palestinian side,
whether it's the Palestinian Authority or other groups like Hamas that
claim to speak for the Palestinians, a recognition of the Quartet
principles, ensuring that there's a recognition of Israel's right to
exist, making sure that past agreements are abided to, that there's an end

                                                  134
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762382 Date: 06/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762382 Date: 06/30/2015




to incitement against Israel and an end to violence against Israel. Those
are necessary pillars of any serious agreement that's to be reached.

     And those pillars have to be supported by the Arab states, because
Israel's security concerns extend beyond simply the Palestinian
Territories; they extend to concerns that they have in a whole host of
neighbors where there's perceived and often real hostility towards
Israel's security. So I'm glad that Prime Minister Netanyahu made the
speech. The United States will continue to try to be as honest as
possible to all sides in this dispute to indicate the degree to which it's
in everybody's interests to move in a new direction. And I think it can
be accomplished, but it's going to require a lot of work and a partnership
with key countries like Italy in order to help the parties come together
and recognize their own interests.

          You discussed during the meeting the crisis, the economic
crisis, you're going to discuss at the G8. The package of measures you
are discussing right now, can this be a kind of basis for the next
meetings -- G8 and G20?

     PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, our respective finance ministers, not just
Italy's and the United States', but all the G8 members', have been meeting
diligently. They've put forward a framework that will be discussed and
hopefully ratified at the G8. That will provide a broad set of
principles.

     Now, the United States is putting forward some very specific
regulatory reforms that are going to make sure that we don't find
ourselves in this position again, that improves oversight, ensures that
banks aren't taking risks with highly leveraged money that can result in
systemic collapse, that consumers and investors are protected more
effectively.

     So we're going to have a lot of work to do. It's going to be a big,
complex piece of legislation. Different countries are going to have
different needs. Prime Minister Berlusconi was indicating to me that the
banking system in Italy has not been under the same kinds of pressures as
the banking system in the United States and some other European countries.

     But I think the general principle -- that we're going to have
improved oversight, better practices, and that there's some coordination
and information-sharing between countries on issues like tax havens, for
example, so that you don't have global capital avoiding more stringent
rules by going to countries with weaker rules -- I think that's going to
be something that all G8 members affirm, and we very much appreciate Prime
Minister Berlusconi's leadership on this issue.

     PRIME MINISTER BERLUSCONI: I would like to add to this that our
ministers of finance have been working on all of these issues and
packages. In particular they paid attention, for instance, to corporate
governments and rules for transparency and a regulation of the financial
sectors, accounting rules, and as President Obama has also mentioned,
                                                  135
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762382 Date: 06/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762382 Date: 06/30/2015




also, the issue of tax havens, to try and prevent those situations from
happening again. And the idea is to work out a set of rules and
regulations which can prevent situations and conditions like the ones
we've experienced which have led -- from happening, experience that is to
-- which led first to the financial crisis and then to the economic crisis
that we are experiencing right now.

     PRESIDENT OBAMA: Thank you. Grazie.

                                                             END
        6:29 P.M. EDT




                                                  136
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762382 Date: 06/30/2015
