     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758705 Date: 06/30/2015
                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                         B6




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                             Saturday, June 6, 2009 4:57 PM
To:                               'millscd@state.gov'
Subject:                           Re: Concept Paper for World Food Prize Remarks - Attached and Below (Drafted by
                                   Megan Rooney)



Are you ok w it? Can we claim more leadership for you, me and State?

    Original Message
From: Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
To: H
Cc: Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>; Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivanil@state.gov>
Sent: Sat Jun 06 15:37:42 2009
Subject: Concept Paper for World Food Prize Remarks - Attached and Below (Drafted by Megan Rooney)

June 6, 2009 11:30am

Rooney (x7-7203,




CONCEPT NOTE FOR WORLD FOOD PRIZE CEREMONY

Thursday, June 11, 2009




This speech is an opportunity to signal the urgency of the problem of global hunger; connect it to an array of global
issues, including economic development, health and education, expanding opportunity for women, and political
stability; and declare the Administration's commitment to tackling hunger at its roots, through effective and efficient
collaboration with an array of partners.




Additionally, your remarks can point to a shift from past approaches by emphasizing the need to support local solutions
and focus on long-term sustainability to help people feed themselves and reduce the need for emergency assistance
down the road.




The speech could be framed as follows:




THE PRIZE AND PRIZE-WINNER

You can begin by announcing the winner of the 2009 World Food Prize, Dr. Gebisa Ejeta. He has a remarkable story:
born in a mud hut in Ethiopia, he got his PhD from Purdue University in plant breeding and genetics and developed


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758705 Date: 06/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758705 Date: 06/30/2015



strains of sorghum that are drought-tolerant, high-yield, and resistant to the Striga weed, which devastates crops across
Africa.

Outside the lab, he helped start the Sudanese commercial seed industry; developed systems to produce, certify, and
market hybrid seeds; and educated farmers about the use of fertilizers and soil and water conservation. And he has
trained and inspired the next generation of African agricultural scientists.

A COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH: FROM LAB TO FARM TO MARKET TO TABLE

Dr. Ejeta's work reflects the breadth of this issue and the comprehensive approach needed to address it—one that
connects the labs where new seed technologies are developed.., the fields where small-scale farmers labor to feed their
families and make a living.., the markets where food is bought and sold... and the homes where people get the
nourishment they need to thrive.

In many places, that food chain is broken. One billion people worldwide woke up hungry this morning and will go to
sleep hungry tonight. Chronic hunger threatens health, while making it harder for people to work and students to learn,
which in turn stunts economic development. Last year's food riots demonstrated that when food is scarce, political
stability is threatened.

To date, the world's primary response to hunger has been to send emergency food aid. While this saves lives, it is a
short-term fix, and we need a long-term solution.




The Obama Administration is committed to leading in developing a new global approach. We will support the creation
of sustainable agricultural systems in appropriate regions around the world, to increase agricultural productivity, create
jobs, strengthen economies, and protect natural resources.




We will do this not by imposing one-size-fits-all solutions, but by assisting countries in carrying out individual strategies
that meet their needs—for example, through the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Plan. To facilitate
coordination and share best practices, we will seek to convene donor governments, multilateral institutions, NG0s,
private companies, foundations, universities, and individuals.




THE ANCHORS OF OUR APPROACH




We've identified seven anchors that secure sustainable agriculture systems. These will guide our approach.




•   Increase agricultural productivity by expanding access to quality seeds, fertilizer, irrigation, the credit to purchase
them, and the training to use them.

•   Stimulate the post-harvest sector by improving the storage and processing of food and improving transportation to
connect small farmers to markets.

•     Maintain natural resources so the land can be farmed well into the future and we can make the right adaptations
for the changing environment.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758705 Date: 06/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758705 Date: 06/30/2015




     Expand knowledge and training by support R&D and developing the next generation of agriculture scientists.


     Increase trade so small-scale farmers in developing countries can sell their crops far and wide.


•    Support policy reform and good governance, because sustainable agriculture flourishes in a,clear and predictable
policy and regulatory environment.


•    Support women and families in agriculture. Seventy percent of the world's farmers are women, but most of the
programs that offer credit and training to farmers target men. This must change for agriculture to thrive. And children
must have nutrition to contribute to their communities' future.




A PREVIEW OF WHAT'S TO COME




In the coming weeks, President Obama, Secretary Vilsack and I will be reaching out to share our approach to global
coordination and agriculture in greater detail. We will seek the input, wisdom and guidance of those who have been
working so long in this arena—from the Congress to NGOs to academics to foundations to the private sector. The
President's conversations at the G-8 meeting in Italy in two weeks will address our approach, as well as my trip to Africa
in August.




Addressing hunger and food is essential to achieving economic recovery, stabilizing societies, and expanding opportunity
for hundreds of millions of people worldwide. This is why supporting sustainable agriculture worldwide will be a central
element of foreign policy in the Obama Administration.




CONCLUSION




You can circle back to the story of Dr. Ejeta to close. He represents the need for a multinational approach: born in
Ethiopia, educated in the United States, advised by Indian scientists, advisor to several African nations.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758705 Date: 06/30/2015                    .
