        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762253 Date: 06/30/2015

                                                                                                                                        RELEASE
                                                                                                                                        IN PART B6

Mir

From:                                  Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                                  Tuesday, June 09, 2009 6:19 AM
To:
Subject:                               Fw: Thank you...again


Fyi



From: Manatos & Manatos                                                                                                                       B6
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Mon Jun 08 15:45:16 2009
Subject: Thank you...again


Secretary Clinton's remarks at her Friday press conference with the Turkish Foreign Minister continued this
Administration's excellent efforts to restore the credibility of the U.S. with Greece and Cyprus — which will lead to
important progress in the region.

As you know, the Bush Administration consistently hid and defended actions by Turkey that were injurious to Cyprus and
Greece, inconsistent with American values and principals, and also not in Turkey's best interests.

We highlighted for the top leaders in our community that Secretary Clinton once again in front of the Turkish Foreign
Minister, called for a "bi-zonal and bi-communal federation" for Cyprus as well as expressed the United States' strong
support for "freedom of religion."

With Secretary Clinton and others doing these kinds of things, America is moving to correct the biggest road block to a
Cyprus settlement — restoring American credibility with the Greek-Cypriots which was badly lost during the Bush
Administration.

Keep up the great work!

Andy Manatos and Mike Manatos



        THE NATIONAL COORDINATED EFFORT OF HELLENES (CEH)
                                  1100 New Hampshire Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20037
                                             (202) 393-7790 [fax] (202) 628-0225
                                           E-mail: CoordinatedEffort@IVIanatos.com


Remarks With Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu
Hillary Rodham Clinton
Secretary of State
Treaty Room
Washington, DC
June 5, 2009


SECRETARY CLINTON: Good afternoon. Minister Davutoglu and I just had a very productive, broad-ranging, comprehensive
discussion. And it is a great privilege to welcome him here to the State Department within the very first weeks of his having been
appointed foreign minister. Of course, I was very honored to have gone to Turkey very early in my term as Secretary of State, and
President Obama had a wonderful visit to Turkey.

 And all of that is to confirm the strength and importance of our partnership and alliance. We have a lot of work to do together. Turkey,
 the United States, and the entire global community certainly face a great number of challenges, but we also see opportunities. So our
 message coming out of the meeting today and our prior meetings is that we're going to deepen and strengthen our cooperation on an
 ongoing basis, because we believe that both Turkey and the United States have unique roles to play.
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762253 Date: 06/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762253 Date: 06/30/2015




Now, we obviously already collaborate. Not only are we both members of NATO, but we are working with the G-20 to respond to the
global economic crisis, we're exploring ways to enhance our trade and commerce between our two countries, we're working to develop
new energy sources, including resources from the Caucasus and Central Asia. We're partners in the fight against global terrorism. We
share the goal of a stable Pakistan and Afghanistan, and to deny al-Qaida safe haven that can threaten our countries and many others.
We support Turkey in its fight against the terrorist activities of the PKK, which has been a very important cooperation.

And I underscored again today the United States' strong support for Turkey's bid to become a member of the European Union. Turkey
has made significant progress toward membership. It's been in a process of reform that is generated by its own internal decisions but
which has certainly responded to many of the concerns regarding the strength of the bid that Turkey had. And so we applaud what
Turkey has already done and pledge our efforts to continue working with Turkey.

And so we ranged across a broad number of issues, and I want to just make a special note. As President Obama said yesterday in
Cairo, the United States is committed to broad engagement with Muslims everywhere across the globe based on mutual interests and
mutual respect. We believe strongly in the freedom of religion and expression, in vibrant civil societies, and we know that
those are values that Turkey shares.

And I want to thank the minister and his government for the role that Turkey plays as a force for peace and stability. This is important,
and it's already been demonstrated in the work that Turkey has done for a number of years and continues with respect to
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. And we are strongly supportive of the Turkish efforts to normalize relations with Armenia, and
we are also very strongly supportive of the efforts to resolve the Nagomo-Karabakh conflict.

We discussed Cyprus, which is an issue that the President also addressed when he was in Turkey in April. The two Cypriot leaders
have an opportunity through their commitment to negotiations under the United Nations Good Offices Missions, and the United States is
willina to help the parties. We want to work toward a settlement that reunifies Cyprus into a bi-zonal and bi-communal federation.

We discussed many, many concerns, and I'm just grateful for the commitment by the minister and by his government to play an active
role in our dynamic world. Our relationship is not just about security; it is about seizing these opportunities, and I look forward to
working with you.




                                                                    7$1
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762253 Date: 06/30/2015
