UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015
                                                                    KCLC/AC
                                                                    FULL




           TESTIMONY BEFORE HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE

                 SUBCOMMITTEE ON STATE/FOREIGN OPERATIONS

                                          MAY 13 2009

                    DEPUTY SECRETARY OF STATE JACOB J. LEW

                                  DEPARTMENT OF STATE



                     Fiscal 2010 State-Foreign Operations Appropriations


    Introduction: A New American Leadership
    Madam Chairwoman, Representative Granger, members of the subcommittee, it is an
    honor to appear before you today to discuss the principles and priorities that underlie
    President Obama's international affairs budget request for 2010. During our first months
    in office, the Obama Administration has launched an ambitious foreign policy agenda,
    recognizing, as the President has said, that the challenges of our time will not wait for
    sequencing. The United States confronts what may well be the most complex array of
    threats in our history -- Iraq, Afghanistan, and Pakistan, terrorism, climate change,
    pandemic disease, extreme poverty, nuclear proliferation, and global criminal networks.
    American leadership remains essential. But we cannot meet these threats alone. Nor can
    we use only one set of tools. Tackling these challenges successfully -- and seizing the
    opportunity to help build a more peaceful and prosperous world -- requires robust
    partnerships, greater capacity, and stronger institutions. It also means that we must invest
    more in the programs and people with the skills and capabilities to address these complex
    challenges.
    This approach is what Secretary of State Clinton has called "smart power." As she has
    explained, only through the appropriate use of smart power -- harnessing the tools of
    diplomacy, development and defense -- will we succeed. These three pillars of smart
    power are essential to prevent and deter conflict and emerging threats.
    The resources in this budget fund the operational elements required to support two pillars
    of our smart-power strategy -- diplomacy and development. We know that the key to our
    security and prosperity is a stable and secure world. And we also know that our power
    does not just come from our military might, but from our values, our capacity to form
    strong partnerships, and our ability to improve the lives of others so we do not pay the
    price of global poverty, instability, and ultimately, conflict. This budget represents a
    fraction of what our government spends each year on what has traditionally been defined
    as national security, reflecting the cost-effectiveness of prevention through diplomacy
    and development.



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015




    That is why the Secretary of Defense has come to Congress and asked that more
    resources be devoted to foreign affairs. As Secretary Gates said in his recent testimony
    with Secretary Clinton, "I believe that the challenges confronting our nation cannot be
    dealt with by military means alone. They instead require whole-of-government
    approaches -- but that can only be done if the State Department is given resources
    befitting the scope of its mission across the globe. This is particularly important in
    Afghanistan and Pakistan, where our ability to provide resources beyond military power
    will be the decisive factor." Or, as Senators Kerry and Lugar noted in their successful
    bipartisan effort to fully fund international affairs in the Budget Resolution, "From
    pandemics to climate change to failed states, this century's security challenges demand a
    new level of commitment to diplomacy and development. With this relatively small
    investment, we are making significant strides toward restoring America's leadership role
    in the world."
    This budget -- a total of $53.9 billion, of which $48.6 billion is for the State Department
    and USAID -- is a 9 percent increase over the total FY 2009 funding level, including
    supplemental appropriations. It reflects the Obama Administration's commitment to
    fiscal discipline and transparency by shifting funding for predictable and recurring
    programs, previously funded in emergency supplemental appropriations, into the
    FY 2010 request.
    .We understand that this is a difficult moment to ask the American people to support even
     a modest increase in spending overseas. At the same time, the American people
     understand that our future security depends on avoiding future conflicts that will force us
     to pay a terrible cost in lives and dollars. Humanitarian objectives are also security
     requirements. Children need basic education to pursue opportunities rather than hatred;
     parents need jobs to reject the appeal of extremists who often seem to offer the only way
     to support their families; and for many, survival requires minimal access to basic health
     care services. With this request, we seek to strengthen America's position of global
     leadership -- ensuring that we remain a force for peace and prosperity in the world,
     advancing our own security even as we expand the circle of dignity and opportunity for
     people left outside of it.
    Five Smart Power Funding Objectives

    First, we must build the civilian capacity within the Department of State and USAID
    necessary for 21st Century missions.
     Our diplomatic and development missions have evolved. Foreign and civil service
     personnel deploy alongside the military in Afghanistan and Iraq, reaching far beyond
     embassy walls to connect with citizens and communities whose support we enlist to
     suppress insurgency and drive out enemies like the Taliban and al-Qaeda. They build the
     capacity of fledgling political parties, ministries, and trade associations. They help create
     the conditions for economic growth and democratic progress, and lay the groundwork for
     expanded access to health, education, and other basic needs. And they build the alliances
     necessary to use smart power; including multilateral engagement and private sector
                                                   2


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015




    collaboration. Our diplomatic and development teams are increasingly posted in
    situations that resemble military conditions rather than traditional diplomatic
    assignments. We simply cannot spread our workforce thinner, and thinner without
    increasing the risk that while we address a current hotspot we are missing an opportunity
    to prevent the next crisis or engage in such a way as to build new and capable partners.
    The FY 2010 budget requests $283 million to support adding over 740 new Foreign
    Service personnel at the Department of State, a significant step toward achieving a 25
    percent increase in State Foreign Service personnel over four years. I want to call special
    attention, however, to our efforts to rebuild USAID, where, as many of you have noted,
    human resources have significantly eroded over the past decade, even as we have ramped
    up development activities and our expectations of our lead development institution. The
    FY 2010 request includes a 45 percent increase in USAID operations to support adding
    an additional 350 new permanent USAID Foreign Service Officers and related capital
    improvements under the Agency's Development Leadership Initiative. The FY 2010
    budget puts the USAID on a path to double its Foreign Service officers by 2012. The
    budget also would provide the resources needed to train the expanded workforces of both
    State and USAID with the language, diplomatic, development and managerial skills
    necessary for their mission, and allow us to increase civilian presence and leadership in
    places like Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iraq.
     We must not only expand our reach but improve our management and oversight capacity.
     We see contract reform as a critical component of that effort. In FY 1990, USAID
     employed nearly 3,500 permanent direct hires administering $5 billion a year in
     assistance. As of FY 2008, USAID employed about 2,200 permanent direct hires
     administering $13.2 billion in assistance. USAID's ability to provide strategic direction
     and appropriate oversight is clearly challenged at this level. This diminished workforce
     has resulted in contracting out more and more programs and activities, bundling activities
     under large mechanisms, and in many cases, higher overall costs.
     The only way to reverse this trend is to increase the core of foreign and civil service staff
     whose full time and sole responsibility is to serve their mission. Foreign and civil service
     officers on the ground need to be developing objectives, working with locally based
     organizations, providing oversight, and making decisions about how resources are
     utilized. We have announced our intent to double foreign assistance by 2015. This can
     only be accomplished if we have the people on board to drive the program.
     The State Department has long needed greater capacity to respond quickly to stabilize
     situations at times of conflict or crisis. These situations may be caused by political or
     natural disasters, but they share a common need for a rapid civilian response. Our
     military men and women are often called upon to respond to situations for which they
     were not trained and where a civilian presence would be more effective. The military has
     done an extraordinary job, but it cannot -- and should not -- handle these situations alone.
     In order to build the capacity to deploy civilians rapidly, we are requesting $363 million
     for the Civilian Stabilization Initiative. This will expand our total response team to over
     four thousand persons and greatly increases our ability to prevent and respond to conflict

                                                   3


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015




    with an immediately deployable civilian counterpart to the U.S. military, ready and able
    to help stabilize countries in the transition from war to peace.
    Included in that request is $40 million for a Stabilization Bridge Fund, which will provide
    the Civilian Responders immediate resources for critical transition and stabilization
    programs to reduce the need for long-term deployments of military forces or
    peacekeepers. Separately, we also request $76 million for a Rapid Response Fund to help
    stabilize turmoil in new and fragile democracies, such as what we saw during Kenya's
    most recent election, where a quick infusion of resources can help reconcile competing
    interests and support the will of the people.
    In order to increase personnel and conflict response capacity, we also need the tools and
    infrastructure to enable our overseas personnel to do their jobs. The FY 2010 budget
    includes $2.095 billion to construct safe, secure, functional new embassies; a
    strengthened American presence in critical emerging areas; and expanded and secure
    global classified and unclassified information technology networks. These resources also
    support efforts to improve the efficiency of diplomatic and development operations,
    including modernizing antiquated software systems; integrating State and USAID
    information technology; participating in e-government initiatives that promote
    transparency, accountability and citizen engagement; upgrading reporting and financial
    management systems, and consolidating State and USAID administrative platforms.
     Smart power means using all of the tools available to reach out to the world, and the FY
     2010 budget requests $1.13 billion for public diplomacy and educational and cultural
     exchanges, providing the resources required to engage and influence people around the
     world, advance understanding of our country's principles and values, and facilitate the
     formation of strategic partnerships through the exchange of people and ideas. These
     programs connect people to people -- exchanging knowledge, information, and expertise,
     and bring people together around shared values. Public diplomacy programs often help
     build the sustainable relationships with local communities that become foundations of our
     development programs. And in a world in which 60 percent of the population is under
     the age of 30, our youth programs are among the most critical investments we can make.
     Extracurricular programs, educational opportunities, and exchanges help divert at-risk
     youth away from the influence of violent actors, and the use of innovative new media
     greatly expands our reach into this critical population.
     Second, we must promote long-term development and human security -- both from
     the top-down and bottom-up.
     Americans have seen first-hand the threats that emerge from ungoverned spaces -- the
     dangers that can take root with poverty, political oppression, and disenfranchisement.
     Elevating development alongside diplomacy as an equal pillar of our foreign policy is not
     only a moral commitment, but a national security imperative. Our superb military can
     stem conflict, but it cannot lay the foundations of long-term economic growth, good
     governance, and human capacity that will result in sustainable peace and prosperity. In
     the long run, the more effective we are at development, the less we will be forced to turn
     to defense.
                                                 4


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015




    Our "top-down" development strategy must strengthen the ability of governments to
    support just and capable institutions that meet the basic needs of their populations; and
    the enabling environment for broad-based, equitable economic growth, including access
    to the global economy.
    Our "bottom-up" development strategy partners with citizens and civic groups to build
    human capacity, ultimately spurring the power of individuals and societies to innovate,
    cooperate, and solve problems -- both locally and globally. Overall, 56 percent of our
    assistance request is targeted to development programs, with special emphasis on
    economic development and good governance, global health, food security, education, and
    global climate change.
    As Secretary Clinton has said, "We believe that extreme poverty poses a grave threat to
    global security and certainly to prosperity." Development experts have predicted that 50
    million more people could end up living in poverty this year. A sharp increase in global
    poverty has the potential to spark new humanitarian crises, erode gains from a wide range
    of U.S. taxpayer investments in development, reverse progress toward achieving the
    Millennium Development goals, and destabilize countries that are our partners. Many
    responsible countries cannot raise funds to support safety nets, restore financial markets,
    or serve the poor.
    These burdens will disproportionately fall on women and children, who are the most
    marginalized in many populations and who constitute the great majority of poor around
    the globe. Raising the status of women and their families -- and supporting their
    participation in the political, economic and social spheres of society -- is a key ingredient
    of our development goals. Moreover, investing in women is one of the most effective
    development tools for poverty alleviation and a country's general prosperity. It remains a
    simple fact that no country can hope to get ahead if half of its citizens are left behind. In
    recognition of this imperative, the Secretary has consolidated activities that were spread
    across the State Department in an Office of Global Women's Issues to ensure that our
    foreign policy programs, including our development initiatives, reflect the needs and
    perspectives of women and girls.
    Economic Development & Good Governance: The FY 2010 request demonstrates the
    Administration's strong commitment to fighting poverty, both because it is important for
    our national security interests, but also to further American values. Funding for
    economic growth and democratic progress, both critical to achieving sustainable
    development and accountable governance, are up significantly over last year's level:
    $4.7 billion -- a 16 percent increase over FY 2009 -- is requested to drive economic
    growth; and $2.8 billion -- a nine percent increase over FY 2009 -- is requested for
    assistance to strengthen democracy and good governance worldwide.
    Support for economic growth and governance is particularly critical in Africa and each is
    up by more than 30 percent over the current year: economic growth in Africa grows from
    $891 million in FY 2009 to a request of $1.175 billion, and governance from $265
    million to $347 million. Funding is targeted to development needs and economic
    opportunity and governance programs critical to the success of the investments we have
                                                  5


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015




    made through the Millennium Challenge Corporation and the President's Emergency
    Plan for AIDS Relief.
    Food Security: The President announced at the G20 meeting in London that we will
    seek to double U.S. financial support for agricultural development in developing
    countries in order to, in his words, "give people the tools they need to lift themselves out
    of poverty." The FY 2010 request makes good on this commitment by including $1.36
    billion, an increase of 62 percent from last year, including the FY 2009 Spring
    Supplemental Request, to address the root causes of food insecurity by increasing
    agricultural production and productivity. Our strategy meets short-term needs and builds
    long-term foundations to reduce food insecurity by improving production, increasing
    rural household incomes, improving the nutritional status of children, and reducing
    reliance on international food aid. Another $1.99 billion will be used to provide food aid,
    of which $300 million will support emergency food security interventions such as cash
    voucher and cash transfer programs and the local and regional purchase of food.
    Education: Our request for basic education expands the United States' leadership in
    global efforts to help all girls and boys access quality basic education. The FY 2010
    request ramps up support for basic education to nearly $1 billion, an increase of 26
    percent over the current year, to expand access to schooling, improve educational quality,
    increase emphasis on educational results, and provide alternatives to extremist ideology.
    The request expands focus to include at-risk and out-of-school youth, and programs are
    coordinated with partner countries, other donors, and multilateral institutions, including
    the Education For All Fast-Track Initiative, to reduce the global education deficit.
    Global Climate Change: Since taking office, President Obama and Secretary Clinton
    have made it clear that the United States is fully engaged and committed to meeting the
    challenges of climate change. The Obama Administration is bringing significant
    resources to the table -- almost a $1 billion overall U.S. Government increase, including
    funds requested by the Treasury Department, signifying robust and ambitious measures
    by the Obama Administration to combat climate change and help put the world on a
    pathway to a low carbon future.
    Within the State and USAID budget, the FY 2010 request includes $309 million of
    additional international climate change assistance, added to an FY 2009 base of $272
    million for a total of $581 million. These funds will help developing countries most
    vulnerable to the impacts of climate change adapt and become more climate-resilient and
    also assist them in pursuing low carbon economies through the development of clean
    energy alternatives. Further, we will support international programs aimed at reducing
    emissions from the energy sector, industry, and urban areas and encourage sustainable
    water and land use, including deforestation, which accounts for about 17 percent of
    global greenhouse gas emission.
     Global Health: The United States continues to lead on global health in HIV/AIDS, TB,
     and malaria, and we are now taking the next steps that will save the lives of millions
     more women, children and families in the developing world. The FY 2010 budget
     request includes $7.6 billion for global health programs for the Global Health and Child
                                                  6


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015




    Survival (GHCS) Account. This request is part of a six-year, $63 billion effort to launch,
    alongside our existing commitments and partners, an integrated approach to increase
    resources for maternal and child health, family planning and neglected tropical diseases
    with the potential to enhance dramatically quality of life, exponentially increase the
    number of lives saved, and break the cycle of poverty and disease.
    To combat HIV/AIDS, this budget provides a $100 million increase for HIV \AIDS
    bilateral programs over FY 2009 enacted and demonstrates this Administration's
    commitment to continuing the fight against HIV/AIDS as the centerpiece of its global
    health agenda. In FY 2010, HIV\AIDS funding is almost 75% of the GHCS funding. In
    addition, a total of $585 million is requested to support the malaria initiative to reduce
    malaria deaths by 50 percent in each of 15 priority countries; and the $525 million
    requested for maternal and child health and $475 million requested for family planning is
    an increase over the robust levels appropriated by Congress in FY 2009.
    Third, we must enhance strategic bilateral and multilateral partnerships critical to
    global security, stability, and prosperity.

    We must renew our diplomacy and target our development assistance to address global
    threats too big and complex to meet alone, helping to develop the capacity of willing
    partners to work with us to solve global problems. Our strategy focuses on states that can
    or must be partners in regional peace and prosperity and those tipping-point states whose
    frailties present regional and global threats. And it seeks to leverage multilateral
    engagement, always a force multiplier in addressing challenges of mutual concern.
    Our simultaneous top-down and bottom-up approach allows us to focus on building
    much-needed capabilities in government institutions while at the same time reaching out
    directly to meet humanitarian needs of the population. As the President and Secretary
    have made clear, the Administration is committed to ensuring that our spending in these
    areas is guided by clear plans with achievable outcomes. Such assistance will not be a
    blank check -- we will hold ourselves and others accountable and establish clear
    indicators for success.
    In Afghanistan, we are seeking to help develop self-reliant Afghanistan Security Forces;
    promoting capable, accountable and effective government at the provincial, local and
    national levels; ramping up quick impact civilian assistance efforts that promote licit
    economic opportunities to support counter-insurgency efforts; and increasing alternative
    development funding as part of our counter-narcotics strategy. The FY 2010 request
    includes significant resources for non-military assistance to Afghanistan -- $2.79 billion -
    - an increase of four percent over the FY 2009 total, including the Spring Supplemental
    Request.
    In Pakistan, we will work toward improving Pakistan's capability to fight extremists;
    strengthening government capacity and the rule of law; providing emergency economic
    relief and promoting economic growth, agriculture, infrastructure, and education as
    alternatives to extremist ideology; and developing a strategic communications strategy to
    counter terrorist propaganda. The FY 2010 request for Pakistan is $1.6 billion, an 11
                                                 7


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015




    percent increase from FY 2009 and a tripling of non-military aid from $457 million in FY
    2008 to $1.3 billion in FY 2010.
    And in Iraq, our funding request advances efforts to continue our support toward greater
    Iraqi self reliance. The FY 2010 request of $500 million, a decrease of 18 percent from
    the FY 2009 total, focuses on key areas that will help the Iraqis lay a foundation for
    lasting peace and stability, including strengthened institutional capacity at both the
    national and provincial levels, assistance to displaced Iraqis, and support to advance
    national reconciliation.
    In the broader Middle East, we will continue to work to support greater stability and
    prosperity. The United States remains committed to a comprehensive and secure peace
    between Israel and its Arab neighbors, including a two-state solution to the Israeli-
    Palestinian conflict. We remain steadfast in our commitment to Israel's security. The FY
    2010 request includes $2.8 billion for Israel, a $225 million increase from FY 2009, to
    support the second year of a ten-year, $30 billion commitment to help Israel maintain its
    qualitative military edge. Other U.S. assistance to the countries of the region, including
    Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon, support this objective by fostering stability, security and the
    economic prosperity of our allies and mitigating the influence of extremists.
    Our assistance also supports the conditions necessary for a Palestinian state to be realized
    while continuing to meet immediate humanitarian needs. We are seeking funds to help
    strengthen the Palestinian Authority's governing institutions. These steps are essential to
    resuming serious negotiations toward a comprehensive peace in the region and
    establishment of a Palestinian state that will live side-by-side with Israel in peace and
    security.
    The FY 2010 request includes $502 million for the West Bank and Gaza to support
    reforms of the security sector; improve local infrastructure; build institutional capacity;
    strengthen moderate voices, including in the private sector; create jobs; provide necessary
    humanitarian assistance; and promote initiatives in health and education. In all cases, our
    assistance programs in Gaza will be based on work with fully-vetted private individuals,
    organizations, and public international organizations, and will be carried out in a
    transparent, accountable manner to help ensure that aid does not end up in the hands of
    terrorist organizations. We will work with the Palestinian Authority and our
    implementing partners to follow established safeguards that will ensure that our funding
    is used only where, and for whom, it is intended.
    Finally, in keeping with our prevention strategy, the FY 2010 request increases funding
    for Yemen by 83 percent, to $55 million. We believe we must work to help keep Yemen
    out of failed state status. We have requested significant across-the-board development
    increases in education, health, and jobs creation to mitigate this threat.
    Closer to home, we seek to strengthen ties with our partners in Mexico and Central and
    South America. Our approach is one of true collaboration, targeted to needs they identify
    and building the security capacity of the state while also focusing on the root causes of
    crime in the region, including economic inequality, the lack of educational opportunities,

                                                 8


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015




     corruption, impunity, and weak governmental institutions. We request $550 million in
     the FY 2010 request to strengthen our efforts under the Merida Initiative to combat
     narcotics and arms trafficking, gangs and organized crime in our hemisphere by
     strengthening law enforcement and interdiction capacity. Other regional priorities
     include continued support for Colombia's fight against terrorism and narcotics trafficking
     -- although at a reduced rate as Colombia continues assuming greater responsibility for
     counter-narcotics efforts. And we are meeting the President's Summit of the Americas
     Commitments with $55 million for energy and climate change, $31 million for a
     Caribbean Security Initiative as part of the President's Shared Security Partnership to
     compliment Merida, and $10 million for an education partnership for at-risk youth.
     Together with the review of our strategy in Haiti, and on the heels of the Secretary's visit,
     we are requesting significant funding for Haiti to strengthen its democracy, reduce
     poverty, protect the environment, and expand counter-narcotics programs. In the security
     sector, U.S. programs will focus on recruiting, training and equipping Haiti's police, and
     on stabilizing urban hot zones that until recently were incubators of gang warfare and
     political violence. On economic growth, we will focus on developing the country's
     finance sector, helping the government create a regulatory environment favorable to
     investors, and growing the capacity of the country's agriculture industry.
     In Africa, the imperative to counter the threats of AIDS, Malaria, and other major
     obstacles to health and prosperity remains compelling. The global economic crisis has hit
     Africa harder than expected, with food insecurity exacerbated by low commodity export
     revenues and dwindling remittances and investment flows. These factors have threatened
     social unrest and political instability, particularly in the form of coups. Our response is
     designed to promote economic growth and support good governance in order to create
     greater opportunities, as well as to address issues such as food insecurity, with significant
     resources targeted to those countries in Africa that have the potential to become regional
     bread baskets. We also seek to buttress the continent against the erosion of the hard-won
     gains in political stability and democratic progress, particularly in Kenya and Liberia.
     Finally, our request is targeted to help resolve and prevent destabilizing conflicts,
     especially in Sudan, Somalia, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. African
     entrepreneurs and civil society leaders have begun to reorient their societies toward
     growth and better governance. With our support and partnership, we can save lives,
     prevent instability and extremism from advancing, and put Africa back on the road to a
     prosperous future.
     Many countries of East Asia and the Pacific have, in the course of a generation, lifted
     themselves out of poverty and become models for economic prosperity and political
     diversity. Our goals for the region include ensuring peace, consolidating democratic
     gains, and fostering continued economic reforms to reach the region's poorest citizens.
     Our programs in the Philippines and our work in North Korea help to reduce the risk of
     terrorism and nuclear proliferation which threaten the United States and the region. On
     the democracy front, Secretary Clinton announced the launch of a U.S.-Indonesian
     Comprehensive Partnership during her trip to Jakarta in February. This partnership seeks
     to support the successful transformation of the world's third largest democracy into a

                                                   9


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015




     stable, democratic and moderate voice, and a beacon of promise around the world.
     Finally, our programs in Burma, Cambodia, and Vietnam not only foster a more vibrant
     civil society, but put in place the building blocks for prosperity and wellbeing for
     vulnerable populations by investing in public health, education, and broad-based
     economic development.
     In Europe, we are seeking to support policies geared to promote a continent whole, free
     and at peace. That includes supporting democratic reformers in Georgia, Ukraine and
     Moldova. For Russia, our request seeks to support the efforts of those in Russia
     promoting democratic reform while cooperating with the government in areas of common
     interest. For Southeast Europe, ensuring the success of newly-independent Kosovo is a
     top priority, followed closely by the need to facilitate progress on reform in Serbia and
     prevent ethnic-based crises that would prevent implementation of the Dayton Accords in
     Bosnia and Herzegovina. In addition, the request restores full U.S. support for the
     Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) budget, preventing further
     operating shortfalls. Providing full financial support to the OSCE is in keeping with the
     Administration's emphasis on revitalizing multilateral engagement, which includes active
     participation on our part, as well as a commitment to paying our dues on time and in full.

     In all of these areas -- from Iraq and Afghanistan to the Balkans -- our objectives and
     investments are greatly enhanced when pursued in partnership with the international
     community. Many of our foreign policy challenges rely on coalitions of like-minded
     partners, forged within our international institutions. And as demonstrated through our
     support for U.N. peacekeeping activities, the dollars we contribute to these fora leverage
     significant returns.

     Therefore, success lies in maintaining U.S. leadership in the international community.
     Responsible global leadership means meeting our financial commitments to international
     institutions, even as we work with them to institute reforms to strengthen their efficacy.
     The Administration's budget requests $4.1 billion for assessed contributions to
     multilateral organizations and peacekeeping assessments, demonstrating our resolve to
     work together with members of the international community in the pursuit of common
     goals. Our overall request meets U.S. financial commitments to the United Nations and
     other international organizations that support a wide range of U.S. national security,
     foreign policy, and economic goals, including full funding of all 2010 scheduled
     payments to the Multilateral Development Banks, and a portion of outstanding arrears.

     Fourth, we must strengthen global security capabilities.

     One of the most basic responsibilities of government is to provide security and order to
     its people. Our allies and partners must be able to defend their territory and borders
     against both external and internal attacks. That is why our strategy seeks to forge
     partnerships among states to help build global security capacity in a host of areas,
     including peacekeeping, police training, non-proliferation, and combating nuclear
     terrorism. Notable examples include our Cooperative Threat Reduction Program with
     Russia; the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, which brings together 75
                                                  10


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015




     partner countries; and the Proliferation Security Initiative, a global effort that aims to stop
     trafficking of weapons of mass destruction supported by over 90 countries.

     The FY 2010 request also includes $90 million to launch a new multi-year effort to help
     address the wide array of threats posed by terrorist organizations. The Shared Security
     Partnership will allow the United States to forge strategic partnerships with allies to
     confront common global extremist threats, building on previous law enforcement and
     counter-terrorist efforts to create a regional and global information-sharing and
     coordination infrastructure.
     This budget also continues funding for the Global Peace Operations Initiative (GPOI),
     which builds and maintains the capacity and effectiveness of peace operations worldwide.
     GPOI is on track to complete its global target of training 75,000 peacekeepers, and is
     shifting its focus from the direct training of peacekeepers to building sustainable,
     indigenous capacity. Funding will also enhance the ability of our partners to address
     counterterrorism threats through the Trans-Sahara Counterterrorism Partnership and the
     East Africa Regional Strategic Initiative programs; reform military forces in the
     aftermath of conflict into professional military forces with respect for the rule of law,
     including those in Southern Sudan, Liberia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
     Somalia; and address critical regional coastal and border security problems in Africa.
     Finally, our resource request for nonproliferation, anti-terrorism, and demining activities
     is up 17 percent, including increases to expand the terrorist interdiction watchlist system
     and efforts to destroy conventional weapons stockpiles.
     Fifth, we must maintain the resources to respond to urgent humanitarian needs.
     The U.S. remains the leader in responding to the most vulnerable populations, providing
     basic life-sustaining support in the face of disasters; and protection of refugees, conflict
     victims, and internally displaced persons overseas. Our humanitarian assistance
     programs are the most fundamental expression of our values, from responding to the
     devastating impacts of the cyclone in Burma to the victims of conflict and instability in
     Darfur, Zimbabwe, and now Sri Lanka and Pakistan. We have also seen that leading with
     these values has a multiplier effect. It was our humanitarian assistance in the aftermath
     of the earthquake in Pakistan that began to turn the sentiments of Pakistani citizens away
     from extremists, and to see the United States as a force for good in their lives. And we
     know that the deep human suffering -- the lack of access to the most basic of needs -- can
     feed instability and further conflict.
     Our request aims to budget fully for expected requirements for refugees, rather than
     continuing to rely on supplemental appropriations. The request includes $4.1 billion in
     refugee, disaster, displaced persons and emergency food assistance, which is part of our
     comprehensive U.S. food security efforts. In addition to basic needs, these resources
     assist refugees with voluntary repatriation, local integration, or permanent resettlement in
     a third country, and provide critical humanitarian relief, rehabilitation, and reconstruction
     in countries around the world affected by natural and man-made disasters.

                                                   11


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015




    Conclusion: Managing for Success

    Securing the resources to promote our goals is an important step toward restoring
    American global leadership. But resources are not enough. With leadership comes
    responsibility, and especially in these difficult economic times, we must be better
    managers of our resources. Congress has been at the forefront of identifying ways to
    improve our assistance policies and practice, and we thank you for your leadership and
    welcome your ongoing consultation.
    I hope that the simple fact that I am here before you today is a sign of our commitment to
    greater fiscal discipline and efficiency in international affairs. One of Secretary Clinton's
    first orders of business was to fill for the first time the position of Deputy Secretary of
    State for Management and Resources. This reflected her seriousness and determination
    that the Department must be a responsible steward of taxpayer dollars and maximize
    resources for greatest effect.
    Among my first duties has been to undertake a comprehensive review of our foreign
    assistance programs. Secretary Clinton has asked me to make recommendations on new
    ways to speed the cause of development in nations left behind by poverty, to use foreign
    aid to buttress our foreign policy aims, and to bring the full power of our resources to
    bear. This effort is well underway, and we look forward to working with you as it
    evolves.
    At that same time, we are already acting on some of the principles that will help guide
    our new approach to foreign assistance. We are learning from real-world experiences
    what works and what does not. We are also rethinking where to focus our attention to
    best advance our nation's security.
    In particular, let me highlight the importance of an integrated approach to development to
    our efforts in Afghanistan and Pakistan. To get our policies right toward these two
    critically important countries, we must deploy our resources for maximum impact.
    Both the State Department and USAID are building upon the Administration's overall
    strategic review to craft and implement a comprehensive effort that focuses on ways that
    civilian agencies -- State, USAID, working together the Department of Agriculture and
    others -- can bolster both security and development. We recognize that over the long
    haul, we will not have one without the other. Different agencies have different tools and
    different strengths. We are working to unite them behind a common mission.
    You can see a similar focus on unity of effort in an entirely different initiative -- the
    Administration's efforts to develop a new food security strategy to dramatically reduce
    global hunger and poverty. The State Department is leading a whole-of-government
    process to design and implement this new strategy. We are creating an inventory of each
    agency's programs, identifying gaps in our current programming, and coordinating
    among all agencies to develop a shared strategy.
    Both of these efforts underscore the need to develop basic mechanisms that allow us to
    integrate our strengths -- acting as a sort of diplomatic force multiplier under a shared
                                                 12


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015




    mission. State and USAID account for about 70 percent of official U.S. development
    assistance; we are just two of the nearly 20 U.S. agencies involved in providing foreign
    aid. We must care more about strategy, unity and results than we do about turf. We must
    be able to look at a country, a function, or an objective, and be able to identify everything
    that the US. government is doing in that area -- not just State. To meet the challenges of
    a world being bound closer together, we need a government that is working closer
    together.
    Similarly, we must speak with one voice. Our partners abroad have sometimes received
    mixed messages from the array of agencies working in international affairs, each of
    which has its own rules of engagement. Our ability to get results on the ground will
    depend on our ability to field coordinated teams, both in Washington and around the
    globe. This is why we are so urgently focused on better coordination of U.S. efforts in
    Afghanistan and Pakistan, and it is why we are reviewing options about how best to
    develop systems and incentives to strengthen coordination across our foreign affairs
    programs.
     Let me also mention another key principle behind our reform efforts: accountability. We
     must demand results. That means defining specific strategic priorities; developing and
     validating ways to measure performance with OMB, Congress, and other key
     stakeholders; and making budget and program-management decisions on the basis of
     results -- or lack thereof.
     Finally, we are mindful that in an age of economic crisis and foreign challenges, the
     United States must be a more effective donor. Development progress is best achieved
     when priorities are determined and implemented by responsible partners, and aid levels
     are sustained, predictable, and coordinated with other donors. We must continue to strive
     for our assistance to be demand-driven, giving our people in the field the means to
     leverage opportunities and enhancing our ability to partner with responsible governments.
     This is an ambitious agenda, but Secretary Clinton and I are looking forward to the
     challenges. With the right resources and your good counsel, we are confident that we can
     rise to meet the moment. We look forward to consulting closely with the Congress and
     other stakeholders as we continue to move ahead in the coming weeks and months. And
     I look forward to our discussion today. Thank you again for having me here today, and
     thank you for your time.




                                                  13


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761340 Date: 06/30/2015
