     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760108 Date: 06/30/2015
                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                 B6




From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                             Friday, August 21, 2009 6:58 PM
To:
Subject:                          Re: Brooke Memorial Fellowship in India



Strobe--This is wonderful news and such a fitting memorial to Booke..                                 Also. I would like
to talk w you about your ideas of what I can/should be doing. Could I call in the next few days? What times are best for
you? H

    Original Message
From: Strobe Talbott
Sent: Thu Aug 20 07:35:17 2009
Subject: Brooke Memorial Fellowship in India

Friends/Family: I wanted you to see what the board of the Inel Center for Research on Women has done. Below is what
you'll find on the website http://www.awid.org/eng/Issues-and-Analysis/Library/Brooke-Shearer-Fellowship.




<http://www.awid.org/eng>

The International Center for Research of Women (ICRW). New Delhi, India.



Description:



The International Center for Research of Women (ICRW) has established a fellowship in memory of Brooke Shearer, a
former ICRW board member and dedicated advocate for improving the health and economic status of women in the
developing world. The Brooke Shearer fellowship in India is an opportunity for U.S. early career professionals with
graduate degrees to contribute to research and programs that advance gender equality and empower women in Asia.

Shearer was a stalwart supporter and contributor to ICRW's mission and work. ICRW honors her commitment to women
with a fellowship program based in our Asia Regional Office in New Delhi, India, a tribute to Shearer's fond memories of
her time spent in India during her youth and her tenure on ICRW's board.

The 2009 fellow will work in collaboration with the Asia director of the social and economic development group on
programs, research, advocacy, and business development related to the group's portfolio of work. The specific activities
of the fellow will be determined based on the substantive and technical skills, interests, and experience of the candidate
selected and the current opportunities in the group. Likely projects for engagement include:

            The PACE program—an ICRW collaboration with Gap Inc. on workplace and personal advancement of
female garment workers in India, Cambodia, Bangladesh.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760108 Date: 06/30/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760108 Date: 06/30/2015




              The Counting Girls Project—a project examining son preference in India and China, the effectiveness of
specific policy efforts in addressing sex selection and discrimination against girl children, and the potential conflict
between the human rights of girls and reproductive rights for women.

              Delayed Marriage—project examining the social norms that would need to be changed to eliminate early
marriage.



Primary Duties:



The fellow will engage in the following responsibilities and tasks:

            Develop technical content of projects including conceptualization, data analysis, background research,
program and evaluation design, survey and instrument design;

             Work with national and international partners on technical assistance, partner engagement and support,
and relationship management;

              Work on project management tasks including administration, budgets, team coordination and work plans;

              Write, synthesize and present findings in reports, briefs, papers and presentations;

              Assist with business development activities including grant writing and proposals;

            Prepare research and program findings for communication to various audiences (donors, policy-makers,
program personnel, researchers) at various forums and opportunities (meetings, events, cultivation, deliverables).



Required Education, Skills, Knowledge and Abilities:



              Applicants should have a Master's degree (5 years or less) or Ph.D. (1 year or less) in the social sciences,
public health, international development or a related field. Qualified candidates with relevant job experience on
program or policy-relevant social science research are preferred. Due to the nature of the fellowship eligibility
guidelines, only US citizens or permanent residents, residing in the US or in India, will be considered.



The following skills are required:



             Strong analytical and conceptual skills along with substantive background in gender and social science
issues and research;

              Desire and commitment to link research with policy and programs;

              Strong interest in understanding on-the-ground development research and program needs and activities in
Asia;

              Excellent written and verbal communication and presentation abilities;




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760108 Date: 06/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760108 Date: 06/30/2015




             Ability to work collaboratively with professionals at different levels, including colleagues, partners and
donor organizations;

             Strong qualitative and quantitative research skills; and

             Ability to participate in fundraising and networking activities.



Duration:



One fellow will be selected each year for a term ranging from six months to one year. The fellowship is a full-time
commitment.



Terms:



The fellowship award consists of a monthly stipend, health insurance and round trip travel to India.. The fellow is
responsible for all local accommodations and living costs. The fellow will be provided with office space and support in
ICRW's Asia Regional Office in New Delhi.



To Apply:



To apply, please submit a letter of interest and curriculum vitae to jobs@icrw.org <mailto:jobs@icrw.org> .

Applications will be reviewed on a rolling basis. Fellowship will start between September 1 and October 1, 2009.

Website: http://www.icrw.org/html/jobs/jobs.htm <http://www.icrw.org/html/jobs/jobs.htm>

Article License: Copyright - Article License Holder: ICRW




Strobe Talbott

President, The Brookings Institution

1775 Massachusetts Avenue NW

Washington, DC 20036

202.797.6200




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760108 Date: 06/30/2015
