      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763001 Date: 06/30/2015
                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                    B6




From:                            sbwhoeop
Sent:                            Friday, June 12, 2009 6:57 PM
To:
Subject:                         Melanne's event was wonderful. Get Shaun Woodward's memo? Miliband interview
                                 below. Sid



http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2009/jun/12/david-miliband-gordon-brown-labour-leadership/print
The Guardian



David Miliband: Labour is facing the fight of its life
Foreign secretary thought about quitting the government in last week's turmoil

David Miliband expressed his frustration at a lack of vision from the Labour leadership. Photograph: Martin
Godwin
Voters still don't know what Labour and Gordon Brown stand for, David Miliband admits today, as he reveals
how close he came to quitting the government during last week's turmoil at Westminster.
Speaking to the Guardian at the end of 10 extraordinary days, the foreign secretary says the party's high
command was given an "electric shock" by the disastrous European election results, and he urges fellow
ministers to get out and prepare for "the fight of our life".
But Miliband also concedes that he considered following his close friend and ally James Purnell, who resigned
from the government last week and called for the prime minister to stand down.
Miliband said: "I'd made my decision on Thursday. Sometimes you can make your decisions with great
planning and calculation and sometimes you have to make them rather more quickly. James made his decision
in good faith, I made my decision in good faith ... we all have tolive with our decisions."
The Labour party has a settled view of who should be leader, he said. "This divides people who are close and
people feel passionately one way and people feel passionately the other way."
Describing the task now facing Labour, he says: "It could not be more urgent that there is a maximum of 11
months until the next general election, that we got 15% of the vote nationally [last week], that we came second
in Wales and that one in 20 people voted for us. If that does not electric shock us out of our ministerial chairs to
think: 'By God, we have got the fight of our life on our hands because whatever the Tories are they certainly
don't deserve a landslide' — then nothing will."
Miliband has not given a domestic policy interview for nearly nine months since he felt dogged by accusations
that he was manoeuvring for the premiership. He refuses to acknowledge that his decision to back Brown last
week saved the prime minister, saying "it is impossible to tell".
But the foreign secretary feels his loyalty has given him the freedom to speak his mind without his motives
being questioned by anyone in Downing Street.
Miliband betrays frustration at the absence of a clear Labour vision, saying: "We need the message to go out
that we have got the humility to learn about what has gone wrong.
"It is not a masochism strategy. It is about saying what we believe in. It is about clarity, priority, adding up to
purpose. I know what we stand for, I know what our instincts are, but the voters don't. Actually, I know what
Gordon Brown stands for.
"We have a responsibility to make sure that, come the election, [voters] know what Labour stands for. We were
not being listened to, people felt that they had been forgotten, we neither inspired nor reassured."
 He calls for cabinet colleagues to show stronger leadership in the battle to restore Labour's fortunes. "We need
to make sure the talents and energies of not just the whole of the cabinet, but the whole of the labour movement


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763001 Date: 06/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763001 Date: 06/30/2015




are give n free rein because one in 20 people voted for us. The truth is that we are not automatons. We all have
to get out there."
Asked whether he felt voters had stopped listening to Brown, Miliband said: "He himself has said he has to
build on his strengths and work on his weaknesses. That is a good maxim for all of us. He is someone who
made the right decisions on the biggest issue of the day. We have got a chance to fight with honour and dignity
for what we believe in. The stakes are very high because we know that parties can slump into very dangerous
positions."
Providing what he describes as a route map from the disaster, he said: "Labour first needs a period of
competent, effective, stable government; secondly, we need to reset our political compass so ministers are no
longer locked in their departments, but link their policies to their values; and thirdly, the government has to be
at the cutting edge of policy."
On the issue of political reform, he demands a speeding-up of the pace of political reform, saying it is not a
piece of middle-class frippery. For the first time, he reveals that he now backs the Alternative Vote for the
Commons, saying MPs' legitimacy will be strengthened by being able to say 50% in my constituency voted for
me.
He says the change cannot be made before the general election. He also backs a fresh push on Lords reform,
saying "we have got an agreed blueprint".
He rounded on Tory spending plans, but said Labour would clarify its own intentions before the election. "They
will be credible and clear. We will come to that in an open and honest way."
But he defends delay in setting out these figures, arguing "when you are in the middle of a Tornado it is a bad
time take a forecast".
In an oblique reference to the Damian McBride briefings, he also calls on the media to abandon unattributable
briefings, saying all politicians' spokesmen should be named, or not quoted by media outlets. "The gotcha
culture of politics is not in anyone's interests," he said.



Shop Dell's full line of Laptops now starting at $349!




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763001 Date: 06/30/2015
