UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761876 Date: 06/30/2015




                                                                           RELEASE IN FULL




                                   Kathleen M. O'Toole
    Kathleen M. O'Toole currently serves as Chief Inspector of the Garda Siochana
    Inspectorate, an oversight body responsible for bringing reform, best practice and
    accountability to the 15,000 member Irish national police service. O'Toole was recruited
    by the Irish Government for this role as the result of her service on the Independent
    Commission on Policing in Northern Ireland (The Patten Commission).

    The Patten Commission was established is 1998 as part of the Good Friday Agreement in
    Northern Ireland. The eight-member group created a new framework for policing and
    security as an integral step in the Peace Process.

    O'Toole remains actively involved in Northern Ireland. She was recently tapped by the
    Security Minister there to serve on a four-person commission established to develop
    prison reforms. In addition, she maintains close links to the North through her cross-
    community volunteer and philanthropic work.

    As the result of her intimate knowledge and extensive network of contacts in Northern
    Ireland, O'Toole has frequently been tapped to brief and advise U.S. Government
    officials on issues there.

    O'Toole is a practicing attorney with diverse career experience in government and the
    private sector. She began her career in 1979 as a patrol officer in the Boston Police
    Department and rose through the ranks of local and state law enforcement in
    Massachusetts. Prior to her appointment as Chief Inspector of the Garda Siochana, she
    served as Boston Police Commissioner, overseeing three thousand sworn and civilian
    personnel. She also served as Massachusetts Secretary of Public Safety, overseeing
    twenty agencies and more than 10,000 employees.

    O'Toole has worked on other high-profile projects. For example, she was a consultant to
    the United States Department of Justice Civil Rights Division on police profiling cases.
    She also chaired the Boston Fire Department Review Commission, a group established to
    address serious allegations of mismanagement and bias.

    Kathleen O'Toole founded O'Toole Associates LLC, an international consulting firm
    with offices in Dublin, Ireland and Boston, Massachusetts. The firm provides a variety of
    services to government and industry clients in Ireland, Northern Ireland and the United
    States.

    O'Toole earned a Bachelor of Arts Degree from Boston College, a juris doctor from New
    England School of Law and was admitted to the bar as a practicing attorney in 1982. She
    is now enrolled in the PhD program at the Business School of Trinity College, Dublin.
    She is married to Dan O'Toole and has one daughter, Meghan.


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761876 Date: 06/30/2015
