        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761559 Date: 06/30/2015



                                                                                                      RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                      B6



From:                               Cheryl Mills
Sent:                               Friday, May 22, 2009 1:22 PM
To:
Cc:                                 Jake.Sullivan
Subject:                            Fwd: Advocate.com: Draft Letter Signals Clinton Ready For Equal Treatment at State




Oh my.

cdm
          Forwarded message
,From: Richard Socarides
 Date: Fri, May 22, 2009 at 11:30 AM
 Subject: Advocate.com: Draft Letter Signals Clinton Ready For Equal Treatment at State
 To: Cheryl Mills


http://www.advocate.cominews detail ektid85471.asp

May 22, 2009



Draft Letter Signals Clinton Ready For
Equal Treatment at State
By Kerry Eleveld


The Advocate has obtained a draft of a letter from Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to employees of the State Department
that details her intentions to extend certain benefits to same-sex partners of foreign service officers posted abroad.


"Historically, domestic partners of Foreign Service members have not been provided the same training, benefits, allowances,
and protections that other family members receive. These inequities are unfair and must end. Providing training, medical
care and other benefits to domestic partners promote the cohesiveness, safety and effectiveness of our Posts abroad," says
the letter.


The letter explains that the department will be "exercising its inherent authority to change its regulations in the Foreign
Affairs Manual and Department of State Standardized Regulations" in order to allow domestic partners of foreign service
personnel to qualify as family members. "Where appropriate, this extension of benefits and allowances will apply to the
children of domestic partners as well."


Providing these benefits to all employees, notes the letter, will help the department "attract and retain personnel in a
competitive environment where domestic partner benefits and allowances are increasingly the norm for world-class
employers. At bottom, the Department will provide these benefits for both opposite-sex and same-sex domestic partners
because it is the right thing to do."


The letter appears to be the culmination of Secretary Clinton's work with LGBT employee groups at the State Department. A
source familiar with the situation who spoke on the condition of anonymity said the letter was drafted by senior officials at



        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761559 Date: 06/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761559 Date: 06/30/2015




the department and represents the Secretary's thinking on the issue. The letter currently awaits final approval from senior
government lawyers.


The draft is consistent with statements made this week by California Congressman Howard Berman that Secretary Clinton
is committed to equalizing the treatment of gay employees of the State Department and that he anticipated an
announcement on the matter soon.




Full text of the letter is below:


DRAFT INTERNAL RELEASE
For Review


Today, I am pleased to announce that the Department of State will be extending a number of benefits and allowances to
domestic partners of members of the Foreign Service assigned abroad.


While a career in the Foreign Service is rewarding, the demands to serve our country both at home and abroad also require
great sacrifice by our Foreign Service personnel and their families as well. Family members often must uproot their lives,
endure hardship conditions, and put their own careers on hold. Like all families, our Foreign Service families come in
different configurations; all are part of the common fabric of our Post communities abroad.


Historically, domestic partners of Foreign Service members have not been provided the same training, benefits, allowances,
and protections that other family members receive. These inequities are unfair and must end. Providing training, medical
care and other benefits to domestic partners promote the cohesiveness, safety and effectiveness of our Posts abroad. It will
also help the Department attract and retain personnel in a competitive environment where domestic partner benefits and
allowances are increasingly the norm for world-class employers. At bottom, the Department will provide these benefits for
both opposite-sex and same-sex domestic partners because it is the right thing to do.


The Department will be exercising its inherent authority to change its regulations in the Foreign Affairs Manual and
Department of State Standardized Regulations to allow the domestic partners of Department Foreign Service personnel to
qualify as family members for a variety of benefits and allowances. Where appropriate, this extension of benefits and
allowances will apply to the children of domestic partners as well. To qualify for these benefits and allowances, an employee
must file an affidavit identifying his or her domestic partner and certifying to certain eligibility requirements that will be set
forth in the FAM.


The Department of State intends to provide the following additional benefits and allowances for declared domestic partners of
eligible employees serving overseas:


       Diplomatic passports,
       Inclusion on employee travel orders to and from posts abroad,
       Shipment of household effects,
       Inclusion in family size calculations for the purpose of making housing allocations,
       Family member preference for employment at posts abroad,
       Use of medical facilities at posts abroad,
       Medical evacuation from posts abroad,
       Emergency travel for the partners to visit gravely ill or injured employees,
       Inclusion as family members for emergency evacuation from posts abroad,
       Subsistence payments related to emergency evacuation from posts abroad,
        Inclusion in calculations of payments of overseas differentials and allowances (e.g., payment for quarters, cost of
living, and other allowances),
        Representation expenses, and
        Training at the Foreign Service Institute.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761559 Date: 06/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761559 Date: 06/30/2015



The Department also will work with our inter-agency partners and host country governments to provide domestic partners
with diplomatic visas, appropriate diplomatic and consular privileges and immunities, and authorization to work in the local
economy abroad.


We look forward to implementing these changes.




Richard Socarides
Brady Klein Weissman LLP
501 Fifth Avenue, 19th Floor, New York, NY 10017
w: 212.949.5800 m:




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761559 Date: 06/30/2015
