      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760103 Date: 06/30/2015


                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                 B6



From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                             Monday, November 2, 2009 1:36 AM
To:                               'nancy               'millscd@state.gov'                                                     B6
Subject:                          Re: Advisory committee status and recommendations



Dear Nancy--

  I very much want to meet and we've been trying to pin my schedule down enough to offer a date. The only times I see
for me before December are Nov 21-23 or sometime in the second or third weeks of December. I'm copying Cheryl so
you two can try to find a time that works.

 As to the names, I think they're all worth inviting w the hope they can come. Let's do it! Best, H

    Original Message
From: Nancy Parrish
To: H
Sent: Fri Oct 30 10:49:00 2009
Subject: Advisory committee status and recommendations

Hillary,

I admire the way you handled yourself during your trip to Pakistan. It reminds me of the daunting job before you and it's
potential.

Successfully engaging the power of the DOS and the array of relevant external relationships on behalf of your goals will
remain a central challenge.

As we discussed, gathering a handful of loyal and trusted outside advisors could provide a valuable tool in this regard.

Given your late October or early November target for the first meeting, I have been working with Cheryl to come up with
a date. I guess given all that is going on possible dates seem to continually slip away.

I would understand if, in the context of everything on your plate this advisory group is just not practical. However, if you
do feel that such a gathering would be helpful and want to proceed, I believe you need to step in, select the initial date
or dates (with risk that it may need to change) and extend the invitations. A quick note to Mickey, Gordon, Maggie and
any others you want to include. Others mentioned so far include Sandy Berger, Strobe Talbott and Elaine Kamarck.

For at least the first gathering, you may want to consider two parts. A dinner, breakfast or other informal event plus a
more structured meeting would create the opportunity for informal discussion and time for reflection.

In the event you do want to move forward, I am happy to assist in any way that may be useful. Please know that I in no
way want to push this beyond where you may want to go.

Nancy




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760103 Date: 06/30/2015
