UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762500 Date: 06/30/2015



                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL


S.840 - International Clean Energy Development Act of 2009

Bill Highlights

The International Clean Energy Development Act of 2009, directs the U.S. Asia-Pacific
Partnership (APP) Program Office of the U.S. Department of State to establish a Development
and Commercialization Committee on Clean and Efficient Energy Technologies. The committee
shall review all existing APP action plans that focus on technology advancement, including
cleaner fossil fuel and power generation, determine the projects that should be expedited and
then leverage existing financial mechanisms to fund them. The bill authorizes funding of $200
million annually from 2010 to 2015. The new committee enables the APP to strengthen its focus
on development and commercialization of clean energy technologies — as well as:

    • Engages specific countries with the largest markets, manufacturing bases, and
      distribution chains in order to leverage their assets to achieve lower technology
      development and commercialization costs and influence global standards.

    • Receives a minimum of 100% match in funding. Existing APP Program Office policy
      requires all projects to have a minimum 1 for 1 match for funding from partners —
      equaling a program total of $2 billion in 5 years, contingent on U.S. funding at $200
      million per year.

    • Strengthens U.S. International Climate Diplomacy efforts by strengthening existing
      channels of engagement with critical countries (China and India) in areas where they can
      effectively contribute to the global effort of reducing GHG emissions.

APP Background

Initiated in July of 2005, The Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate (APP)
brings together seven major Asia-Pacific countries — Australia, Canada, China, India, Japan,
Korea, and the United States — that collectively account for more than half of the world's
economy, population, and energy use. Within this framework; the Partners are cooperating in
voluntary and collaborative efforts to address increased energy needs and the associated issues of
air pollution, energy security, and climate change. An innovative public-private sector effort, the
Asia-Pacific Partnership was established to achieve these objectives in ways that promote
economic development, reduce poverty, and accelerate the development and deployment of
cleaner, more efficient technologies. The work of the Asia-Pacific Partnership comprises a wide
range of activities. The initial portfolio of Partnership projects is weighted toward activities such
best practice identification, and technology research and demonstration, with project examples
including: standardized energy efficient lighting; transforming waste to fuel in cement kilns;
improving carbon capture technology for coal-fired power plants; developing coal mining health
and safety strategies; sharing best practices in power generation; promoting solar power
deployment; and increasing usage of cleaner steel technologies.

                                                 1


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762500 Date: 06/30/2015
