      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761495 Date: 06/30/2015


                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                         B6



From:                           Jackie Newmyer                                                            B6
Sent:                           Monday, March 30, 2009 3:38 PM
To:
Subject:                        Re: Follow up
Attachments:                    Consulting for State 1N 30 March 09.doc


Secretary Clinton,

Pending our conversation, I thought I owed Anne-Marie a thank you and follow up message because we had a
terrific chat on Thursday,

                                       bringing to bear the best extra-governmental academic expertise
through the Long Term Strategy Group                 so I just sent a proposal memo (attached and pasted in
below). Thank you again for recommending me and for all of your advice.

I am most eager to help however I can and look forward to hearing your thoughts.

All best. Jackie

Memorandum
To:   Department of State
From: Long Term Strategy Group
Re:

Issue: The Long Term Strategy Group would undertake by means of a consulting agreement to explore major
shifts in American strategy for interacting with the major powers of Asia. This would involve simulations of
alternative interactions among Asian powers, and the impact of alternative American strategies on the outcome
of those interactions. Because these explorations involve speculative contingencies, they are most appropriately
conducted through non-governmental institutions, though they can ultimately be used to inform debate within
the American government.

Background: The strategic landscape of Asia has changed substantially over the last few decades, and may yet
shift suddenly in ways that are currently under-explored. The growth of Chinese power is altering the Asian
balance of power; the government of India is exploring new defense alignments; and Japanese officials are
openly discussing subjects that were previously off limits, up to and including a nuclear weapons option for
Japan. The current economic crisis will very likely lead to higher levels of political instability within major
Asian countries, including China, which may, in turn lead to discontinuities in their external policies, creating a
need to explore a range of possible new political configurations within the region, and possible new modes of
American interaction with traditional allies, new friends, and potential rivals. The explicit examination of these
new configurations and modes of interaction calls for combinations of activities (e.g., conduct of simulations of
long-range regional interactions, some of which entail non-incremental shifts in American foreign policy) and
consideration of scenarios that are inevitably politically sensitive and are most appropriately conducted outside ,
the American government.

The role of non-government groups working with the American government to explore speculative
contingencies is well established. The Center for New American Strategy has been exploring strategic options
in Afghanistan. The Brookings Institution and Center for Strategic and International Studies have regularly


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761495 Date: 06/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761495 Date: 06/30/2015



worked on plans to restructure agencies and departments within the American government that are not as well
positioned to conduct that sort of planning themselves.

The Long Term Strategy Group has specialized in the analysis of modes of strategic decision-making and
behavior that differ from those anticipated by the United States. It has focused on China, Iran, India, Pakistan,
and Japan, and has presented its work to the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, National
Intelligence Council, NSC staff members, and the Office of the Secretary of Defense. LTSG has participated in
and organized multiple simulations for the American government to explore the nature and outcome of complex
interactions among states that do not behave in ways commonly anticipated by the United States. As a private,
for-profit organization, it can conduct work that remains the exclusive, not-for-publication property of the
contracting party (i.e., the government).

The initial issues to be explored by LTSG would include:

--The impact of a potential severe and prolonged economic contraction on the foreign policies of China, Japan,
and Russia; the resulting shifts in alliances and relationships of conflict within the region; and the alternative
strategies for interacting with Asia that might be considered by the United States.

--The impact of a potential end of effective central government in Pakistan that leaves a Punjab state co-existing
with a Baluch/Sindh state and an Afghanistan that expands to control the border regions now part of Pakistan.

--The impact of the acquisition of nuclear weapons by Iran on intra-Asian relations.

In each case, the deliverables would constitute one monograph, the conduct of one simulation exercise
involving non-government participants (and government observers/participants if desired), and one workshop
report.

Action: To approve the general plan of work set forth above, and to initiate administrative measures to
complete the work within 15 months of initial approval.


Jacqueline Newmyer
President, Long Term Strategy Group
12 Eliot St., Cambridge, MA 02138
617-661-1620 (ph)
617-661-1626 (fax)
www.ltstrategy.com




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761495 Date: 06/30/2015
