      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758642 Date: 06/30/2015


                                                                                          RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                          B5,B6




From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                             Friday, May 29, 2009 7:30 AM
To:                               'abedinh@state.gov'
Subject:                          Fw: FW: Frame



Pls print.

    Original Message
From: Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
To: H
Sent: Fri May 29 05:43:14 2009
Subject: Fw: FW: Frame

Fyi

Jim's thoughts on doc

Cdm




From: Jim Kennedy
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Cc:
Sent: Fri May 29 02:35:47 2009
Subject: Re: FW: Frame



I think this is very good. I really like the emphasis on security, which is part of her brand, and very relevant (I always
have in the back of my mind the possibility that great tragedy will strike again, so we need to prepared to deal with that
reality, should it come about some day).

I like combining that with the notion of prosperity and humanity, which together covers so much ground - from
economic development to human rights.

A couple miscl thoughts --

- in terms of promoting prosperity/economic development, might there be a reason to technological advancement
(giving people access to education and technological tools that can help them in terms of both education and access to
social networks and other avenues for advancement). You do reference education in the development arena, and in
prosperity, so that's good).

- there isn't much here mentioning democratization, freedom, etc. I know that is probably dicey given the multitude of
governments we want to partner with that aren't ready to talk that talk, but still think it needs to be incorporated in
some aspect of a mission statement.

- really like strong reference to women as a key to economic and social stabilization. That ties into her "brand" and into
a reality. I know when the First Ladies of Africa came out here to LA, one of the desires was to try to draw them into an
alliance that might transcend their own national differences and create cross-border force for positive change. A friend

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758642 Date: 06/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758642 Date: 06/30/2015




of mine is one of the executives with the Hunger Project, whose CEO is a woman who focuses, too, on the way targeting
women can help alleviate hunger in ways that just dealing with men or generally cannot.

- really like that 'variable geometry' reference. This is kind of like 3 dimensional chess - strange and complicated
alliances need to be made to grapple with a multitude of cross-cutting challenges. This is calculus, not arithmetic.

- would like to be sure religions are involved here, vis a vis the various partnerships. It can be either a powerful force of
positive change, or it can get in the way of progress, depending on how it's used or abused, but to the extent allowed
Constitutionally, the power of religion should be encouraged in the direction of alliances and partnerships of progress.

- as I think about Kennan's "containment" doctrine a little further - in some ways it can be reapplied to extremism,
meaning that our goal should be to contain not Communism this time, but extremist ideology whereever it exists, and
just as Kennan supported, development is one of the ways to build those walls of containment around a dangerous
ideology. We want to contain extremist, nihilistic, violent ideologies and movements whereever they might take root,
and a good way to do that is to focus on development, on women, on technology, on education.

The power of diplomacy rests on two foundations. On the one hand, there is the reality and potentiality of military
force. Without having the capacity to defend, and to project force, diplomacy is inherently weak and ineffectual.

On the other hand, development is the other foundation upon which successful diplomacy can be built. It's the carrot to
the military's stick. And the State Department has an integral role to play in both the diplomatic and developmental
parts of that tripod (while also being understanding of, and when necessary supportive of, implementing the military
part).

The connective tissue of security, prosperity and humanity is, as you suggest, "purpose," or more prosaically -
"morality." Morals. It is immoral for people to live in fear, to be unprotected, to be subject to harm and death. It is
immoral for people's human rights to be violated, to not have access to education and heatlh. And it is immoral to be
denied the opportunity to grow, to create a better future for children, etc. To let, as Roy has said, every child to live up
to his or her God-given potential.

one last point - on shared humanity, perhaps protecting the natural resources of the Earth - environmentalism - should
be referenced along with health and human rights. It's part of the underpinning of our international morality and the
kind of partnership we need to solve global warming, etc.



On Thu, May 21, 2009 at 11:33 AM, Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov> wrote:



       Can you both take a look at this — if this implementing agenda works, we will use language of purpose to
surround it.




         cdm




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758642 Date: 06/30/2015
