      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758986 Date: 06/30/2015


                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                         B6



From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Tuesday, July 14, 2009 5:40 AM
To:                                'JilotyLC@state.gov'
Subject:                           Fw: Back in DC



Pls print for me.

    Original Message
From: Roach, Stephen
To: H
Cc: ValmoroU@state.gov <ValmoroU@state.gov>
Sent: Wed Jul 08 10:45:51 2009
Subject: Re: Back in DC

Dear Secretary Clinton,

Your assistant, Lona Valmoro, and I have been exchanging emails on trying to find a time to meet in Washington on July
30. I am hopeful something can be worked out. In the meantime, I wanted to take you up on your offer below and
provide you with a few thoughts on China prior to the upcoming SED on July 27-28. I send you this note from Beijing
(midway through a four-day visit) via Blackberry -- so apologies for any typos.

1. Mounting signs of social instability have intensified China's growth imperatives. Beijing insiders are very concerned
about the Xinjiang uprising; Hu Jintao's pre-G-8 exit validates those concerns. Coming on the heels of last year's
problems in Tibet, social instability can no longer be dismissed as an isolated occurrence. In both cases, my sources claim
growth shortfalls have exacerbated ethnic disturbances. China's recent fiscal stimulus -- especially infrastructure
initiatives in the West -- attempts to address this. Growth has long been modern China's antidote to the risks of social
instability.

2. A massive external demand shock dilutes the growth antidote that China needs to contain social instability. In fact,
the global recession adds a new risk factor to China's social instability equation. The government has confirmed reports
of over 20 million layoffs of migrant workers in export-intensive Guangdong Province -- a direct outgrowth of the
collapse of Chinese exports over the past year (from growth of +25% in mid-2008 to a contraction of -25% in May 2009).
Driven by a record capitulation of the American consumer -- real US consumption down by -1.8% over the past four
quarters (a 58-year record plunge) -- China's biggest source of end-market export demand has been hit with an
extraordinary shock. To the extent there is more to come on this count -- and that remains my best guess, although with
a less dramatic US consumption adjustment than we saw over the past year -- external demand pressures will continue
to undermine China's growth imperatives and feed heightened concerns over social instability.

3. China's stimulus package is a "quick fix" that can only exacerbate its already worrisome structural imbalances. The
focus of the stimulus is on its two most unbalanced sectors -- fixed investment and exports, which collectively account
for about 80% of Chinese GDP. Fully 72% of the RMB4 trillion fiscal initiative announced last November goes to
infrastructure. And there are aggressive incentives directed at exporters (i.e., tax rebates, "buy China" procurement
incentives, SME credit support, etc.). Moreover, there has been a huge push of State-directed bank lending -- the full-
year 2009 lending target was hit in mid-April! This latter initiative underscores the risks of deteriorating loan quality and
associated banking problems down the road. Meanwhile, despite public claims to the contrary, very little has been done
to stimulate the one sector in China that needs it the most -- internal private consumption. Social safety net efforts are
still puny -- the recent healthcare plan translates into US$30 per person for three years and the National Social Security
Fund only has enough assets to provide about $90 of lifetime social security benefits per worker! This forces fear-driven
-- or precautionary -- saving that, in turn, inhibits the consumer-led impetus a Chinese rebalancing urgently needs.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758986 Date: 06/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758986 Date: 06/30/2015




4. All this points to an asymmetrical global rebalancing -- a very worrisome prognosis for a post-crisis world. Despite all if
our problems, the US is actually tempering its greatest macro imbalance -- excess consumption. At the same time, China
is unfortunately upping the ante on its two most unbalanced sectors -- investment and exports. Sadly, this could set up a
still unbalanced global economy for another serious accident in the not-so-distant future.

Sorry to have rambled so much. There is a good deal more to each of the points above -- but wanted to give you the
highlights ahead of the SED. Good luck with that -- and with all else that seems to be going on around the world. Hope to
see you on the 30th.

Best regards,



Stephen S. Roach
Chairman
Morgan Stanley Asia




     Original Message
From: H <HDR22@clintonemail.com>
To: Roach, Stephen (FM)
Cc: 'ValmoroU@state.gov' <ValmoroU@state.gov>
Sent: Fri Jul 03 04:58:29 2009
Subject: Re: Back in DC

Dear Stephen,

  Delighted to hear from and about you. I'm looking forward to seeing you when you're in DC and I'm copying my
assistant, Lona Valmoro, so she can work w you to schedule a visit. Your timing is impeccable since I will be co-chairing w
Tim Geithner the first Strategic and Economic Dialogue w the Chinese on July 27-28 in DC. So if you have any thoughts
you want to share before our meeting, pls pass them on.

 I hope all is well w you and yours. Happy 4th! All the best, H

    Original Message
From: Roach, Stephen
To: H2
Cc: H
Sent: Thu Jul 02 05:32:50 2009
Subject: Back in DC

Dear Secretary Clinton,

Although I regretfully missed seeing you on your swing through Beijing earlier this year, I will be back in Washington on
July 30. Would love the opportunity to meet with you briefly and give you up update on my thoughts/ insights into China
and the rest of the region. The story is not quite as neat as it appears on the surface. Despite all the hype, this region
remains an export machine that should struggle in the aftermath of the crisis -- with important implications for many of
the global economic issues you are facing. I have had extensive meetings throughout the region over the past few
months and would welcome the opportunity to provide you with a first hand assessment.

One other note: I will be publishing a book in Sept! Oct, "The Next Asia", which digs beneath the surface of many of the
macro issues the region faces. It is generally constructive on the Asian outlook but lays out a number of critical

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758986 Date: 06/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758986 Date: 06/30/2015




milestones that must be hit to validate the hopes and dreams of the "Asia Century." I have asked the publisher (Wiley)
to send you an advance copy of the manuscript in the hope you or your staff might find it of interest.

Hope to hear back from you on the feasibility of meeting later this month.

Best regards,

Stephen S. Roach
Chairman
Morgan Stanley Asia




NOTICE: If received in error, please destroy, and notify sender. Sender does not intend to waive confidentiality or
privilege. Use of this email is prohibited when received in error. We may monitor and store emails to the extent
permitted by applicable law.



NOTICE: If received in error, please destroy, and notify sender. Sender does not intend to waive confidentiality or
privilege. Use of this email is prohibited when received in error. We may monitor and store emails to the extent
permitted by applicable law.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05758986 Date: 06/30/2015
