UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761515 Date: 06/30/2015




                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL




                                     CONFIDENTIAL



                                             December 15, 2009



        For: Hillary
        From: Sid
        Re: The Berlusconi assault


    1. The physical attack on Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi is a major political event
       in Italy and Europe. His assailant is a mentally disturbed man without a political agenda
       who has been in and out of psychiatric care since he was 18 years old. Nonetheless, the
       assault has significant repercussions. It has generated sympathy for Berlusconi as a
       victim—he has been obviously injured, lost two teeth and a pint of blood, and doctors
       will keep him in the hospital for perhaps a week for observation. The attack comes as
       Berlusconi was beginning to lose political footing, having lost his legal immunity. One
       court inquiry is turning up evidence of his links to the Mafia while another is examining
       his role in the bribery case of British lawyer David Mills. Berlusconi' s government and
       party have used the attack as a way to turn the sudden sympathy for him to his advantage,
       claiming that his opponents have sown a climate of "hate." Through demogogic appeals
       they are attempting to discredit and rebuff the legal proceedings against him and
       undermine the investigative press. (Berlusconi is suing La Repubblica, the large
       independent newspaper in Rome that has been most aggressive in digging into his affairs
       of all kinds.)
    2. It would seem proper and decent for the President to call Berlusconi to express his
       concern about his health and wish him a speedy recovery, if he hasn't done so already.
       There are many reasons for Obama to do this, not least to condemn violence against a
       democratically elected head of state. It would be awkward for the U.S. President not to
       call a Western head of state of a NATO country who has been physically harmed.
       Berlusconi, for his part, would certainly make such a call public. It would therefore also
       be awkward if a call were used only as an element in his sympathy campaign against the
       court proceedings.
    3. If so, there is a larger message that should be communicated, perhaps by the President in
       his conversation, but most importantly through a statement from the State Department,
       also conveyed by the U.S. ambassador in Italy. The USG condemns any and all violence

                                                1
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761515 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761515 Date: 06/30/2015




         as an assault on democracy. By the same measure, this incident involving an apparently
         deranged individual should not be exploited to raise social tensions. Instead, it should
         inspire reflection on the necessity of every citizen to adhere to the rule of law as well as
         to respect freedom of speech and the press.
     4. Two articles on the legal inquries into Berlusconi below:



 http://www.independent.co.ukinews/worldieurope/berlusconi-
 cut-deal-with-mafia-court-told-1834647.html

 Berlusconi 'cut deal with Mafia', court told
 Former hitman claims Italian PM gave 'benefits' to the Mob for political support

 By Michael Day in Milan

 Saturday, 5 December 2009

 The Italian Prime Minister, Silvio Berlusconi, made a deal with the Sicilian Mafia in the early
 1990s that put the country "in the hands" of the Mob, a court in Turin was told yesterday.

 Gaspare Spatuzza, a jailed Mafia hitman turned witness, told a packed and heavily guarded
 bunker courtroom that his Cosa Nostra Godfather boss had cut a deal with Mr Berlusconi in 1993
 that provided unspecified "benefits" to the Mafia in exchange for political support. The media
 tycoon entered politics a few months later and won his first term as Prime Minister in 1994.

 Spatuzza said his boss, Giuseppe Graviano, who was jailed over Mafia bomb attacks in Rome,
 Milan and Florence, had told him that the Mob had "got everything" with the help of Mr
 Berlusconi, adding that Graviano called Mr Berlusconi "the man from Channel 5", in reference
 to his TV network.

 The damaging claims came at the appeal hearing of Marcello Dell'Utri, a key Berlusconi
 associate and senator, who is challenging his nine-year jail sentence for links with the Mafia.

 Spatuzza, in prison for several murders, testified: "Graviano told me the name of Berlusconi and
 said that thanks to him and the man from our home town [an apparent reference to Dell' Utri] we
 have the country in our hands."

 Mr Berlusconi has denounced the claims of Spatuzza as "vile", and "unfounded and defamatory",
 denying ever having links with the Mafia. The Prime Minister's spokesman said the testimony
 yesterday was the Mafia's "completely logical" revenge against the Prime Minister for his
 "determined" fight against organised crime.



                                                   2

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761515 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761515 Date: 06/30/2015




 Dell'Utri told the court that neither he nor Mr Berlusconi had Mafia connections. "It's in the
 interest of the Mafia to force the collapse of the Berlusconi government because this government
 has done the most in the fight against organised crime," he said. Mr Berlusconi, who recently lost
 his legal immunity to prosecution, was said to have been furious this week, after the
 parliamentary Speaker, Gianfranco Fini, the man who is supposed to be his closest ally, had said
 that the Spatuzza evidence was "an atomic bomb".

 Mr Fini was recorded by an unobserved microphone while talking privately at an official dinner.
 Rumours of the conservative Prime Minister's links with the Mob have persisted since
 investigators learnt that a Cosa Nostra hitman, Vittorio Mangano, worked as Mr Berlusconi's
 "stable-master" at the media mogul's villa in Arcore outside Milan in the 1970s. Much
 speculation has also centred on the origins of Mr Berlusconi's vast wealth.

 Last week, the Prime Minister's broadcast group, Mediaset, and his holding company, Fininvest,
 announced it intended to sue the left-wing newspaper La Repubblica over an article that said
 Mediaset was "20 per cent owned by the Mafia".

 La Stampa newspaper noted that the "dread combination of Mafia allegations and separation
 from his wife are now his principal torments". Mr Berlusconi's estranged wife, Veronica Lario, is
 said to be seeking a £3m-a-month divorce settlement, and a messy courtroom battle looms. Mr
 Berlusconi also faces a retrial on the charge that he bribed the British lawyer David Mills to lie in
 court.



 TIME
 Friday, Dec. 04, 2009


 After a Court Ruling, Berlusconi's Legal
 Woes Resume
 By Jeff Israely

 The world has spent the past six months wondering how — and with whom — Silvio Berlusconi
 spends his Saturday nights. But the combative, scandal-plagued Prime Minister of Italy would
 prefer to talk about his mornings instead. "Do you know how I've been forced to spend my
 Saturday mornings since I entered politics?" Berlusconi once declared to business leaders in
 Rome. "With my lawyers."

 Italy's self-proclaimed Defendant in Chief makes a point of lamenting all those weekends spoiled
 by stacks of court dossiers as further proof that he is the victim of politically motivated
 magistrates, whom he called during the same speech "the spreading cancer of our democracy."
 (See Berlusconi's worst gaffes.)



                                                  3
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761515 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761515 Date: 06/30/2015




 To combat such perceived persecution, Berlusconi has tested the bounds of decorous democratic
 conduct, including his allies' pushing a bill through Parliament last year that gave him and other
 top Italian officeholders immunity from prosecution. But since the Constitutional Court
 overturned that law in October, several criminal investigations into Berlusconi's business
 dealings have been reopened, with other new charges rumored to be looming.

 The potentially most damaging trial is set to resume Friday, Dec. 4, in Milan, with the 73-year-
 old billionaire being accused of paying British attorney David Mills $600,000 in 1997 to
 withhold incriminating evidence about his broadcasting empire Mediaset. Mills is appealing a
 conviction in the same case; both men have denied any wrongdoing.

 So, alas, Berlusconi is back to spending his downtime with a well-paid cadre of more than a
 dozen avvocati, who have been successful so far in keeping their biggest client clear of criminal
 convictions. Not that the lawyers have ever really gone away. Since the media baron first ran for
 office 15 years ago, his legal advisers have doubled as political consiglieri, key members of
 Parliament and even important Cabinet Ministers. Indeed, while some critics have spoken of
 Berlusconi's reign as a kind of sultanate of showgirls or government by gaffe, others have
 described it as a republic of attorneys. (See what Berlusconi's Obama "jokes" say about Italy.)

 His longtime lawyer Cesare Previti served as Italian Defense Minister during Berlusconi's first
 term in 1994 before being convicted of corruption himself (and losing twice on appeal). During
 Berlusconi's second term (2001-06), Gaetano Pecorella, a former leftist, served as president of
 Parliament's Justice Commission, where he was instrumental in shepherding through new laws
 that helped shield Berlusconi from investigating magistrates.

 Giovanni Sartori, a Columbia University professor of constitutional law, says the role
 Berlusconi's personal lawyers have played in his legislative agenda is yet another gargantuan
 conflict of interest to add to those related to his ownership of Italy's main private television
 stations. But by now, Sartori says, Berlusconi's lawyers have perfected the art of exploiting
 Italy's painfully slow justice system: many cases conclude without a final verdict because the
 statute of limitations has been reached. "It is more a mania than a necessity," Sartori says of
 Berlusconi's near obsession in battling magistrates. "He feels persecuted, and fighting the judges
 is what makes him happy."

 Berlusconi's current point man is Nicolo Ghedini, a somber-faced, lanky 49-year-old criminal-
 defense attorney from the northern city of Padua, who has served in both the Italian Senate and
 the lower house of Parliament. Ghedini has continued to mount a grinding defense in the
 criminal cases, arguing in the Mills case that Berlusconi cannot be present in the Milan
 courtroom for the next several months because of time conflicts with his duties as Prime
 Minister. Ghedini has also spearheaded an increasingly aggressive legal strategy that has
 included several libel suits against opposition newspapers. He declared in September that if
 necessary, Berlusconi would testify in a suit against a journalist who referred to rumors that the
 Prime Minister is impotent. Last week, Berlusconi vowed to launch additional suits against
 newspapers that printed unsubstantiated reports that a close adviser of his was involved in a 1993
 bombing campaign by the Sicilian Mafia. (Read "An Offended Berlusconi Goes on the
 Offensive.")

                                                 4
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761515 Date: 06/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761515 Date: 06/30/2015




 Despite these many legal headaches, Berlusconi is embroiled in one other particularly thorny
 case that even he can't blame on overzealous magistrates. Veronica Lario, Berlusconi's wife of •
 more than 20 years, filed for divorce earlier this year, which sparked an avalanche of accusations
 that he frequented a prostitute from Bari and an underage model from Naples. The Milan daily
 Corriere della Sera reported last week that Lario has demanded 3.5 million euros ($5.2 million)
 in monthly payments, and Berlusconi countered with an offer of 300,000 euros ($450,000). No
 matter how this and the other cases shake out, there is little hope that Berlusconi can avoid a
 mountain of lawyers' fees and some grim Saturdays that he'd rather devote to other business and
 pleasures.

    •   Find this article at:
    •   http://www.time.comitime/world/article/0,8599,1945439,00.html




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761515 Date: 06/30/2015
