      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766912 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                                    RELEASE IN
                                                                                                    PART B6


From:                            sbwhoeop
Sent:                            Sunday, November 29, 2009 10:16 AM
To:                              H
Subject:                         Memo on new Senate report on Tora Bora and its significance. Sid
Attachments:                     hrc memo tora bora 112909.docx




                                      CONFIDENTIAL



                                              November 29, 2009



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Afghanistan background/Senate report on Tora Bora

For the week ahead, it's essential to remember why the war against AQ failed under Bush beyond under-
resourcing in preparation for the invasion of Iraq. The Senate Foreign Relations Committee report on Bin
Laden's escape at Tora Bora, just issued, is well worth reading and noting--Bin Laden's location was known,
he could have been capture or killed, Rumsfeld and Tommy Franks decided against the U.S. operation
frantically urged by CIA commanders on the ground, and it would have made an enormous difference in the
war on terror. (I can't reproduce the report here, but you can print it out or read online:
hap ://forei gn , senate. gpvlimoirriediaidociTora Bora :Tort:24f)

Gary Berntsen, the head of the CIA armed operation in eastern Afghanistan, is a major source for the report. I
am in contact with him and have heard his entire story at length, key parts of which are not in his book,
"Jawbreaker," or in the Senate report. In particular, the story of the Kunduz airlift of the bulk of key. AQ and
Taliban leaders, at the request of Musharaff and per order Cheney/Rumsfeld, is absent.

The New York Times story of today on the report is below:

The New York Times

November 29, 2009

Senate Report Explores 2001 Escape by bin Laden
From Afghan Mountains
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766912 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766912 Date: 12/31/2015



By SCOTT SHANE
WASHINGTON — As President Qbarna vows to "finish the job" in Afghanistan by sending more troops, the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee has completed a detailed look back at a crucial failure early in the battle against Al Qaeda:
the escape of Osarna hip Laden from American forces in the Afghan mountains of Tora Bora in December 2001.
"Removing the Al Qaeda leader from the battlefield eight years ago would not have eliminated the worldwide extremist
threat," the gortimittee'sfeoort concludes. But the decisions that opened the door for his escape to Pakistan allowed bin
Laden to emerge as a potent symbolic figure who continues to attract a steady flow of money and inspire fanatics
worldwide."
The report, based in part on a little-noticed 2007 history of the Tara Bora episode by.the military's Special Operations .
Command, asserts that the consequences of not sending American troops in 2001 to block Mr. bin Laden's escape into
Pakistan are still being felt.
The report blames the lapse for "laying the foundation for today's protracted Afghan insurgency and inflaming the internal
strife now endangering Pakistan."
Its release comes just as the Obama administration is preparing to announce an increase in forces in Afghanistan.
The showdown at Tora Bora, a mountainous area dotted with caves in eastern Afghanistan, pitted a modest force of
American Special Operations and            officers, along with allied Afghan fighters, against a force of about 1,000 Qaeda
fighters led by Mr. bin Laden.
The committee report. prepared at the request of Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, the committee's Democratic
chairman, concludes unequivocally that in mid-December 2001, Mr. bin Laden and his deputy, Ayman al-Zawahri, were at
the cave complex, where Mr. bin Laden had operated previously during the fight against Soviet forces.
The new report suggests that a larger troop commitment to Afghanistan might have resulted in the demise not only of Mr.
bin Laden and his deputy but also of Mullah Muhammad Omar, the leader of the Afghan Taliban. Mullah Omar, who also
fled to Pakistan in 2001, has overseen the resurgence of the Taliban.
Like several previous accounts, the committee's report blames Gen. Tommy R. Franks, then the top American
commander, and Donald H. Rumsfeld, then the defense secretary, for not putting a large number of American troops
there lest they fuel resentment among Afghans. General Franks, who declined to comment for the committee's report, has
at times questioned whether Mr. bin Laden was even at Tora Bora in late 2001.
The report represents unfinished political business on the part of Mr. Kerry. Before and during his unsuccessful 2004
presidential campaign, he hammered on the failure to catch Mr. bin Laden.
The Foreign Relations Committee's report draws on previous accounts, including books by two C.I.A. officers, Gary
Berntsen and Gary Schroen, and by a commander in the Army's elite Delta Force who goes by the pen name Dalton Fury.
The analysis in their books of the flawed tactics at Tora Bora is generally echoed in the official Special Operations
goiiano history.
The 2007history said that it "has been determined with reasonable certainty" that Mr. bin Laden was at Tora Bora in
December 2001, but that the fewer than 100 American troops committed to the area were not enough to block his escape.
The Senate report was prepared by the Foreign Relations Committee's Democratic staff, whose chief investigator,
Douglas Frantz, is a former journalist who has reported extensively on the hunt for Mr. bin Laden.
The report describes how Americans at Tora Bora intercepted Mr. bin Laden's voice in radio transmissions to his fighters,
as well as references to "the sheikh."
The former Delta Force officer who uses the name Fury told staff members that C.I.A. officers "had a guy with them called
Jalal and he was the foremost expert on bin Laden's voice."
"He worked on bin Laden's voice for seven years and he knew him better than anyone else in the West," the former officer
said. "To him, it was very clear that bin Laden was there on the mountain."
The report says some villagers who were paid to help in the fight were given global positioning system devices and told to
push a button wherever they saw fighters or arms caches. The coordinates were then sent to American military spotters to
call in airstrikes.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766912 Date: 12/31/2015
