      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789534 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                 B6


From:                            Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
Sent:                            Wednesday, January 18, 2012 7:11 PM
To:
Subject:                         FW: TIME: President Obama: Romney Foreign Policy Attacks Will Wither in 'Serious
                                 Debate'(excerpt)
Attachments:                     TIME jpg


FYI


From: Rhodes, Benjamin J. [mailto:
Sent: Wednesday, January 18, 2012 5:25 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3
Subject: FW: TIME: President Obama: Romney Foreign Policy Attacks Will Wither in 'Serious Debate'(excerpt)



http://swampland.time.com/2012/01/18/president-obama-romney-foreign-policy-attacks-will-wither-in-serious-
debate/


President Obama: Romney Foreign Policy Attacks
Will Wither in 'Serious Debate'
By Michael Scherer I @michaelscherer I January 18, 2012 I ±




Christopher Morris /VII for TIME
U.S. President Obama at the White House, Washington D.C., on January 17, 2
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789534 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789534 Date: 12/31/2015




President Obama dismissed Republican rival Mitt Romney's critiques of his foreign policy credentials
Wednesday in an exclusive TIME interview, saying the GOP frontrunner's attacks are little more than primary
posturing that will wither under the glare of "a serious debate."

"I think Mr. Romney and the rest of the Republican field are going to be playing to their base until the primary
season is over," Obama told TIME's Fareed Zakaria during a White House interview that will appear in the next
issue of TIME magazine. "Overall, I think it's going to be pretty hard to argue that we have not executed a
strategy over the last three years that has put America in a stronger position than it was than when I came into
office."




Christopher Morris—VI! for TIME

In what sometimes sounded like a dry run of the Obama reelection campaign's foreign policy themes, the
president drew sharp contrasts between himself and GOP leaders, past and present. He spoke with pride of
accomplishing what he called a "pivot" from the policies of George W. Bush. This included ending the Iraq
War, increasing pressure on Al Qaeda, rebuilding international alliances, and refocusing America's foreign
policy goals.

"It's an American leadership that recognizes the rise of countries like China, India and Brazil," Obama said of
his own policies. "It's a U.S. leadership that recognizes our limits in terms of resources and capacity. And yet,
what I think we've been able to establish is a clear belief among other nations that the United States continues
to be the one indispensible nation in tackling major international problems."

Obama also blamed Republicans in Congress for threatening to weaken America's international poktion by
failing to agree to domestic policies that the White House has been advocating over the last year. "Our whole
foreign policy has to be anchored in economic strength here at home," Obama said. "And if we are not strong,
stable, growing, making stuff, training our work force so that it's the most skilled in the world, maintaining our
lead in innovation, in basic research, in basic science, in the quality of our universities, in the transparency of
our financial sector, if we don't maintain the upward mobility and equality of opportunity that underwrites our

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789534 Date: 12/31/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789534 Date: 12/31/2015




politically stability and makes us a beacon for the world, then our foreignpolicy leadership will diminish as
well.f




In particular, Obama praised the bipartisan fiscal commission, also known as Simpson-Bowles, for providing a
clear and workable model for compromise, even if he disagreed on some of the specifics. He dismissed charges
that he had abandoned the framework for his own agenda, and blamed Republicans for standing in the way.
"The only reason it hasn't happened is because the Republicans were unwilling to do anything on revenue,"
Obama said. "Zero. Zip. Nada. The revenues that we were seeking were far less that what was in Simpson-
Bowles. We've done more discretionary cuts than was called for in Simpson-Bowles."

"There's no equivalence between Democratic and Republican positions when it comes to deficit reduction,"
Obama continued. "If we can get any Republicans to show any serious commitment, not vague commitments—
not 'we'll get revenues because of tax reform somewhere in the future, but we don't know exactly what that
looks like, and we can't identify a single tax that we would allow to go up'—but if we can get any of them, who
are still in office as opposed to retired, to commit to that, we'll be able to reduce our deficit."

On the campaign trail, Romney has pointedly attacked Obama for carrying out "an appeasement strategy" that
"apologizes for America." "He believes America's role as leader in the world is a thing of the past. I believe a
strong America must – and will – lead the future," Romney said after winning the New Hampshire primary.
SeveralRepublican candidates have argued that Obama does not embrace the notion ofAmerican
exceptionali sm.

In the interview, Obama pointedly dismissed that critique. "I think there is a strong belief that we continue to be
a superpower unique perhaps in the annals of history that is not only self-interested but is also thinking about
how to create a set of international rules and norms that everyone can follow, everyone can benefit from,"
Obama said.

The president did acknowledge that despite his foreign policy successes, not everything had gone according to
plan. "We still have huge challenges ahead and one thing I've learned over the last three years is that as much as
you'd like to guide events, stuff happens," Obama said. "And you have to respond, and those responses, no
matter how effective your diplomacy or your foreign policy, are sometimes going to produce less than optimal
results. But our overall trajectory, our overall strategy, has been very successful."

When asked about Romney's assertion that Iran would get a nuclear weapon if Obama won reelection, Obama
responded directly. "I have made myself clear since I began running for the presidency that we will take every
step available to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon," he said. "Can we guarantee that Iran takes the
smarter path? No, which is why I've repeatedly said we don't take any options off the table in preventing them
from getting a nuclear weapon."

The interview will appear in the January 30 issue of TIME, which will be released online Thursday for all
access subscribers.



Read more: http://swampland.time.com/2012/01/18/president-obama-romney-foreign-policy-attacks-will-wither-in-
serious-debateMixzzliqiGSviT




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789534 Date: 12/31/2015
