     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788711 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                    B5,B6


From:                              Feltman, Jeffrey D <FeltmanJD@state.gov >
Sent:                              Saturday, March 3, 2012 12:02 PM
To:                                H; Thomas_E_Donilon
Cc:                                Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject:                           Re:



Uzi's been on the outs with Bibi for a while, but what he describes seems consistent with Bibi and Barak's efforts in
recent years to change out advisors who don't agree with them, especially on Iran. That was behind Gabi Ashkenazi's
departure, as well as the former head of the Mossad. Bibi has surrounded himself with people like. Amidror who don't
offer opinions that diverge from Bibi's predispositions.
-- Jeff
Jeffrey Feltman

     Original Message
From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Saturday, March 03, 2012 09:54 AM
To: 'Thomas_E._Donilon
Cc: Sullivan, Jacob J; Feltman, Jeffrey D
Subject:

Tom--




http://972mag.com/is-netanyahu-misleading-his-ministers-on-iran/36915/Friday, March 2 2012IYossi Gurvitzls
Netanyahu misleading his ministers on Iran? Former National Security Advisor Uzi Arad claims Prime Minister
Netanyahu ordered him to refrain from providing ministers with contradictory data.Yedioth Ahronoth's weekend
supplement published a very long and equally stunning interview with disgraced National Security Advisor Uzi Arad.
Arad, who was forced to resign last year, was interviewed by Nachum Barnea and Shimon Shiffer, and told them about
the Byzantine court surrounding Netanyahu, and exposed the shocking fact he was interrogated by the Israel Security
Agency for hours in the Ben Gurion Airport as he came back from a mission in the US. But there's one point which should
trouble every Israeli, which was not emphasized enough.During the interview, Arad — a long-time Netanyahu
follower - says twice that he lost favor with the prime minister when he began contradicting his position on Iran during
discussions. Even worse from Netanyahu's point of view, he provided the government with a different assessment about
Iran and the way to thwart it. After one of those occasions, says Arad, Netanyahu took him aside and ordered him to
refrain from contradicting him in the presence of others. According to Arad, Netanyahu was particularly worried that
Arad's documents may serve the investigative committee which will follow the Israeli attack on Iran. Netanyahu's
bureau did not deny those accusations.This is a point which must be investigated. Neither the PM nor the Minister of
Security command the army; the commander is the government, a collective body. A prime minister who refuses to
divulge contradictory information to his ministers is a prime minister who sabotages their ability to make an informed
decision on that issue.The government's control of the armed forces in Israel has a chequered history. To make a long
story short, as long as the government controlled the army, it succeeded or at least managed to avoid disaster. When it
let slip of that control — particularly when it allowed factions within the government, with the minister of security always
a participant, take control — calamity was often the result. The process' lowest point was probably in 2006, when Shimon
Peres, then a minister of something or other, opposed the decision to begin the Second Lebanon War — but voted for it
anyway, telling the Winograd investigative committee that "you don't vote against the prime minister in a time of war."

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788711 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788711 Date: 12/31/2015




Such abdication of responsibility is hardly surprising when you're familiar with Peres' history; yet we must not allow it to
repeat itself.Now we are being told by Arad that Netanyahu is blinding his ministers from seeing the full picture. One can
hardly think of a better reason for an investigatiive committee, which, should it find Arad told the truth, send Netanyahu
home, and irrevocably tarnish the careers of ministers who agreed to be turned into marionettes. One Shimon Peres is
more than enough.This is particularly important as Israel and Iran are not, and have never been, in a state of war. The
two countries, testified Foreign Minister David Levi a decade ago, never declared war on each other. Earlier wars and
operations were declared by the governments against countries with which Israel was at war; this is not the case with
Iran. This war should be debated by the Knesset — particularly if it is true that Netanyahu is misleading his ministers.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788711 Date: 12/31/2015
