         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777981 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS@state.gov>
Sent:                              Sunday, February 20, 2011 5:27 AM
To:
Subject:                           Brazil



I'm en route back from 3 days in Brazil and since you're meeting with the Brazilian FM mid-week, I thought a quick
report might be useful. Tom Shannon told me he will be in DC for the meeting.


I went to Brazil to work on the implementation of the MOU on the advancement of women that you and your
counterpart signed last year. I had meetings with all the ministers who have a role in this agenda. They all reported
President Dilma's priority commitment to improving the lives of women and they all have all been ordered to develop an
ambitious agenda which Dilma will initiate during events around women's Day.


Our MOU will focus on 3 issue areas.
The first is women and girls in math and science. At this year's UN Commission on the Status of Women meeting in NY
starting this coming Tuesday, we will be co-hosting together a side meeting on the topic and our IVP program is
sponsoring several Brazilian women scientists to come to US starting at UN next week.


We are also going to address violence against women which is a a big challenge in Brazil's machismo society. They have
passed a significant law on VAW but have a way to go on enforcement and are looking to us for best practices, etc.


The 3rd prong will be focused on women and the economy -- an area in which they are also making a major push.


I spent a day in Recife which is NE of Salvador de Bahaia. The NE --historically quite poor -- is experiencing some of the
most amazing economic growth seen anywhere -- from technology to manufacturing. The Lula conditional transfer
payments to low income Brazilian families and very favorable tax incentives to business have both contributed to the
boom. They also have a very dynamic Governor who pleaded for more attention by the US to the NE region (sending US
students there, etc) There are many companies from Kraft to Wal-Mart to Coca Cola expanding their business and many
are also engaged in public/private partnerships. Wal-Mart, for example, has a terrific program providing training and
markets to women who have been victims of abuse.


If Dilma can keep her investment in the environment/clean energy, women, the economy, etc going, Brazil could
become a global powerhouse based on soft power.There is much anticipation over the President's trip there next month
and much affection for you.


I feel good about the trip and the Brazilians were very engaged. Shannon is a keen observer of all that is transpiring
there!


At the UN next Friday we will also be hosting a CSW reception at the Natural History Museum to salute women in
science and Bachelet (with inauguration of UN Women). Chevron has agreed to cover the costs.




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777981 Date: 12/31/2015
