     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780301 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL




From:                           McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sent:                           Saturday, June 4, 2011 6:10 AM
To:
Cc:                             Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma
Subject:                        Dialogue with young African Leaders
Attachments:                    DWYAL One-Pager - HiRes.pdf; DWYAL - Powerpoint.ppt; DWYAL One-Pager -
                                HiRes.pdf; DWYAL - Powerpoint.ppt



As the President's August 2010 Forum with Young African Leaders signaled, the youth population in Africa
presents great challenges and opportunities. The Bureau of African Affairs and my office have worked closely
over the last year to develop on-going U.S. engagement with young Africans in order to understand their
perspectives, inform our programs and policies, and provide a platform to share young people's ideas and
energy with African elites. Africa's youth will be heard, and we are using our convening power to provide
focused, constructive fora for their voices. The attached PowerPoint slides and fact sheet outline our recent
work on this front.


As part of this effort, we designated May as the month for concentrated programming and outreach to young
people across the continent. U.S. embassy public affairs officers and their American and local staff responded
with a remarkable range of creative and substantial engagement, producing more than 200 programs in 37
countries. The top themes were education, leadership, entrepreneurship, governance, science and
technology. Social media engagement on Facebook, YouTube and Twitter complemented the hands-on, face-
to-face programs. Peace Corps and USAID supported the programs, many of which included our chiefs of
mission and other senior USG officials. I participated in a number of events in South Africa and Senegal on my
recent trip. Many embassies partnered with local universities, media and civil society organizations to create
and host the programs. Starting with the core group of delegates to the President's August 2010 Forum, our
embassies expanded the network to include other young leaders, delegates to the AU Youth Summit, young
Americans, alumni of State Department exchanges, and members of the African Diaspora. A lively discussion
on the Africa Bureau's Facebook page generated more than 18,000 interactions among a group of which 55%
were between 18 and 34. About 40 percent of that group was women.

I believe this region-wide approach provides a good model for similar initiatives elsewhere. It allows us to
leverage our assets across multiple posts within a region, act as a convener across geo-political boundaries,
maximizes our impact across a broad range of targeted demographic groups and sectors and generate
significant media attention at relatively low cost. For example, while I was in South Africa I used our media hub
in Pretoria to host a discussion group with women in media in Cape Town, Lusaka, Dar Es Salaam and Nairobi
to discuss the role of women in journalism. The event received broad coverage in major media outlets in each
of the participating countries. As a follow on our Posts helped establish an on-line platform so the participants
could continue and expand the initiative.


The youth engagement programs initiated in May and earlier will continue. This work gives substance to the
Department's Global Youth Strategy and encourages our embassies to continue to consider youth
perspectives in all aspects of their work. The Africa Growth and Opportunity Act Forum now includes a youth
element, as will your trip to Africa and the First Lady's trip later this month. By working with African
institutions such as schools, the media, civil society, business associations, governments, and regional
organizations, we raise the importance of listening to young people without making this a USG-only initiative
that might provoke negative reactions. We have found great enthusiasm and openness among young Africans
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780301 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780301 Date: 12/31/2015




to participate in our programs, and a strong sense that they are grateful for our efforts to give them a platform
from which to speak and our willingness to listen. We will continue to engage young Africans and provide
these opportunities for dialogue.



jm




http://www.facebook.com/DOSAfricanAffairs




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780301 Date: 12/31/2015
