     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768666 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                   B6



From:                        sbwhoeop                                                                  B6
Sent:                        Friday, April 23, 2010 2:26 PM
To:
Subject:                     H: Important new memo on Kyrg. Sid
Attachments:                 hrc memo kyrg 042310.docx




                                   CONFIDENTIAL



                                           April 23, 2010



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Kyrgyzstan Update


              my friend with deep contacts in Kyrgyzstan and who testified this week on the latest     B6
developments there before the House Oversight Committee, has sent me a memo containing important new
information and including some recommendations. Here it is:

To: Sid Blumenthal

From:                                                                                                  B6


Date:          April 23, 2010

Subj:          Kyrgyzstan Update



This is to update you on some key developments in Kyrgyzstan since I last
wrote, drawing largely on discussions with leading figures in the interim
government, staffers, and several independent analysts on the ground both
in Bishkek and the country's south.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768666 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768666 Date: 12/31/2015




1. Interim Government Struggling to Restore Order in Capital
and Across North; Exercising Weak Authority in Country's
South. Following the 2005 revolution, the new government was able to
restore peace to the capital and exercise its authority across the nation
within 72 hours. This was largely due to Feliks Kulov, an opposition leader
who was a career policeman and commanded deep respect within the police
forces. Following the 2010 revolution, the interim government continues to
have an extremely difficult time restoring order two weeks later. A large
part of the problem comes in motivating the police and getting them back
out on the street and doing patrols. Relations between the government and
the police rank-and-file are terrible and police claim that they risk being
beaten or shot simply by going out on the streets. Much of this sterns from
breeding resentment over the deaths (now put at 85, but with hundreds still
in the hospitals with wounds, nearly a hundred with life-threatening
wounds). The break down in law and order is reaching Hobbesian
dimensions. Squatters, frequently armed with iron bars and stones, and
sometimes with guns, attempt to occupy homes and buildings on the
outskirts of the capital. In the Issyk Kul resort area, several hotels and
dozens of vacation villas have been seized. But spontaneous "squatters
actions" are reported all across the country, and government authority is
especially feeble in the south (and hardly apparent in the Jalalabad
Province). Government leaders express confidence that they will get the
situation in hand, though they agree it may take some weeks. But others see
serious vulnerability and point to menacing coverage of the situation in the
Russian media, much of it broadcast into Kyrgyzstan, coupled with concerns
of possible threats against ethnic Russians. The situation could be exploited
by Russia as a pretext for police operations in Kyrgyzstan, but the Kyrgyz
leaders I speak with consider this a remote possibility. Restoring police
order across the country is still the top priority for the interim
government. Recommendation: U.S. support to the new government to
help restore police operations is critical; basics like paying salaries and
furnishing fuel is essential.

2. Criminal Investigation Targeting Bakiyev and Family. Acting
procurator general Azimbek Beknazarov is cranking up a major effort to
bring criminal charges against members of the Bakiyev family and
clan. There are two major aspects of this: the first is preparation of crimes-
against-humanity charges based largely on the shootings of April 6-7 and
several other unexplained killings long assumed to be presidentially directed
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768666 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768666 Date: 12/31/2015




assassinations. The second, coordinated with interim finance minister
Sariev, aims to track assets looted from the state, freeze and recover
them. Recommendation: The efforts to go after Bakiyev based on the
shootings is politically incendiary and is undermined by Beknazarov's over-
the-top rhetoric, under which his targets are convicted before the
investigation is even opened. Moreover, Beknazarov appears intent on
using this for an anti-U.S. agenda. However, the U.S. should offer law
enforcement cooperation and assistance in asset tracing efforts and in
obtaining a freeze—just as it did in 2005, when the FBI tracked Akayev
family assets and froze Akayev family accounts in two New York banks.

3. Base Politics. On balance, I believe the Manas Transit Center can be
retained for another year. Beyond that, an assessment shouldn't be
attempted until after the fall parliamentary elections and the formation of a
new government. However, the effort is increasingly difficult, and there is
little margin for error. The U.S. has to play its cards very astutely to get
through this. There are three keys to success:

(a) Work with Russia. As one of Otunbayeva's assistants tells me, "If this is
a Russia vs. U.S. matter, you shouldn't be in suspense: the U.S. loses." That
same interlocutor told me, however, that the U.S. was playing things "just
right" by working at the White House level through Medvedev and making
the case for the base in the context of joint interests. Russia will continue
low-level anti-base propaganda, and the U.S. can survive this. But if Russia
turns up the heat, the new government will jump to its tune. There is a
strong sense that Russia is justly angry because Bakiyev took their money
and betrayed them, and that Russia has to be appeased over this.

(b) Admit Mistakes. Beknazarov is building a case against the U.S. over the
fuel contracts. He is arguing that they were a form of bribery pursued by the
U.S. to corrupt the government. He has assembled a strong evidentiary
portfolio already. Kyrygz prosecutors have shown me documents showing
much of the paper path between Red Star/Mina and DOD; they have
payment records to the Bakiyev-controlled companies; they even have
pricing data showing that fuel was being sold at around $3.25. They have
detailed research on Col. Squires's role and tapes of some of his
communications which show him operating as if he were a fully integrated
part of the DESC team, and they've identified other figures in the. Red Star
operations in London who they believe are U.S. intelligence
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768666 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768666 Date: 12/31/2015




operatives. Almost all of this information is being kept tightly under wraps
in Washington even as it can be easily sourced in Bishkek. Beknazarov will
use this to bolster claims that the U.S. is still scheming and is still
misleading on this issue. The only effective response to this is to let in the
natural disinfectant of sunlight. Recommendation: The U.S. has to admit the
essence of what it did (though not necessarily the particulars of who did it),
acknowledge it was wrong, and say that this will stop. It should offer
cooperation with Kyrgyz law enforcement though steering their efforts
towards Kyrgyz citizens involved, rather than U.S. persons. It should
undertake to rebid the corrupt contracts and take Red Star out of the
process. One alternative worth some thought would be to bid the fuel
supply arrangements to a Kyrgyz state supplier—an arrangement which
might help the Kyrgyz deal with their crisis over electricity costs (another
particularly grave challenge to the government).

(c) Make clear the relationship isn't just about the base. Every opposition
leader I speak with says he or she wants to see real evidence that the
relationship between the U.S. and Kyrgyzstan is shared values like
democracy and the rule of law and shared security concerns—not the Manas
Transit Center. That means that the best way to secure the base going
forward is to be supportive of Kyrgyzstan in ways completely unrelated to
the base. The number one option is education (support the American
University, the scholarship programs, the secondary education programs for
instance). The number two option is broad support for civil society,
especially geared to the Constitutional referendum and upcoming
parliamentary elections.

Threat on the Horizon. Masaliev, the head of the Communist Party, has
emerged as interim speaker of the parliament and has established himself as
a key conciliator. He states openly that he will run against the base, using it
as a lead issue in the elections. Roughly half of the core group of political
figures carrying the interim government seems primed to do the same. The
other half will spout anti-base rhetoric, but behind the scenes they are
clearly prepared to be reconciled provided the corruption issue is bridged,
an agreed platform of security interests can be articulated, and the base can
clearly be shown to provide economic benefit to the country as a whole. It
will be essential that the U.S. not undermine its friends in this process; their
task will be tough enough.

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768666 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768666 Date: 12/31/2015




4. Constitution and Elections. Tekebayev has taken the lead in crafting
a new constitution and it will circulate publicly very soon. I have seen his
draft and have offered comments. In essence, the new constitution moves
the country away from the presidential model now favored in the post-
Soviet space and towards something much closer to continental European
parliamentary government. It is poised to establish a lists- rather than
mandate-based system for parliamentary elections, designed to help assure
balanced representation among ethnic groups, regions, religions and party
affiliations. As now drafted it offers an extraordinary measure of protection
for minority parties (they get automatically control of the Budget
Committee, for instance), so much so that one has to wonder whether this is
workable. However, it has a strong focus on balance-of-power concepts and
avoiding autocratic power in the hands of a president. It retains the office of
the president, however, while making the government an independent base
of power. Recommendation: Tekebayev is moving too quickly on the
constitution project. For it to have legitimacy, the proposal needs to be open
to public debate and discussion for a longer period of time, and civil society
groups need to have proper input. The U.S. should support their efforts at
consultation and consensus-building provided they don't over rush the
process.

Elections are now foreseen for the fall. This promises to be Kyrgyzstan's
first fully free and fair elections—though some Kyrgyz elections in the past
have been fairer and freer than almost anywhere else in Central Asia. It
would make sense to deploy the full election support apparatus—helping
with international monitors, involving IRI and NDI and other civil society
organizations that can help the Kyrgyz parties get out and compete
vigorously. The elections, like the constitution, are essential to creating a
government with legitimacy, of which the interim government has a very
short supply.

5. DOS Relations. Assistant Secretary Blake's visit was assessed
positively. "We have a long way to go," is the balancing comment. Also they
insist that the new leaders are absolutely unimpressed with the words of
professional diplomats; the words must be followed by concrete action that
gives them meaning. I am now hearing a higher level of animosity
expressed against Ambassador Gfoeller and her staff—bitterness over the
fact that she did not meet with opposition leaders, including those who
formerly held high office or were members of parliament. One leader, who I
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768666 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768666 Date: 12/31/2015




could count as pro-America, told me that "no one will ever forget that when
the revolution came, Gfoeller was on the way to Washington to help Maksim
bait new victims." That's a reference to the trade show which Maksim
Bakiyev, the president's son and the nation's Uberkleptocrat, which was to
have opened in Washington with DOS presence and support. In the eyes of
the new government, this is irredeemable evidence of bad judgment and a
bond with corruption, and it tightly involves the State Department. Others
say they know Gfoeller was just doing what the U.S. military expected of
her. Recommendation: Highest possible level contacts should be continued,
White House involvement at some point (trip by Michael McFaul, for
instance), and a substitution of ambassadors seems advisable at the earliest
opportunity.

6. Congressional Hearings. I testified before the House Oversight
Committee on Thursday on the Kyrgyz revolution and its relationship with
the DOD fuel contracts. Chair John Tierney told me afterwards that this
hearing was merely a "framing and research" exercise to prepare for
subsequent hearings with DOD and DOS representatives in May. The
hearing was heavily attended and the questioning was very well
informed. Moreover, it seems that both Democrats and Republicans on the
committee were both focused on the corruption issue and highly dissatisfied
with the official statements that have come so far from the Pentagon and
State and very sympathetic with the criticisms that come from the Kyrgyz
interim government about the fuel contracts. The committee will be sending
researchers to Kyrgyzstan to look into the situation on the ground, and it
appears both Chairman Tierney and Ranking Member Flake will go. I was
asked to help them arrange meetings with Kyrgyz prosecutors who are
investigating the fuel contract arrangements.




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768666 Date: 12/31/2015
