       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791826 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                             Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                             Tuesday, February 28, 2012 7:51 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: HuffPo: Olympia Snowe Retiring: Senator Will Not Seek Another Term


Fyi

From: Rodriguez, Miguel [mailto
Sent: Tuesday, February 28, 2012 05:30 PM
To: Adams, David S; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Cc: Abedin, Huma
Subject: Fw: HuffPo: Olympia Snowe Retiring: Senator Will Not Seek Another Term

FYI.

This one is out of the blue.




From: Lee, Jesse C.
Sent: Tuesday, February 28, 2012 05:24 PM
To: Hankins, Hannah R.; Aberger, Marie; Abrams, Adam W.; Abrevaya, Sandra; Allen, Elizabeth M.; Anderson, Amanda
D.; Barkoff, Kendra; Bartoloni, Kristen; Bates, Andrew J.; Brundage, Amy; Buffa, Nikki; Burke, Jordan; Campoverdi,
Alejandra; Carney, Jay; Childress, Mark; Compton, Matthew; Conrad, Shasti; Curtis, Colleen; Dean, Laura; Earnest,
Joshua R.; Favreau, Jon; Hartnett, Kathleen R.; Holzer, Benjamin; Hughes, Caroline E.; Inouye, Shin; Jenkins, Brad;
Kang, Eugene; Keenan, Cody; Kolachalam, Namrata; Lawrence, Natasha (Intern); Lee, Monica; Lehrich, Matt; Lepow,
Brandon D.; Lewin, Jesse; McCullough, Victoria; Miller, Jason; Miranda, Luis; Monje, Carlos A.; Munoz, Cecilia; O'Connor,
Kyle; Palmieri, Jennifer; Papas, Nick; Paulsen, Joe; Pfeiffer, Dan; Phillips, Macon; Plouffe, David; Raman, Aneesh; Rangel,
Antoinette N.; Rodriguez, Julie; Rodriguez, Miguel; Rosholm, Joanna; Ruemmler, Kathryn H.; Sahgal, Rishi R.; Schmuck,
Bobby; Schultz, Eric; Selak, Dawn; Sheehy, Kathleen; Siegel, Julie; Small, Anne; Smith, Jamie; Stevens, Clark; Thompson,
Kenny; Updegrove, Laura; Valley, Shannon; Vietor, Tommy; Whithorne, Bobby; Xu, Kevin
Subject: HuffPo: Olympia Snowe Retiring: Senator Will Not Seek Another Term


Includes full statement...


           "I do find it frustrating, however, that an atmosphere of polarization and 'my way or the highway'
           ideologies has become pervasive in campaigns and in our governing institutions... Unfortunately, I do
           not realistically expect the partisanship of recent years in the Senate to change over the short term."


http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/28/olympia-snowe-retiring n 1307824.html



 Olympia Snowe Retiring: Senator Will Not Seek
 Another Term
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791826 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791826 Date: 12/31/2015




U.S. Sen. Olympia Snowe (R-Maine) will not run to keep her seat this November, according to local station
WGME.

"After an extraordinary amount of reflection and consideration, I am announcing today that I will not be a
candidate for re-election to the United States Senate," Snowe said in a statement issued on Tuesday. "It has been
an indescribable honor and immeasurable privilege to serve the people of Maine, first in both houses of Maine's
legislature and later in both houses of Congress."

This is a developing story... More information to come...

Below, full text of the statement issued by Snowe on her decision.

       "After an extraordinary amount of reflection and consideration, I am announcing today that I will not be
       a candidate for re-election to the United States Senate.

       "After 33 years in the Congress this was not an easy decision. My husband and I are in good health. We
       have laid an exceptionally strong foundation for the campaign, and I have no doubt I would have won
       re-election. It has been an indescribable honor and immeasurable privilege to serve the people of Maine,
       first in both houses of Maine's legislature and later in both houses of Congress. To this day, I remain
       deeply passionate about public service, and I cherish the opportunity I have been given for nearly four
       decades to help improve the lives of my fellow Mainers.

        "As I have long said, what motivates me is producing results for those who have entrusted me to be their
        voice and their champion, and I am filled with that same sense of responsibility today as I was on my
        first day in the Maine House of Representatives. I do find it frustrating, however, that an atmosphere of
        polarization and 'my way or the highway' ideologies has become pervasive in campaigns and in our
        governing institutions.

        "With my Spartan ancestry I am a fighter at heart; and I am well prepared for the electoral battle, so that
        is not the issue. However, what I have had to consider is how productive an additional term would be.
        Unfortunately, I do not realistically expect the partisanship of recent years in the Senate to change over
        the short term. So at this stage of my tenure in public service, I have concluded that I am not prepared to
        commit myself to an additional six years in the Senate, which is what a fourth term would entail.

        "As I enter a new chapter, I see a vital need for the political center in order for our democracy to flourish
        and to find solutions that unite rather than divide us. It is time for change in the way we govern, and I
        believe there are unique opportunities to build support for that change from outside the United States
        Senate. I intend to help give voice to my fellow citizens who believe, as I do, that we must return to an
        era of civility in government driven by a common purpose to fulfill the promise that is unique to
        America.

        "In the meantime, as I complete my third term, I look forward to continuing to fight for the people of
        Maine and the future of our nation. And I will be forever and unyieldingly grateful for the trust that the
        people of Maine have placed in me, and for the phenomenal friendship and assistance I have received
        over the years from my colleagues, my supporters, and my staff, both in Maine and in Washington."
        Senator Snowe will be scheduling a news conference in Portland, Maine, in order to further discuss her
        decision when she returns to her home state on Friday.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791826 Date: 12/31/2015
