       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767220 Date: 12/31/2015

                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                    B5,B6




From:                              Valenzuela, Arturo A <ValenzuelaAA@state.gov>
Sent:                              Wednesday, February 17, 2010 12:53 PM
To:
Cc:                                Fuchs, Michael H; Sullivan, Jacob J; cheryl.mills            Mills, Cheryl D
Subject                            RE: WHA Followup


Madam Secretary: Since your e-mail, we had the opportunity to discuss several of these issues during your meeting on
WHA with the Under Secretaries. The items below include a more detailed response to your questions from last month,
and refer to several policy reviews I am currently managing for the Bureau.

1) Sen. Baucus contacted me about his support for a US-Canada park in the Flathead, Mont area. It is primarily an
   Interior Dept. responsibility but State has a role because of the inter-national nature of it. Pls be sure someone in
   WHA stays on top of this.

WHA has been engaged with Canada for a long time on concerns about potential mining along the North Fork of the
Flathead River. We have intervened several times with Canadian federal and provincial officials when development plans
posed potential threats to this environmentally sensitive region. Sen. Baucus and many environmental groups in both
countries advocate more permanent protection for the region. These actions, though, fall within the authority of the
province of British Columbia, which believes adequate safeguards already exist. Our partners at the Canadian federal
level have a limited ability to move the provincial government toward position. Still, we are continuing to work with the
Montana congressional delegation on a way forward. Canadian Affairs Office Director recently briefed Senator Baucus's
staff on this issue on January 20.

2) Similarly, Cong. John Dingell called about another international park w Canada, the Detroit River International Wildlife
Refuge
that he wants to see us pursue. Pis have someone look into this and let me know what's the status of the project.

We have discussed with Canadian federal and provincial officials U.S. interest in an international wildlife refuge along both
sides of the Detroit River. Canadian federal officials have been exploring options with the Ontario provincial
government. We will stay engaged on this and keep you posted.

3) President Funes is under attack w/in his own party because he is perceived as too pro-American. What more can we
do to support him?

An overwhelming majority of Salvadorans have a positive view of the U.S. and do not see a close associate with the U.S.
as negative. We should not distance ourselves from Funes because a group of hardline elements within the FMLN hold
his association with us against him. Rather, we should publicly and forcefully build on that close relationship. I asked
Julissa to visit El Salvador in December, where she met with Funes and made positive statements of support while in-
country. In Chile I signed an MOU for trilateral cooperation in Paraguay and El Salvador. I am also planning a visit to El
Salvador and Guatemala in late March.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767220 Date: 12/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767220 Date: 12/31/2015




Regarding the Cuba Democracy Program, we are undertaking an interagency review of the programs to reconfigure them
to track with our priorities in Cuba and are in the process of finalizing a congressional notification for FY09 funds. We
would like to use the program to expand the reach of our assistance to reach Cubans beyond those in the political
opposition. In our conversations with Senator Lemieux and others, we have emphasized that the program will involve an
open procurement process. However, some of the usual recipients of assistance will now have to compete with
everybody else for funding. This could generate some backlash from Republicans on the Hill, but I've been preparing for
this by building support from key members and their staffs.

5) Are we giving Carlos Pascual all the support he needs to implement Merida?

We are giving Carlos strong support. I sent a memo up yesterday updating you on our engagement in the Policy
Coordinating Group (PCG) with the Mexicans. WHA took the lead in helping the NSC set up the PCG, which will largely
follow the Ambassador's Merida agenda. PCG approved the next state of the Merida cooperation, which will be blessed
by the High Level Group meeting that you attend in late March. WHA has also worked with DHS to restructure the USG's
inter-agency architecture for dealing with the border, which will help champion the Ambassador's vision for a 21st border
with Mexico that gives equal weight to promoting trade/travel and security. Finally, the Department has thus far been
successful in securing nearly $1.2 billion dollars for the Mexico Merida program.

6) Do you know if we have been given additional responsibilities by the Administration to reach out to Indian tribes in US
because of their historical "sovereign nation" status?

An office under Pat Kennedy's direction (M/PRI — Management Policy Rightsizing and Innovation) has action on this
issue. They have reached out to Federally-registered tribes (all 564 of them) for comment. This is their first step in
figuring out what the Department's role vis a vis the tribes might be. WHA has been providing input to M/PRI, but we have
no formal consultative responsibility with the tribes.

7) We need to meet w Jim Steinberg about his trip to the region and develop more effective approaches to Venezuela, to
its conflict w Columbia and how to influence Brazil to be more willing to rein in Chavez.

Look forward to this discussion. This is an issue we have been thinking carefully about. We are finalizing a medium-term
strategy paper for Jim Steinberg on Colombia and are conducting a policy review n Venezuela. I am meeting today with
Venezuelan Ambassador Bernardo Alvarez today to emphasize 1) the importance of improving relations with Colombia
and 2) articulate what we expect from a bilateral relationship with Venezuela. Some
                                                   are convinced that Chavez is facing unprecedented pressures and
increasingly desperate for external contention and conflict, or the threat of these; he needs this to legitimize his linisirule,
which is increasingly affecting even erstwhile supporters in negative ways. We need to carefully consider the
consequences of publicly confronting him but ought to look at opportunities for others in the region to help.

8) Is WHA working on a plan to address the needs of the CARICOM nations? I'd like to focus on what we intend to do this
month. So we should aim for a memo and meeting in next week.

The Caribbean Basin Security Initiative will go a long way to meeting some of their needs. We expect in FY10 to be able
to fully meet the President's $45 million first year commitment to this program. In FY 11 and out years we are seeking
funding at twice that level. It will be important for Department leadership (especially F) to continue to support sustained
spending to meet these enormous challenges. We believe the Hill is supportive.

We will provide you with recommendations that could serve as the basis of further discussion of our approach to the
Caribbean, e.g. high level visits, extension of trade preferences, more formalized consultation structures, debt
management assistance, alternative energy initiatives, and more exchanges and scholarships.

       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767220 Date: 12/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767220 Date: 12/31/2015




    Original Message
From: H <HDR22©clintonemail.com>
To: Valenzuela, Arturo A
Cc: Fuchs, Michael H; Sullivan, Jacob J; 'cheryl.mills             <cheryl.mills
<HDR22©clintonemail.com>
Sent: Sun Jan 17 21:21:30 2010
Subject: WHA Followup

Dear Arturo--

  Thanks for coming w me to Haiti yesterday and thank you for going to Santo Domingo tomorrow.

  Please tell President Fernandez that I raised his request to add his soldiers to MINUSTAH and was advised by the
commander that they would have to be self-sufficient. And that the UN and our military are looking at the greater use of a
private airport in the DR. Also discuss w him the costs for what the DR is doing to help Haiti and what they would expect
in terms of financial reimbursement from the international community.

 Also thank you for your year end report; I know Mike Fuchs has been following up w you and your team. Because of my
busy travel schedule this month, I may not have time to meet w you about it so I wanted to add some additional issues
and questions:

1) Sen. Baucus contacted me about his support for a US-Canada park in the Flathead, Mont area. It is primarily an Interior
Dept. responsibility but State has a role because of the inter-national nature of it. PIs be sure someone in WHA stays on
top of this.

2) Similarly, Cong. John Dingell called about another international park w Canada, the Detroit River International Wildlife
Refuge
that he wants to see us pursue. Pis have someone look into this and let me know what's the status of the project.

3) President Funes is under attack w/in his own party because he is perceived as too pro-American. What more can we
do to support him?

4) Should we be doing more on the case of Alan Gross being detained in Cuba? Also to get Tom Shannon confirmed, I
told Sen. Lemieux, we would take a hard look at the groups in Florida receiving US $ to work inside of Cuba. Do you know
status of this?

5) Are we giving Carlos Pascual all the support he needs to implement Merida?

6) Do you know if we have been given additional responsibilities by the Administration to reach out to Indian tribes in US
because of their historical "sovereign nation" status?

7) We need to meet w Jim Steinberg about his trip to the region and develop more effective approaches to Venezuela, to
its conflict w Columbia and how to influence Brazil to be more willing to rein in Chavez.

8) Is WHA working on a plan to address the needs of the CARICOM nations? I'd like to focus on what we intend to do this
month. So we should aim for a memo and meeting in next week.


This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767220 Date: 12/31/2015
