       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780403 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                  B6


From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Thursday, June 9, 2011 3:10 AM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: UN HLM/HIV 1st Day




    Original Message
From: Goosby, Eric
Sent: Thursday, June 09, 2011 12:04 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Hyde, Dana; Nides, Thomas R; Quam, Lois E; 'Gayle_E._Smith
<Gayle_E._Smith
Cc: Von Zinkernagel, Deborah J; Gavaghan, Ann
Subject: UN HLM/HIV 1st Day

Overview of UN High Level Meeting June 8-10, 2011



As the first day of the UN High Level Meeting on AIDS comes to an end, I wanted to provide you with an up-date on the
progress being made and the PMTCT announcement that will be coming tomorrow. Our objectives entering this meeting
were to showcase the enormous progress that has been made in the fight against AIDS, thanks largely to the United
States, and reaffirm the Obama Administration's strong commitment to the fight as part of a shared responsibility
among all nations.
First, the UN Security Council unanimously approved on Tuesday a resolution on HIV/AIDS affirming AIDS as a security
issue and the continued need for urgent, coordinated action to address the global epidemic including conflict and post-
conflict situations. The USG drafted and co-sponsored the resolution.
Today, the negotiations concluded surrounding the UN HLM Outcome Declaration that will set the course for action on
the HIV/AIDS front over the next five years.
Overall, the United States did exceedingly well in the negotiations. The Declaration affirms US support for intensified
efforts while calling for shared responsibility by all Member States to achieve these goals.

The highlights of the Declaration are:
■Treatment goal and universal access: We successfully secured our language on the treatment goal with the inclusion
of the words "working towards 15 million people living with HIV on antiretroviral treatment by 2015". This preserved
the phrase universal access which has been critical language since the 2006 UNGA HLM, but stepped back from the word
" ensure" which could imply financial obligation on the US (and Gayle's broader concerns). Under the agreed-upon
language, there are no additional financial obligations placed on the USG.

■Resource commitments: We successfully secured language stating a commitment to work towards closing the global
HIV and AIDS resource gap by 2015, currently estimated by UNAIDS to be US $6 billion annually, through greater
strategic investments and continued domestic and international funding. We did not agree to any new financial targets.
Annual resource needs for the global HIV/AIDS response were recognized to be significant, but were cast in the
framework of "shared responsibility" and emphasized the importance of increasing national (domestic) resources in
meeting that need.



Eric



       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780403 Date: 12/31/2015
