UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                                 RELEASE
                                                                                                 IN FULL




                            "Mexico at a Crossroads"
                                  Carlos Pascual
                    Ambassador of the United States of America to
                                      Mexico

                    Frank E. and Arthur W. Payne Lecture Series
                  Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies
                                Stanford University
                      Wednesday, October 20, 2010 at 4:30 pm


  Thank you, I am thrilled to be back at Stanford, and to have been selected to
  deliver the 2010 Payne Lecture by the Freeman Spogli Institute. No single
  experience shaped my life more than the four years I spent on this campus. I am
  honored to take part in this distinguished lecture series, which has raised public
  understanding of the complex policy issues facing the global community today and
  increased support for informed international cooperation.

  We meet today to consider the relationship between Mexico and the United States.
  The United States has no relationship with any country in the world that more
  profoundly affects our daily lives, and the same is true in the opposite direction for
  Mexico. Our lives and our nations are intertwined — and not just on the questions
  of safety and security that grab the daily headlines in both countries. Our
  economies and societies are also indispensably interconnected, to the good of
  Mexicans and Americans alike.

  Today I would like to talk with you about Mexico at a crossroads — or rather,
  multiple crossroads — and the choices that these intersections present for policy in
  both countries. At one of these crossroads we find Mexico at the cusp of a global
  economy — a G20 partner, yet still with over 40% of its population considered
  poor. At another crossroad there is Mexico's internal insecurity, where there is
  terrible violence inflicted by transnational organized crime, but also Mexico's new
  initiatives to assert the rule of law over criminal activity. And yet at a third
  crossroad, we see the intersection between economics and security — whether the
  virtues of jobs and competitiveness are a weapon against insecurity, or whether
  insecurity will drive away economic opportunity.



                                                1
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




  Two examples illustrate the contrasts.

  About 120 miles from Mexico City is the historic town of Queretaro, a UNESCO
  world heritage site known for its charming squares and picturesque cobblestone
  streets. Mexico's constitution was signed there in 1917. It is not, however, just
  another quaint, colonial gem, stuck in the past. Queretaro has a very bright future.
  Per capita income in Queretaro is equal to $27,000 -- twice the national average --
  due in large part to investors such as Ford, Bombardier, and GE. Known for
  having one of the best community police forces in Mexico, Queretaro is one of
  Mexico's safest cities.

  About 1,100 miles northwest of Queretaro is Ciudad Juarez, right across the border
  from El Paso, Texas. Homicides from January through July of 2010 rose more than
  50% over the same period in 2009. One quarter of the city's homes are abandoned.
  Whole sections of the city have no public services, including sewers, water or
  sidewalks. Only about 20% of children graduate from high school and, there are
  not enough schools to handle 40% of high school-age kids if they tried to attend.
  Many of the city's schools do not have functioning bathrooms or glass in their
  windows. Sixty percent of households are run by single women. It is one of the
  most violent cities on earth, controlled by a variety of criminals, who threaten the
  residents and the city's institutions. The city's poverty makes a life of crime an
  attractive alternative — young robbers receive 500 pesos for each stolen car and
  1000 pesos, about $80, for an assassination.

  The relative prosperity and security of Queretaro is as much a Mexican reality as is
  the violence and despair of Ciudad Juarez. Our challenge is to forge the policies
  that will help Mexico develop more Queretaros. Today, I would like to do two
  things that will help us better understand how Mexico can move through the
  crossroads it confronts today and emerge a better, safer nation. First, to outline the
  drivers of economic opportunity and insecurity in Mexico. We need to understand
  these dynamics to define options that can influence them. The second is to sketch
  the policy directions that Mexico and the United States are pursuing together to
  affirm the rule of law. Communities, like those of Ciudad Juarez, need economic
  opportunities to lift them out of despair. International investors need the promise
  of a stable security situation, like in Queretaro, to invest and create jobs for



                                                2
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




  Mexico's talented workforce. Those jobs in turn help keep our own companies in
  the United States prosperous.

  Grasping Economic Opportunity

  Sixteen years after it was signed, there is little doubt that NAFTA has transformed
  North America and the U.S.-Mexico economic relationship. Since NAFTA was
  signed, more than 40 million jobs have been created, and annual trade among
  NAFTA partners now totals $946 billion — more than triple what it was in 1993.

  Yet NAFTA has also had its skeptics. After China entered the WTO in 2001,
  Mexican and North American competitiveness stagnated. Mexico took an historic
  pounding in the 2008 recession, suffering the biggest drop in GDP in Latin
  America, largely due to its linkage to the U.S. economy. Protectionism risked
  encroaching into the political vocabularies of both countries. That has been
  countermanded by the need to compete in international markets. In automobiles,
  trucks, tractors, railroads, and high technology, we have heard the same refrain
  from American companies: they could not compete globally if their product lines
  were not integrated between Mexico and the United States.

  Jobs and competitiveness are indeed the issues at the heart of Mexico's economic
  future, and ours as well. Mexico is doing many things right. It withstood this
  recession better than any of the previous, periodic economic crises of the last 40
  years. FDI increased 28% (to US$12.2 billion) in the first six months of 2010, and
  34% year-on-year from July 2009, posting US$7.4 billion in the second quarter of
  this year. Eighty-two percent of foreign investments in 2010 were new
  investments — only 17.8% were profit reinvestments. Portfolio investment has
  increased dramatically -- overshooting pre-crisis levels. Mexico's macroeconomic
  fundamentals are notably strong: the economy grew at 7.6% in the second quarter
  of 2010, which will help bring GDP growth for the year somewhere between 4-5%.
  It has low foreign debt, controlled inflation, high international reserves, and sound
  financial institutions. Mexico today is a bigger market for U.S. exports than all of
  the Asian newly industrialized countries combined.

  The annual fall debate over the Mexican government's budget in itself reflects
  stability. The key issues have been whether to sustain or lower the Value Added



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




  Tax (currently at 16%), the potential impact of such a decision on revenue sharing
  with states hard hit by the devastation of record floods, and the implications for
  rating agencies and interest rates. Mexico has become a fiscally conservative and
  responsible state. The question is whether its strong performance reflects a
  breakthrough that will establish Mexico's position as a dynamic emerging
  economy, or whether it is just a statistical "bounce-back" phenomenon after a year
  of massive contraction. Comparative statistics underscore the stakes. Mexican
  GDP growth averaged 2.3% per year from 1994 to 2009, compared with annual
  GDP growth rates in the 6-9% range for Brazil, Russia, India and China.

 Two factors loom large. One is lack of competition. One or less than a handful of
 companies control these key sectors in Mexico: oil and gas, electricity, cement,
 telephone and internet, television, bread, tortillas, dairy products, poultry, soft
 drinks, and banking. Monopolies or duopolies in these key sectors raise prices for
 Mexican consumers and business inputs.

 The second is poverty. Over 47 million Mexicans (44%) live in multidimensional
 poverty. Poverty exacerbates our tensions over immigration. In areas of
 instability, it creates a wave of ready recruits for the narcotics cartels. Long-
 running Mexican government programs like Oportunidades have created
 incentives to keep kids in schools and get preventive health care in rural areas, but
 they have barely begun to take on the complexities of urban poverty. Also, the
 narrow reach of the banking sector suggests that a large segment of the population
 does not have access to financial services. The most recent government figures
 show that only 20% of Mexico's population has a bank account, compared to 90-
 99% in the U.S. and Europe, or even 60% in Chile, 43% in Brazil, and 28% in
 Argentina.

 Solving these structural problems will require a consensus of political will in
 Mexico just at the time when presidential electoral politics through 2012 will make
 such consensus difficult. There is, however, a window of global opportunity that
 may be unique but may not stay open forever. To understand this window, we
 need to look at the driver of foreign direct investment: Mexico's increased
 competitiveness vis-à-vis China. Mexico's share of U.S. imports rose about one
 percentage point from January to May of 2010, compared to the same period last



                                               4
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




  year, while China's share dropped by the same amount. The share growth seems
  small. The volumes are enormous.

  Several reasons are clear. Transport from China costs 124% more than from
  Mexico, and delivery times average 26 days instead of four. Since August 2008,
  the Mexican peso had depreciated 21%, while the Chinese renminbi has mildly
  appreciated. The differential between wage rates has converged. In 1996, Chinese
  workers earned only about a fourth as much as Mexican workers, but by 2009, they
  were earning 85% as much. In 2005, it cost $17 to produce an aluminum auto part
  in China and $18 in Mexico; three years later, it cost $25 in China and only $20 in
  Mexico.

  The result has been one of opportunity and anomaly. We have seen, for example, a
  dozen production plants return to Mexico from China — in places like Ciudad
  Juarez, Baja California, Nuevo Leon, and Tamaulipas. Cisco Systems has its
  largest facility outside of the Silicon Valley in Juarez. But at the same time that we
  see this rise in foreign direct investment, small service sector businesses are
  boarding up their windows as the cartels expand their "product lines" to include
  extortion, robbery, and kidnapping. Medical professionals are sending their
  families to the United States, and even emigrating themselves. Company
  executives are leaving, finding the constraints of living in cities where their fear for
  the safety of their families is an increasing concern. The American Chamber of
  Commerce of Mexico, which represents the bulk of FDI in the country, said earlier
  this year that 58% of its members felt less safe than they did a year earlier, and
  27% were reconsidering investments in Mexico due to security concerns.

  There is no doubt that Mexico needs to create jobs, and that jobs are a critical tool
  for minimizing recruits to organized crime. How long can Mexico sustain the
  anomaly between increasing FDI and rising insecurity? One investment banker
  drew this analogy: the relationship of risk to FDI is like a rubber band. You can
  keep stretching it, but at some point it will snap. Because it has not snapped today
  may not be a good predictor of what will happen with a bit more strain. And once
  it snaps, that rubber band is useless. One policy prescription is to relax the tension
  in the rubber band, and for this we need to understand the drivers of insecurity.

  What Drives Insecurity and Violence?



                                               5
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




  We know that transnational criminal organizations (TCOs) have continued their
  escalation of violence in Mexico. The violence is escalating numerically, with
  each of the past 10 years showing a far higher number of TCO-related murders
  than the one before it. It is escalating in the kind of weapons, tactics, and brutality
  that the TCOs employ, with a series of car bombs and grenade attacks being the
  newest, ugliest innovation. It is escalating in its impact on otherwise uninvolved
  innocents, as the TCOs expand from drugs into extortion, robbery, blackmail,
  kidnapping, carjacking, trafficking in persons, and other crimes. A gubernatorial
  candidate was killed in June. Eleven mayors have been assassinated this year.

  Since December 2006 Mexico has had about 29,000 drug-related homicides.
  Depending on the source, there were about 6,600 to 9,000 homicides in Mexico in
  2009. By September 2010, the nine-month total was in the range of 8,700 to
  9,500. At this pace, Mexico could exceed the 2009 record with 13,000 homicides
  in 2010. As a national average, Mexico's homicide rate, at approximately 14 per
  100,000 inhabitants, is little more than half of Brazil's 26 homicides per 100,000
  inhabitants. But the violence is unevenly distributed. In Ciudad Juarez, the
  homicide rate is 191 per 100,000 persons, making it perhaps the deadliest place in
  the western hemisphere. In Monterrey, which was relatively safe until recently,
  murders in 2010 are already equal to the total of all murders over the previous
  twelve years.

  Much debate has been focused on whether the violence in Mexico represents an
  insurgency. The short answer is no. There is no political, religious, or ideological
  motivation to the violence, and the TCOs do not seek to govern. In their bid to
  clear the way for their criminal enterprises, they do seek to intimidate and corrupt
  public officials, much as the mafia did in the U.S. in the 1920s, or in Italy for
  decades. Whatever the label, there is no denying the signs of increasing
  inhumanity evident in TCO violence, among themselves and towards the
  authorities. Far too much time has been spent arguing over whether the
  "insurgency" label fits the Mexican situation. We need to spend more time on
  understanding the problems and identifying the solutions. For this, it is critical to
  look at the sources and causes of the violence: the socioeconomic phenomenon of
  clashing addicts, the radical change in the Mexican market, and the recent
  pressures on the drug trade.



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




  Let's begin with the socio-economic issues. Poverty has left young Mexicans with
  few alternatives. For some the choice is to emigrate. Others become the ready
  recruits of cartels or gangs. In 2008 and 2009, a perfect storm hit Mexico — an
  economic recession that stripped away jobs both in the United States and Mexico,
  giving criminal organizations an even larger labor pool from which to recruit.
  Increasingly these kids are paid in drugs, and that has generated its own cycle of
  violence. About 70% have become addicts. In parts of Mexico the battles are no
  longer just among higher-level cartel or gang leaders, but among kids fighting to
  control a street corner so they can sell their drugs and feed their own habit.
  Nowhere is the inhumanity of organized crime demonstrated more boldly than on
  these street corners. These criminal groups are destroying Mexico's youth.

  Another dimension to this problem lies in the evolution of the drug trade as its
  center of gravity moved from Colombia to Mexico. In the United States, law
  enforcement efforts in the early 1990s increasingly shut down our ports to the drug
  trade, pushing the movement of cocaine from maritime to land routes through and
  across Central America and Mexico. By the end of the 1990s, four Mexican
  cartels dominated transit in Mexico: Sinaloa, Tijuana, Gulf, and Juarez. They
  competed for territory, but they drew limits on their brutality.

  During this same time period, a new phase emerged in Colombia, which had
  dominated the cocaine trade. Plan Colombia entered full implementation.
  Extraditions became legal and quickly ramped up. Increasingly, Colombian
  kingpins found themselves behind bars in the United States, without phones and
  the ability to run their businesses from prison. Many began to cooperate.
  Colombian traffickers lost control of their routes. The Mexican cartels stepped in
  to control the cocaine trade from Colombia throughout the value-added chain into
  the United States. Consider this analogy: the trucking oligopoly had just gained
  control of the transit, wholesale, and retail trade as well.

  By 2003-2004, the value of the market had jumped exponentially for the Mexican
  cartels, and with this so did the stakes. In the world of legitimate business, this
  type of displacement might result in mergers, acquisitions, takeovers, or new
  market entrants. In the underworld of criminal enterprises, it resulted in a surge of
  violence as rivals sought to kill each other for market share. When this wave of
  violence hit Mexico, there was no police or civil justice system to respond. After


                                               -7
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




  decades of one party rule, Mexico was controlled through political patronage. The
  police accepted bribes, watched the violence unfold, and were co-opted into the
  cartel intelligence networks. Even if they had been "clean," they had neither the
  weapons, training, nor authority to resist. Cartel violence was met with impunity.

  What followed was a period of market alignments in Mexico that became
  increasingly brutal. A long-standing feud between the Sinaloa and Tijuana cartels
  broke into a full-scale battle in Baja California. In 2003, the arrest of Osiel
  Cardenas weakened the Gulf cartel and led the Sinaloa cartel to challenge Gulf
  dominance in Nuevo Laredo, causing an explosion of violence that briefly shut the
  U.S. Consulate in Nuevo Laredo in 2005. The Zetas emerged as the paramilitary
  wing of the Gulf cartel. La Familia Michoacana announced its entry into the
  market by rolling decapitated heads onto a disco floor in 2006. In 2008 the Beltran
  Leyva organization split from the Sinaloa cartel and aligned itself with the Gulf
  and Juarez cartels, provoking a new battle ground between the Sinaloa and Juarez
  cartels to control the most important crossing into the U.S. eastern and southern
  markets through Ciudad Juarez. Earlier in 2010, the split-up of the Zetas and the
  Gulf cartel made Nuevo Leon and Tamaulipas a new zone of violence.

  Today's drug market in Mexico is not what it was in the 1990s. Mexican criminal
  groups have become the kingpins. They control the trade in the hemisphere. For
  those who muse whether it might be possible to go back to the "accommodations
  of the 1990s," when government forces looked the other way to the cartels' illegal
  activities — that market structure no longer exists. It's not just about drugs
  anymore. The cartels have diversified into other aspects of organized crime -
  extortion, racketeering, robbery, trafficking in persons, and kidnapping — the kinds
  of crime that now turn ordinary Mexican citizens into victims. Those who blame
  standing up to the cartels for the violence also misread the violence. The violence
  started with the cartels; the confrontations with organized crime are therefore a
  necessary part of a strategy to assert control over Mexico's streets and stop the
  violence.

  Add to these developments yet a third set of causes of violence in the drug trade
  and its expansion into other criminal activities: pressures on the market. The UN
  estimates that the global retail cocaine market was, in constant dollar terms, half
  the size in 2008 ($88B) that it was in 1995 ($165B). This drop in value was driven


                                               S
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




  in part by reduced demand in the United States, where there were half as many
  users in 2008 (5.3M) as in 1982 (10.5M), as well as by reduced supply thanks to
  declining production and more effective interdiction efforts in the U.S. and abroad.
  Estimates show U.S. consumption dropping from 660 metric tons in 1988 to 200 or
  fewer tons today. Unemployment and reduced personal wealth as a result of the
  current global economic downtown have further reduced demand for cocaine.

 Stronger interdiction has also made it harder and costlier for cartels to get products
 into the United States, increasing the competition for plazas and border crossings
 they can control. The United States has increased Border Patrol and ICE agents on
 the border from 15,000-17,000 during the Bush administration, to over 26,000
 agents working in the border region today. The FY2010 Supplemental
 Appropriation of $600 million will support additional investments in law
 enforcement on the border.

 Since President Calderon took office in December 2006, he has made clear that
 combating criminal organizations is his most pressing priority, and his government
 has acted accordingly. In 2007, Mexico and the United States formally launched a
 new era of cooperation under the Merida Initiative which allocated $1.4 billion for
 programs designed to counter the drug-fueled violence that has threatened citizens
 on both sides of the border. By 2009, Mexican Government efforts and
 cooperation under Merida started to take root. We began sharing intelligence,
 developed vetted law enforcement units, assisted in training a more professional
 federal police force, and delivered non-intrusive inspection equipment and
 helicopters to increase the mobility and effectiveness of Mexican enforcement
 agencies. In the past year, Mexican officials have had unprecedented success in
 taking down major organized crime leaders. Beginning with Arturo Beltran Leyva
 in December 2009, nearly a dozen more have been captured or killed in 2010. As
 Mexican and U.S. authorities improved intelligence and targeting, and as Mexican
 authorities made more and more serious hits, the battle with and among criminal
 groups has intensified and may still intensify even more.

  Lessons Learned

  One lesson we have learned is that Rule of Law matters. At present, 97.9% of
  crimes under local and state jurisdiction in Mexico go unpunished. The probability



                                               9
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




  that at the local and state level a suspect will even be detained in Mexico is 1.7%.
  The likelihood that charges will be brought against a person who commits a crime
  is 2.1%. At the local and state level in Mexico, the likelihood that a person who
  commits a crime will be indicted is 1.55%. The lesson we have learned in
  supporting Mexican government efforts to fight cartel violence is that nations,
  states and communities must invest in law enforcement to sustain the rule of law.
  Rule of law requires police who dissuade criminals with their swift responses, and
  it requires a civil justice system that puts and keeps criminals in jail.

  Another lesson is that money matters. U.S. government agencies estimate that $19
  to $29 billion are laundered annually between the United States and Mexico. At
  best, both countries capture a total of one billion dollars annually in bulk cash.
  That means that criminal groups have access to tens of billions of dollars which
  they can use to buy weapons and bribe officials in order to perpetuate their
  criminal activity. To cripple organized crime, we must cut off access to those vast
  sums of laundered money. If we fail to curtail these money flows, the
  confrontation with organized crime will generate more violence and more
  corruption.

  A third conclusion is that the transnational nature of these criminal organizations
  requires regional cooperation. Throughout the hemisphere we find points of
  supply, demand, and transit that will continue to drive the destruction of the social
  fabric in both Mexico and the United States. We each have a responsibility to
  contain and curtail the sources of consumption, production, and violence
  embedded in the drug trade. We have a mutual self-interest in helping each other.
  As long as consumption exists, the drug trade can and will adapt its supply and
  transit chain to get product to its customers. As centers of supply and distribution
  relocate, so will the violence that accompanies organized crime. Regional
  cooperation is needed to ensure that every country in the hemisphere has enhanced
  rule of law programs to combat and confront the TCOs. We must leave them
  nowhere to operate with impunity.

  Fourth, as the Mexican law enforcement and judicial systems more capably and
  aggressively go after these organized crime groups, we are likely to see the
  violence become more acute. We are already seeing that the violence is



                                               10
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




  increasingly directed toward authorities and innocent civilians as TCOs seek to be
  left alone and go back to impunity they have known.

  Strategic Directions

 The intense bilateral cooperation that we know today as the Merida Initiative
 began when President Calderon recognized the grave threat to Mexico's national
 security and well-being posed by the expanding presence of transnational criminal
 organizations in his country. He enlisted the support of the U. S. Government
 under President Bush for a regional initiative to confront this challenge. After
 President Obama took office, our two governments undertook an intensive bilateral
 review from September 2009 through February of this year. In that review we
 focused on lessons learned and how best to move forward with our combined
 efforts. In March of this year, Secretary Clinton met with her Mexican counterpart
 Patricia Espinosa, and together they chaired a high-level group meeting that
 announced four strategic pillars for our cooperation.

  The four pillars of our Merida Initiative will strengthen both of our societies in the
  fight against organized crime and violence. Our first pillar aims to disrupt the
  capacity of organized crime to operate. We work across the board with Mexican
  institutions to help capture criminal groups and their leaders and reduce their
  revenues. We also support better investigations, successful prosecutions and
  shipment interdictions. The initiative's second pillar focuses on enhancing the
  capacity of Mexico's government and institutions to sustain the rule of law. The
  Merida Initiative's third pillar aims to facilitate legitimate trade and movement of
  people while thwarting the flow of drugs, arms and cash. This provides the
  foundation for infrastructure and technology as well as modernizing land crossings,
  ports and airports. Finally, the fourth pillar seeks to build strong and resilient
  communities. But let's take a twist on the four pillars and look at them through a
  different optic, a time lens, in order to get a different perspective on our shared
  objectives.'



  1 For more information on the Merida Initiative, visit the website of the U.S. Embassy in Mexico City at
  http://mexico.usembassy.gov/eng/eborders_Merida_Initiative.html. See also the August 12, 2010, Keynote address
  by U.S. Ambassador Carlos Pascual at the El Paso Border Security Conference "Re-Envisioning The Border
  Community To Foster A U.S.-Mexico Partnership For Prosperity, Progress And Socio-Economic Development" at
  http://mexico.usembassy.gov/eng/Ambassador/A100702_Border.html.


                                                11
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




 The Long Term

 Rule of Law at all Levels of Society

 What needs to be done in the long-term is actually quite clear. Juarez is not the
 first city and Mexico not the first country to be faced with problems of violence.
 There are models that can be followed to control crime and rebuild society and
 those models all begin with rule of law. Without rule of law, criminals operate
 with impunity, business investment suffers, and the citizenry live in fear. With
 rule of law, intelligence is used proactively to prevent crime, criminals are arrested,
 prosecutions are successful, and criminals are jailed and taken off the streets. With
 rule of law, small businesses can flourish, free from extortion. With rule of law,
 large businesses have the confidence to invest, creating the jobs that offer
 Mexico's young people positive options for their future.

 Building institutional capacity for the rule of law -- Merida's second strategic pillar
 -- is crucial to long-term success. To date, the Government of Mexico has laid
 important foundations for success and the United States is supporting the Mexicans
 as they implement comprehensive reforms in Mexico's criminal justice system
 through the professionalization of police and prosecutors, judicial exchanges, and
 partnerships between Mexican and U.S. law schools. As Mexico moves to pass
 legislation to reform its state and municipal police, we have committed to work
 together to build the training and vetting programs needed to create local police
 forces that people can trust, while continuing our efforts at a federal level.
 Mexico is starting to train a new generation of police officers unlike any the
 country has ever seen. As of March 2010, 5,500 federal and state officials from all
 levels of law-enforcement and judicial agencies have participated in newly
 designed professionalization programs. Over 4,300 police officers have graduated
 from the Federal Police Basic Investigation Techniques course in San Luis Potosi
 and are now deployed throughout Mexico. These college-educated officers are the
 first of a new cadre of professional police officers in Mexico who will help
 transform the way crimes are investigated and prosecuted. But there is a long way
 to go — across all levels, there are about 450,000 police in Mexico. We have taken
 just the first steps in what will be a decade-long process.




                                             17.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




 In 2008, Mexico passed a crucial constitutional reform to create oral trials and a
 more transparent legal system where all parties — from police to prosecutors to
 judges — are held accountable. Now every state and the federal government have
 to pass laws to comply with the constitution. In some areas, increased operational
 effectiveness is resulting in greater numbers of arrests in Mexico. But lack of
 familiarity with the new system and the lack of trust by witnesses willing to come
 forward for trials, means that many criminals are released for want of evidence and
 the ability to prosecute them.

  To overcome these obstacles, U.S. support has expanded expert-to-expert
  exchanges, programs, and workshops between Mexican and U.S. criminal-justice
  professionals. These programs help professionals in both our countries work
  together more closely in combating organized crime. They are building trial
  advocacy skills, including evidence collection and preservation; improving
  extradition and fugitive apprehension; supporting witness protection; encouraging
  internal integrity; teaching advanced witness interview techniques; providing
  officer safety and protection; and using asset forfeiture tools. Together we are
  implementing the programs to build the skills Mexican investigators and
  prosecutors need to put criminals in jail and take back the streets.

  Communities as Partners in Rebuilding Communities
  Security cannot be an end in itself, but must be a condition that allows
  communities to achieve normalcy and prosperity. Whether in Medellin, Bosnia,
  Iraq, Afghanistan, or New York, families that have experienced high violence or
  crime have wanted not just a safer environment, but also to send their children to
  good schools, to travel freely, and to have dependable jobs. If security does not
  also improve quality of life, it is not seen as a benefit. Security programs must be
  integrated with social and economic programs, and success measured against social
  indicators — in addition to reductions in violence and crime. Medellin, Colombia is
  a powerful example where business and community leaders designed and
  implemented a strategy to restore civic life, and to engage the local population in
  winning back their security. As the community became more involved and took
  the initiative in engaging security officials, their ownership of the process created a
  perception that the police worked for them. That engagement started a virtuous



                                               13
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




  cycle where community involvement led to greater security, and greater security
  facilitated community engagement and a restoration of business activity.

  Mexican communities need to believe that the police or security forces around
 them are committed to and are capable of protecting them before they can be
 expected to participate proactively in the rebuilding of businesses and
 neighborhoods. This process is now beginning. Civil society programs like
 President Calderon's Initiative, "Todos Somos Juarez", are gaining momentum and
 engaging local community groups on priorities to keep kids away from crime,
 create new role models, and lure others from violence. Community groups, like
 Red Juvenil are expanding their youth-led training programs and are proving that
 young people are willing to positively spend their time to help their community.
 Business groups like Paso del Norte and the Fundacion de Empresariado
 Chihuahuense (FECHAC) are sponsoring job creation programs for young people
 that finish high school.

  The challenge will be to channel this new but nascent base of community
  initiatives in ways that have a cumulative impact, so that communities can see their
  efforts make a difference. Taking the next step — to build from the satisfaction of
  doing good things to seeing that good things can work — is key to building a
  virtuous cycle where community engagement accelerates security success.

  With safer neighborhoods, civic projects like building new schools, transit systems,
  and infrastructure projects can launch and create more jobs and make the economy
  more competitive. With support from USAID, Mexico has developed the means to
  issue state bonds that are backed by concrete investment plans. Already these
  bond issues have raised sums ranging from $100 million to $250 million in several
  states, repaid over 15 years at competitive rates. Combine that further with
  investments from the North American Development Bank, or the Inter-American
  Bank, or the private sector to develop a sustained promise of economic progress
  that will build strong and resilient communities in Mexico.


  U.S. Demand Reduction

  President Obama recognizes U.S. co-responsibility, as the largest market for
  Mexican narcotics, for the violence that plagues Mexico as a result of criminal


                                               14
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




  activity. It is that sense of responsibility that underlies the cooperation we extend
  in our international partnerships with Mexico and others. But we also recognize
  the need to do more at home. The Administration has therefore developed a
  National Drug Control Strategy that reflects a comprehensive approach to reducing
  drug use and its consequences. The Strategy calls for a 15 percent reduction in the
  rate of youth drug use over five years, and to meet that goal the Administration
  requested $15.5 billion in anti-drug spending for this year alone. The Strategy
  seeks to strengthen community efforts to prevent drug use, integrate treatment into
  health care, and break the cycle of drug use, crime, and incarceration that plagues
  so many of our cities.

  The Short Term

  Intelligence-Led Operations to Disrupt TCOS Now

  Performance in the short-term is harder than the long-term agenda. You need to
  work with existing security forces. The challenge is how to evoke better law
  enforcement. Violence is unprecedented, people are afraid, mayors are being
  killed. Only a small percentage of the police and judicial system are trained. The
  GOM faces pressures and expectations to deliver results and reduce violence. This
  is where Merida's first pillar focuses — on disrupting the capacity of organized
  crime to operate.

  In the short run, integrating intelligence with law enforcement operations is key to
  building citizen confidence that police and security officials are able to arrest
  criminals. Mexico has been piloting intelligence-led policing, where vetted units
  receive information and use that information to arrest key drug cartel leaders. And,
  the program is working. In the past year, Mexican authorities implemented
  successful high-profile operations. Major cartel figures such as Arturo Beltran-
  Leyva, "El Teo" Garcia , Nacho Coronel, "El Grande" Barragan, and Edgar
  "Barbie" Valdez can no longer wreak havoc in Mexico.

  This was the initial focus of the Merida Initiative. Together Mexico and the United
  States focused attention on the heads of cartels — to demonstrate that they could not
  operate with impunity. Now the intelligence programs that led to these successes
  against cartel leaders must be expanded to local levels where information from
  community members — the people who know firsthand where criminals are hiding


                                               15
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




  — can help the police identify and disable safe houses, bases, weapons sites, and
  vehicle storage areas. Slowly but surely, intelligence-led policing will not only
  lead to the capture and arrest of TCO leaders, but will debilitate and disrupt the
  capacity of the cartels to victimize communities. By integrating intelligence and
  operations, officials will increasingly be better equipped to attack cartel operations
  strategically and with precision.

  With such widespread violence, the difficulties of simultaneous implementation of
  sweeping law enforcement and civil society initiatives can be mitigated by
  strategically choosing where to start first. By selecting a small section of a state or
  city, officials can limit the complexity of implementing all the necessary and
  sufficient programs. The strategic selection of the best area(s) in which to work
  should be determined by both intelligence and mapping that analyzes crime and
  violence trends and cartel tactics. This allows both law enforcement agencies and
  civic organizations to implement the full force of their programming in a
  concentrated area that becomes a safe zone in the city. With demonstrated success
  in one zone, the zones can be expanded and connected, steadily increasing the
  areas in which the impact of cartel violence and crime is controlled and rule of law
  replaces intimidation and fear.

  Attack the Entire Organization, not Just the Killers

  As we accelerate the tempo of action, we need to increase our capacity to strip the
  cartels of the resources and arms that fuel their brutality. As noted earlier, the
  United States and Mexico capture about $1 billion in bulk cash annually, and the
  U.S. Treasury Department has sanctioned hundreds of Mexican entities linked to
  the drug trade, but it's not enough.

  Mexican and U.S. financial intelligence centers have been forging strong
  information links which became even stronger at a bilateral money laundering
  workshop held earlier this month. The group agreed on ten recommendations to
  advance bilateral efforts to combat money laundering and bulk cash smuggling.
  For the first time, we will target six money laundering cases — three selected by
  each country — for joint investigation and prosecution. The U.S. will expand its
  training support to Mexico in money laundering and asset forfeiture, including
  advanced technologies and techniques used in money laundering.



                                               16
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




 Also crucial is controlling the flow of arms that drug trafficking organizations use
 to confront authorities and to intimidate and extort citizens. Most of those guns
 flow south into Mexico from the U.S. side of the border. ICE and ATF are
 working jointly on weapons seizures through programs "Armas Cruzadas" and
 "Project Gunrunner." Newly deployed non-intrusive inspection equipment is
 being used at key Mexican POEs to assist in the arms detection and ATF's e-Trace
 is a searchable database that allows law enforcement agencies to monitor and trace
 firearms data. E-Trace is not just a database — it is a tool that can result in
 prosecutions and incarcerations of Mexican cartel members.

  We saw an important result from e-Trace earlier this year, when a District Court
  Judge in Tucson sentenced the leader of a firearms trafficking conspiracy to 57
  months. Other defendants, who had supplied 117 assault rifles and other weapons
  to the Sinaloan drug cartel, will serve more than 40 months. Fifteen of the guns
  were tracked through e-Trace, allowing ATF agents in Arizona to identify this
  trafficking group. The firearms were predominately assault-style rifles, including a
  .50 caliber rifle, and handguns known to be weapons of choice by the Mexican
  drug cartels.

  Now, thanks to a new agreement signed in October, ATF has launched a Spanish
  language interface for e-Trace which will make this technology available to
  Mexican investigators to trace weapons known to originate in the United States.
  Mexican officials will be attending ATF-training training courses in the next two
  weeks.


  Capturing Economic Potential

  While the need to fight crime and improve citizen security has a very obvious,
  compelling urgency, we cannot let the security agenda distract us from the
  imperative to support Mexico's economic growth and development. We need
  progress on both fronts in order to move together to create opportunity and break
  the cycle of poverty and violence. Our trade and investment relationship with
  Mexico continues its broad progress. Mexico is our number two trading partner
  and we are the largest source of foreign direct investment in the country. When
  President Obama received President Calderon in May 2010, we agreed to identify


                                               17
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




 barriers to progress in key areas, and work with the private sector to move forward
 on regulatory cooperation, the need for innovation and greater North American
 competitiveness and a more closely integrated energy policy.

 Looking to the future, a key component of our global competitiveness is creating a
 border that positions Mexico and the United States to compete together in a global
 economy. I have spoken with U.S. businesses in almost every sector that have told
 me that integration with Mexico has allowed them to lower costs and compete in
 markets where they would otherwise be excluded. That means more jobs and
 exports for both the United States and Mexico. But it also means that the border
 must be efficient — to help reduce the cost of integration so that we increase our net
 competitiveness in global markets.

 Building this 21st century border requires us to rethink long held concepts of what
 our common border is and should be. We have always thought of the border as a
 line separating two entities. Border security therefore meant strengthening that
 line, constructing stronger walls, and protecting one side from the other.

  Modern technology allows us to re-conceptualize the border as something more
  than a juridical line that separates two countries. Our shared border is the entire set
  of activities that flow cross it. Over a million people legitimately cross the border
  every day. Over one billion dollars worth of legitimate trade crosses the border
  every day. The border does not just follow the river as it courses between El Paso
  and Ciudad Juarez. The border has one end in a strawberry field in Guanajuato
  and the other end in the fruit section of the Costco in Kansas City; and it includes
  everyone involved in the process from production to transport to sale.

  We have begun work on the 21st century border by expanding existing and
  building new ports of entry. Multi-hundred-million dollar expansions are now
  underway at three key ports of entry — San Ysidro, Nogales-Mariposa, and the
  World Trade Bridge in Laredo. After a decade in which no new crossings opened,
  we opened a new port of entry at Anzalduas last December and are on track to
  open two other new ports of entry this year at San Luis II, and Donna-Rio Bravo.
  We are improving our processes to accelerate the movement of goods by
  increasing hours of operation at ports of entry and by double stacking customs
  officers on entry lanes. Trusted traveler programs such as SENTRI and non-


                                               1R
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




  intrusive inspection equipment continue to expedite the flow of people. The
  reopening last April of designated student lanes at the Paso del Norte downtown
  crossing, and this year's announcement of our intent to open a new pedestrian
  crossing point between Tijuana and San Diego are further steps in expediting the
  flow of people.

   What is most exciting and has the potential to be truly transformative are
  proposals we are studying to create internal ports. These would locate centers for
  customs inspection and clearance in places like Monterrey or Guanajuato — or
  potentially San Antonio or Phoenix. Once cleared, goods could then move along
  secure corridors across the border. This would free up processing at the border and
  relieve the infrastructure demands in border communities, allowing for faster
  crossings for everyone.

  These efforts are still in early stages. When Presidents Obama and Calderon met
  in Washington in May, they issued a Joint Declaration on 21st Century Border
  Management. That declaration establishes an Executive Steering Committee
  (ESC) of senior representatives from both our countries. Their mission is both to
  break the many small logjams and to implement big thinking, like the internal ports
  concept, to implement the 21st Century Border. We expect the first meeting of the
  Executive Steering Committee to take place in November. It will be a major step
  forward in implementing the 21st Century Border.

  Another strategic step will be to move toward common or shared standards for
  production. The more we can harmonize with Mexico on standards and
  regulations that satisfy the interests of both countries, the more we can integration
  production lines and reduce costs. In May, the Presidents created a High-Level
  Regulatory Cooperation Council (HLRCC) to guide a process of selecting products
  and sectors to target our efforts. The expected results: lower costs for consumers,
  businesses, producers, and governments; and improved capacity to protect the
  environment, health and safety of our citizens. The HLRCC is working on
  increasing regulatory transparency; providing early warning of regulations with
  potential bilateral effects; and help make regulations more compatible. We hope to
  expand this Council to Canada soon. Indeed, one vivid example of the need for
  regulatory cooperation is the fact that Canada, the United States, and Mexico all



                                               19
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




 have different standards for seat belts used in automobiles, even though our
 automobile industry is integrated in so many other ways.


 Another promising growth area for cross-border trade is clean energy. Mexico has
 an aggressive goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 50 percent by 2050,
 and U.S. companies can play a supporting role in helping Mexico achieve that
 target. The U.S. Embassy has hosted and will continue to host trade missions of
 U.S. companies looking to sell green technologies. Interest in cross-border trade in
 renewable energy is growing and there are already a number of success stories,
 such as Export-Import Bank's $102 million loan to Clipper Wind Power to export
 wind turbines to Mexico. As part of the project, Walmart will purchase about a
 third of the power generated to supply electricity to 348 of its facilities in Mexico,
 which will avoid emission of more than 130,000 metric tons of greenhouse gas per
 year. Today, Mexico is EXIM's largest customer in the world — with an exposure
 of about $8 billion — and PEMEX is the largest customer in Mexico. By financing
 U.S. oil and gas technology, the United States has helped Mexico halt the decline
 in oil production and introduce sound environmental practices that extend the life
 of oil wells. The U.S. benefits by sustaining the productivity of our third largest
 supplier of oil.

  Common Interests, Shared Responsibility

  As we support Mexico in facing the crossroads before it, several things are clear:
  Mexico's economic development and its security needs must be addressed
  together, with integrated strategies that acknowledge the interactive nature of these
  challenges. Strengthening the rule of law is critical to restoring security, and
  security is crucial for competing successfully in a globalized economy. Organized
  crime must be dismantled so that investment flows will increase and more jobs will
  be created.

  We have seen that the threats -- and the opportunities -- are transnational, inviting
  us, indeed, obliging us to work together.

  This is a moment of opportunity. Incentives for investment and risks that can drive
  it away are side by side. It's important to act on this moment to take advantage of



                                              20
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015




  economic opportunity — and to use economics to define the course on the crossroad
  of security, and not let insecurity be the driver of economic realities.

  With Mexico once again at a historic juncture, I feel optimistic that it has framed
  its challenges correctly and is taking important steps to take advantage of the great
  opportunities that lie ahead for it.

  The Obama Administration has similarly committed itself through the Merida
  Initiative and the other security initiatives that I have described, as well as through
  our many joint economic initiatives, to support Mexico in its efforts to build
  institutions, establish a strong rule of law, and to combat organized crime as a
  necessary step to increasing economic well-being. We are all in this together since
  our mutual security and prosperity depend on Mexico's success.




                                               21
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774249 Date: 12/31/2015
