     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771937 Date: 12/31/2015


                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART B3
                                                                                                    NATSECACT1947,B6



From:                               Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                               Monday, November 29, 2010 6:09 AM
To:
Subject:                            Fw: WikiLeaks Coverage Update 11.29 as of 0430
Attachments:                        Media Coverage Wikileaks Update 11.29.2010.doc



DoD news roundup

                                                                                                        B3 NATSECACT1947
    Original Message                                                                           B6
From: Wilson, Douglas HON OSD PA
To: Harris, Jennifer D; Harris, Jennifer D; 'Hammer, Michael A.'                                          ; Crowley, Philip J;
Chitre, Nanda 5; Benton, Cheryl A; Smith, Dana S; Toner, Mark C; Ratney, Michael A; Korman, Samuel I. (Shai); Masonis,
Melinda J; Howard, Ariel N;                                                 'Matthew.Chandler
<Matthew.Chandler                   'Smith, Sean' <Sean.Smith
'Matthew.A.Miller                                                    'Dean.Boyd
'dawn.n.dearden                                                   'Marti.Adams
                                  'Jenni.LeCompt;                                                       'Chang, Benjamin'
                                      (U) Robert R. Jensen                                                      'McDonough,
Denis R.                                             'Rhodes, Benjamin J.'                                         'Turner,
Shawn'                                         Vietor, Tommy'
                                                                 'Amy.Kudwa                                         Mull,
Stephen D; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Klevorick, Caitlin B; Kennedy, Patrick F; Goldberg, Philip 5;



Sent: Mon Nov 29 05:24:16 2010
Subject: FW: WikiLeaks Coverage Update 11.29 as of 0430                                            B3 NATSECACT1947



-----Original Message
                                                                                                             B6
From:
Sent: Monday, November 29, 2010 5:10 AM

Subject: WikiLeaks Coverage Update 11.29 as of 0430

Media coverage of WikiLeaks' release of classified U.S. State Department cables remains heavy across all mediums.
Reports underscored that the leaked documents provide candid views of foreign leaders and blunt assessments on
terrorism and nuclear proliferation filed by U.S. diplomats.
Attention centered on new revelations about "long-simmering" nuclear trouble spots, detailing U.S., Israeli and Arab
world fears of Iran's growing nuclear program, American concerns about Pakistan's atomic arsenal and U.S.
discussions about a united Korean peninsula as a long-term solution to North Korean aggression. However, coverage
also italicized that most of the revelations were not "explosive" nor would "shatter any international relationships."




Print, online, and wire coverage consisted of official condemnation of the release of leaked documents and stories
detailing the contents of the cables, including reports that U.S. diplomats were encouraged to spy on counterparts at the
U.N. and information about various countries including China, North Korea, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Israel, Yemen, Iran
and Saudi Arabia. Reporters emphasized that the documents illustrate how frightened the Arab world is of Iran's rising

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771937 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771937 Date: 12/31/2015




ambitions and its nuclear program -- and how much Iran has become the center of attention in capitals around the
world. In the wake of the release, the press added that to prevent further breaches, the Pentagon announced Sunday it
had ordered the disabling of a feature on its classified computer systems that allows material to be copied onto thumb
drives or other removable devices.




Among the five media groups to receive the documents prior to the WikiLeaks release -- America's New York Times,
Britain's The Guardian, Germany's Der Spiegel, France's Le Monde, and Spain's El Pais and -- the Times has been heavily
referenced, with the issues it covered influencing the direction of the overall coverage. Coverage by Agence France
Presse has been extensive.
Broadcast coverage consisted of both brief "readers" as well as full reports on the release of the State Department
documents.




Full text articles are included in the attachment.




Highlights



Characterization of the Leak



*    Agence France Presse: Whistleblower website WikiLeaks on Sunday
unleashed a flood of US cables detailing shocking diplomatic episodes, from a nuclear standoff with Pakistan to Arab
leaders urging a strike on Iran... In an introduction, it painted the United States as a hypocritical superpower and
attacked "the contradictions between the US's public persona and what it says behind closed doors.
*    Associated Press: Hundreds of thousands of State Department
documents leaked Sunday revealed a hidden world of backstage international diplomacy, divulging candid comments
from world leaders and detailing occasional U.S. pressure tactics aimed at hot spots in Afghanistan, Iran and North
Korea... None of the revelations is particularly explosive, but their publication could prove problematic for the officials
concerned. And the massive release of material intended for diplomatic eyes only is sure to ruffle feathers in foreign
capitals, a certainty that prompted U.S.
diplomats to scramble in recent days to shore up relations with key allies in advance of the disclosures.
*    Reuters: The diplomatic cables so far released by WikiLeaks might
embarrass U.S. diplomats but probably won't shatter any international relationships... The key lesson so far seems to be
just how much easier the information age has made it to steal vast quantities of data -- and how much harder it is to
keep secrets.
*     McClatchy: However, the cables' blunt language and their unvarnished
statements of U.S. positions on a wide range of issues as well as internal U.S. assessments of world leaders could prove
highly embarrassing, hurt ties with allies and other countries and diminish trust in Washington's ability to safeguard
secrets. The first tranche of documents, released by WikiLeaks, the whistle-blowing website, didn't contain any explosive
revelations, although a cable outlining U.S. efforts to convince China to stop commercial air shipments of North Korean
missile parts to Iran via Beijing appeared to divulge a top-secret U.S. intelligence operation.



Mideast



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771937 Date: 12/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771937 Date: 12/31/2015




*    Wall Street Journal: U.S. diplomats and defense officials have
worried the disclosures could undercut the ability of foreign leaders to continue cooperating with Washington on
counter-terror and counter-proliferation operations, with Yemen, Pakistan and Afghanistan among those most focused
on.



Iran



*    Agence France Presse: The United States has told France that Israel
could strike Iran without US military support but the operation might not be successful, according to a leaked document
published Sunday.
*    Agence France Presse: Israel has warned its US ally that President
Barack Obama's attempt to engage diplomatically with Iran over its nuclear weapons program will fail, according to
leaked memos published Sunday.
*    Bloomberg: Iran obtained 19 advanced missiles from North Korea,
potentially giving the Islamic nation the capability of attacking Moscow and cities in Western Europe, according to
embassy cables posted by WikiLeaks.org and provided to the New York Times.
*    Los Angeles Times: Leaders of oil-rich Arabian Peninsula monarchies
who are publicly reluctant to criticize Iran have been beseeching the United States in private to attack the Islamic
Republic and destroy its nuclear facilities, according to a series of classified diplomatic cables released by the WikiLeaks
website.
*    New York Times: These warnings are part of a trove of diplomatic
cables reaching back to the genesis of the Iranian nuclear standoff in which leaders from around the world offer their
unvarnished opinions about how to negotiate with, threaten and perhaps force Iran's leaders to renounce their atomic
ambitions.
*    Reuters: King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia repeatedly exhorted the
United States to "cut off the head of the snake" by launching military strikes to destroy Iran's nuclear program,
according to leaked U.S.
diplomatic cables.
*    Washington Post: The United States believes Iran has obtained
advanced missiles from North Korea that could reach Moscow and cities across Western Europe, one of several secret
diplomatic assessments of Iran's weapons program disclosed publicly for the first time Sunday.



Pakistan



*     Agence France Presse: The United States has led top secret efforts
to remove highly enriched uranium from Pakistan for years, worried it could be used to make an "illicit" nuclear device,
according to leaked US cables.
*     Washington Post: The latest document dump from WikiLeaks reveals the
diplomatic high wire the United States is often walking in its relationship with countries that are considered crucial allies
in fighting terrorism, such as Pakistan. Cables that pertain to the U.S. relationship with Pakistan show the extent to
which U.S. diplomatic officials think the American agenda is often undermined by the poor standing of the superpower
among Pakistanis.




Yemen




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771937 Date: 12/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771937 Date: 12/31/2015




*      Agence France Presse: Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh admits
lying to his own people by pretending that US military strikes against AI-Qaeda are carried out by Yemeni forces,
according to a leaked US document.
*      Wall Street Journal: Yemen's President Ali Abdullah Saleh allowed
American forces to conduct counter-terror operations against al Qaeda militants inside his country. During a January
meeting with visiting U.S.
Gen. David Petraeus, the Yemeni leader made clear he wanted to disguise Washington's role, according to a cable from
the American ambassador in Sana'a.



Afghanistan



*      Bloomberg: The leaked documents include details about governments
and officials, including an episode last year in which Afghanistan's then-vice president, Ahmed Zia Massoud, was found
carrying $52 million in cash while visiting the United Arab Emirates. Massoud denied taking any money out of
Afghanistan, according to the Times.
*      Agence France Presse: Leaked US documents on Monday painted
President Hamid Karzai's controversial younger brother as a corrupt drugs baron, exposing deep US concerns about graft
undermining the war against the Afghan Taliban... Ahmed Wali Karzai has long been dogged by allegations of unsavory
links to Afghanistan's lucrative opium trade and private security firms. But as a powerful figure in Kandahar, where US
forces are leading the fight to break a nine-year Taliban insurgency, Western officials have kept quiet in public on the
president's younger half brother's tainted record. Leaked cables from the US embassy in Kabul now reveal their true
feelings in moves that could complicate already strained relations between Washington and Karzai at a key juncture in
the war.



Iraq



*      Agence France Presse: Iranians applying for diplomatic visas to Iraq
were vetted by the US embassy in Baghdad for as long as 16 months before their application was decided upon, a leaked
US document showed Monday.



Turkey



*       Reuters: U.S. diplomats have cast doubts on the reliability of NATO
ally Turkey, portraying its leadership as divided and permeated by Islamists, according to the German Der Spiegel
magazine's website.



Israel



*       Agence France Presse: Israel discussed its planned war on Gaza with
the Palestinian leadership and Egypt ahead of time, offering to hand them control of the strip if it defeated Names, US
documents released by WikiLeaks showed.



Asia



       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771937 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771937 Date: 12/31/2015




China



*    Agence France Presse: The United States believes that China's
leadership has directed a hacking campaign into computers of Google and Western governments, according to US
diplomatic files leaked Sunday.
*    Agence France Presse: The United States confronted China on
information it tried to pressure Kyrgyzstan to pull the rug from a US base, possibly due to a dispute over Guantanamo
detainees, a leaked document said Sunday.
*    Reuters: The United States has complained to Beijing several times
over the transshipment of missile components from North Korea to Iran via China, the Guardian newspaper reported.
*    Wall Street Journal: The cables reflect continuing U.S. concern that
China isn't doing enough to prevent proliferation of missile and chemical weapons technology despite Beijing's
introduction of export controls in 2002... The cables also highlight U.S. concerns about China's computer warfare
capability, and its influence in Central Asia. And they give potentially embarrassing blow-by-blow accounts of meetings
between U.S. and Chinese officials.
*



Koreas



*    Agence France Presse: South Korea believes that the offer of
commercial deals could help a reluctant China get on board the idea of Korean reunification, according to US diplomatic
cables cited by the New York Times.
*    Reuters: Separately, the New York Times said the leaked cables
showed that U.S. and South Korean officials have discussed the prospects for a unified Korea, should the North's
economic troubles and political transition lead the state to implode.



Americas



*     Agence France Presse: Washington ordered its diplomats in 2008 to
probe a possible Al-Qaeda presence in a border zone between Paraguay, Argentina and Brazil, according to a
confidential cable released Sunday by WikiLeaks.
*     McClatchy: The events surrounding the June 2009 coup in Honduras was
a carnival of illegal actions by every branch of government, including the successor of the deposed president, according
to a diplomatic cable signed by the U.S. ambassador.



Europe



*     Agence France Presse: The United States voiced concern to France
earlier this year over the possible sale of a French warship to Russia, saying it sent a "mixed signal" to both Moscow and
Eastern European allies, according to a leaked US document published Sunday.



Intelligence




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771937 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771937 Date: 12/31/2015




*    Agence France Presse: The United States has ordered its diplomats to
play a larger intelligence role by performing espionage work like obtaining the credit card and frequent flyer numbers of
foreign dignitaries, according to leaked US documents published Sunday.
*    Los Angeles Times: U.S. diplomats have been directed by Washington
to gather detailed data on their foreign counterparts, including the kinds of information usually sought by spies,
according to diplomatic cables made public Sunday.



Reactions - Government/International Organizations



United States



*    Agence France Presse: The White House hit back, saying the release
was a "reckless and dangerous action" that put lives in danger... The Pentagon, which was infuriated by the website's
publication of secret Afghanistan and Iraq war logs earlier this year, also condemned the latest, more far-reaching
release and unveiled new steps to prevent future leaks.
*     Hill: The White House condemned "in the strongest terms" Sunday the
anticipated leak of three million classified documents, including hundreds of thousands of State Department cables that
have sent the administration scrambling to stem the damage in advance.



World



*   Agence France Presse: The United Nations said Sunday that it relies
on member states to respect immunities granted to the world body, in its first statement on leaked documents which
told how US officials were ordered its officials to spy on the UN leadership.
*     Agence France Presse: Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari
criticized the release of confidential US diplomatic cables by Internet whistleblower Wikileaks as "very, very unhelpful"
on Monday.
*    Associated Press: Pakistan on Monday criticized the release of
classified U.S. diplomatic cables that reportedly raise concerns that highly enriched uranium could be diverted from its
nuclear program to build an illicit weapon.
*    Agence France Presse: Israel reacted calmly Monday to the release of
a massive trove of US diplomatic cables by whistleblower website WikiLeaks, saying they showed the Jewish state's
consistent concern about Iran.
*   Agence France Presse: The slow release of thousands of US diplomatic
documents by WikiLeaks is a "threat to democratic authority", French government spokesman Francois Baroin told
Europe 1 radio on Monday.
*   Agence France Presse: New Zealand Prime Minister John Key said
Monday he expected some embarrassing fallout when US diplomatic cables from Wellington are released by
whistleblower website Wikileaks.
*    Agence France Presse: Canada said Sunday that WikiLeaks' release of
thousands of US diplomatic cables was 'irresponsible' and could threaten national security.
*    Associated Press: Pakistan has criticized the release of classified
U.S. diplomatic cables that reportedly raise concerns about the country's nuclear program.



Views on Foreign Leaders




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771937 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771937 Date: 12/31/2015




*    Agence France Presse: Diplomats are by definition known for the
niceties of their public statements, but leaked documents out Sunday show that US officials can be merciless in their
assessments behind closed doors... The thousands of secret cables released by the whistle-blower website WikiLeaks
feature unflattering descriptions of the leaders of both US allies and adversaries.
*    Agence France Presse: Veteran Libyan leader Moamer Kadhafi fears
flying over water, prefers staying on the ground floor and almost never travels without his trusted Ukrainian nurse, a
"voluptuous blond," according to a US document released Sunday by WikiLeaks.
*    Agence France Presse: Britain's Guardian newspaper Monday promised
it would release leaked memos in which US officials offer "embarrassing"
assessments of Prime Minister David Cameron and "weak" ex-leader Gordon Brown.
*   Agence France Presse: The top US diplomat in Rome found Italian
Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi to be an "ineffective" leader who wastes his energy on parties, according to US
documents leaked by Wikileaks.
*    Agence France Presse: French President Nicolas Sarkozy's senior
diplomatic advisor branded Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez "crazy" in talks with top US officials, according to a
diplomatic cable leaked Sunday.
*    Agence France Presse: Diplomatic cables released by WikiLeaks to
German news magazine Der Spiegel include embarrassingly frank US assessments of German Chancellor Angela Merkel,
who is described as a weak leader.
*    Reuters: U.S. diplomats describe German Foreign Minister Guido
Westerwelle as arrogant, vain and critical of America, documents released on Sunday by whistle-blowing website
WikiLeaks showed.
*    EUobserver.com: American diplomats speak about EU leaders in terms
of "Teflon Merkel," "authoritarian Sarkozy" and a "feckless, vain and ineffective Berlusconi" who is a "mouthpiece" for
Russia, a first batch of secret cables sent to and from US embassies abroad and published by WikiLeaks shows.
*    Hill: French President Nicolas Sarkozy is referred to as a "naked
emperor," while Afghan President Hamid Karzai is said to be "driven by paranoia."



Newspapers Defend Publication of Leaked Diplomatic Memos



*    Agence France Presse: The New York Times, The Guardian and Le Monde
on Sunday defended their decision to publish hundreds of secret US diplomatic memos obtained by WikiLeaks while
voluntarily withholding certain information.
*    AlterNet: The job of the media is not to protect power from
embarrassment... Clearly, it is for governments, not journalists, to protect public secrets. Were there some overriding
national jeopardy in revealing them, greater restraint might be in order. There is no such overriding jeopardy, except
from the policies themselves as revealed. Where it is doing the right thing, a great power should be robust against
embarrassment.



Pentagon — Information Control



*    Bloomberg: The Pentagon said yesterday it will take action to
prevent future reoccurrences, such as monitoring user behavior in a way similar to steps taken by credit-card companies
to detect fraud. The military will also conduct security oversight inspections at forward bases and remove the ability of
classified computers to download information onto removable disks.
     Politico: The Pentagon on Sunday announced new approaches for how it
would safeguard information in the wake of the leak of documents from WikiLeaks, amid allegations that the Obama
administration went too far in improving information-sharing across the government.



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771937 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771937 Date: 12/31/2015




WikiLeaks



*    Agence France Presse: Wikileaks evaded a massive cyber attack Sunday
to begin posting hundreds of thousands of classified US diplomatic documents, the whistleblower organization said.
*    Associated Press: Attorney-General Robert McClelland says police are
investigating whether any Australian law has been broken by the latest leaking of confidential documents by online
whistle-blower WikiLeaks.
*    Associated Press: The online website WikiLeaks on Sunday blamed the
temporary outage of its site on a denial-of-service attack by unknown hackers trying to prevent its release of hundreds
of thousands of classified U.S. State Department documents... James Lewis, a cybersecurity expert and a senior fellow at
the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said it's unlikely the U.S. or some other government would use denial-
of-service attacks against Wikileaks.




                                                                                                                 B6
Media Research Analyst




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771937 Date: 12/31/2015
