      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780895 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Friday, July 1, 2011 7:20 PM
To:                               H
Subject:                          Fw: Honduras Update -- Final Transmission



You might send Hugo a message - he did yeoman's work.



From: Llorens, Hugo
Sent: Friday, July 01, 2011 06:32 PM
To: Burns, William J; Valenzuela, Arturo A; Shannon, Thomas A; idaniel_a._restrepo0
                                    ; Jacobson, Roberta S; Reynoso, Julissa; Webster, Christopher W; McKinley, P
Michael; Radetsky, Amy S; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Otero, Maria; Gedan, Benjamin N; Schnier, David M; Otero, Maria
Cc: Henshaw, Simon; Eiriz, Silvia; McGeehan, Mary Grace; Stevens, Michael G; Ellingwood, Claudia R
Subject: Honduras Update -- Final Transmission

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Today is my last work day at the Embassy. Lisett and I depart Tegucigalpa on July 3 having just finished
hosting this morning our last event -- a large and very successful July 4 reception with President Lobo, the First
Lady and nearly 1,000 guests. Having been overseas 11 of the last 12 years, we are very much looking forward
to going back to our home in McLean, and beginning my coming assignment at the National War College.

Suffice it to say that the past three years have been tremendously interesting. We were blessed with a truly
exceptional team here in Tegucigalpa. The ability of the entire Embassy staff to work in an intense and
complex crisis and sustain a clear-eyed and highly focused performance in the service of the President and
Secretary is something we are all very proud of here. We were also fortunate to work with a top notch corps of
professionals in WHA, the NSC and across the inter-agency. The smooth coordination between our Embassy in
Tegucigalpa and Washington ensured U.S. policy was effectively implemented in support of Honduran
democracy through two U.S. Administrations.

The Honduran coup crisis certainly brings with it a wealth of lessons. The President's and Secretary's earliest
condemnation of the coup was the strong principled foundation of our policy; while our adoption of a prudent
approach in support of the Arias mediation and the Guaymuras dialogue was crucial to finding a peaceful and
balanced path out of the crisis. Likewise, the U.S. technical assistance in support of the elections gave the
Honduran people the opportunity to have the final word in bringing the country back in a democratic
direction. Honduras certainly faces major challenges, but our cultivation of a strong bilateral relationship with
President Lobo's Government of National Unity and our diplomatic success in helping Honduras return to the
OAS fold positions this traditional ally to work positively on the core security, economic, social issues facing
the country. I believe a Honduras closely aligned with the U.S. and working in tandem with its democratic
neighbors has a good opportunity of implementing a reformist agenda to help the Honduran people build a
better life, and contribute to achieving democratic stability in the isthmus.

Again, it has been honor working with all of you and I hope to see many of you in Washington.

Hugo Llorens
Ambassador
U.S. Embassy Tegucigalpa, Honduras
504 236-9320 ext. 4268
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780895 Date: 12/31/2015
