      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792947 Date: 12/31/2015


                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                  B6



From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Monday, August 13, 2012 12:08 PM
To:
Subject:                         FW: FP's The Cable: Close Obama Ally Rated Worst Ambassador in the State
                                 Department, Treasury Sanctions Hezbollah...Again, Romney's Japan Remark Raises
                                 Eyebrows




From: Thomas-Greenfield, Linda(MS)
Sent: Monday, August 13, 2012 10:13 AM
To: Kennedy, Patrick F; Mills, Cheryl D; Carson, Johnnie
Subject: FW: FP's The Cable: Close Obama Ally Rated Worst Ambassador in the State Department, Treasury Sanctions
Hezbollah...Again, Romney's Japan Remark Raises Eyebrows

In the press.


From: Greenberg, Brenda L
Sent: Monday, August 13, 2012 8:01 AM
To: CUPS
Cc:                      'Frank A. Casale Jr.'; 'beacho
Subject: FP's The Cable: Close Obama Ally Rated Worst Ambassador in the State Department, Treasury Sanctions
Hezbollah...Again, Romney's Japan Remark Raises Eyebrows




Close Obama ally rated worst ambassador
in the State Department
Posted By Josh Rogin • Friday, August 10, 2012 - 5:59 PM




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792947 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792947 Date: 12/31/2015




The State Department inspector general's office released its scathing report on the leadership of former
ambassador to Kenya Scott Gration Friday, saying that Gration ranked dead last among dozens of ambassadors
reviewed in recent years.


Gration resigned suddenly June 29 after viewing the report, but he did not offer a written response to the report
released today.
"The Ambassador has lost the respect and confidence of the staff to lead the mission," read the report. "Of more
than 80 chiefs of mission inspected in recent cycles, the Ambassador ranked last for interpersonal relations, next to
last on both managerial skill and attention to morale, and third from last in his overall scores from surveys of mission
members. The inspectors found no reason to question these assessments; the Ambassador's leadership to date
has been divisive and ineffective."
The assessment of Gration goes downhill from there.


"The Ambassador has damaged the cohesion of Embassy Nairobi's country team by underscoring differences
between offices working directly with Kenya and those with regional responsibilities. Country team members,
particularly those from other agencies, relied on the recently departed deputy chief of mission to maintain a sense of
common purpose at Embassy Nairobi. Unless corrected there is a risk that the country team will become
dysfunctional," the report stated.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792947 Date: 12/31/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792947 Date: 12/31/2015




Gration consumed his staff with what he called "mission essential tasks" that provided "almost no value" to the State
Department or the rest of the U.S. government working on Kenya, the IG found. Gration made it clear he disagreed
and would not implement U.S. government decisions, insisted on using his personal email for official business, and
refused to even read the cables coming from Washington, the report said.


"Notwithstanding his talk about the importance of mission staff doing the right thing, the Ambassador by deed or
word has encouraged it to do the opposite," the report said.


The IG reported that Gration refused to meet with most prominent Kenyans, journalists, and even his senior
embassy staff, who would try unsuccessfully for months to get in touch with him.


Gration's big project was one he started called Let's Live, which set the goal of reducing Kenyan infant mortality by
50 percent in one year, but the program was never funded and confused everyone in Nairobi working on the Global
Health Initiative (GI-II) programs in Kenya, including the Kenyans.


"At the Ambassador's initiative, the embassy has spent considerable time and effort on Let's Live without advancing
the GHI. At the same time, Let's Live has damaged mission morale and negatively affected relations with senior
Kenyan health officials," the report said.


In an interview with the Washington Post, Gration disputed the report and said using his commercial e-mail was not
a security issue. "I did rock the boat. I made changes in priorities, and changes can be very hard," he said.
Gration, a retired Air Force general, was one of the first senior military figures to openly support and actively
campaign for President Barack Obama in 2007 and was embraced by the team that would eventually form the
president's closest national security inner circle. Deputy National Security Advisor Denis McDonough once
described Gration as one of the top three national security advisors to Obama, along with former Navy Secretary
Richard Danzig and former Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. Merrill McPeak. He was rumored during the transition to
be a candidate to lead NASA.
He took over as ambassador to Kenya in February 2011 following a controversial two-year stint as Obama's speCial
envoy for Sudan.


JIM WATSON/AFP/Getty Images




SHARE:_ CI More    L,J COMMENTS (2)
     •     EXPLORE:AFRICA, DIPLOMACY, HEALTH, Of3AMA ADMINISTRATION, STATE DEPARTMENT



Treasury sanctions Hezbollah ... again
Posted By Josh Rogin • Friday, August 10, 2012 - 4:58 PM

         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792947 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792947 Date: 12/31/2015




The Treasury and State Departments announced Friday that the U.S. government is sanctioning Hezbollah for
supporting the Syrian regime, even though the Lebanese militia is already sanctioned for being a terrorist group and
the new announcement doesn't actually change those sanctions at all.


"This action highlights Hezbollah's activities within Syria as well as its integral role in the continued violence being
carried out by the Assad regime against the Syrian population," Treasury Undersecretary David Cohen said on a
Friday afternoon conference call.


He noted that Hezbollah is already sanctioned as a terrorist group, since 1995, for numerous terrorist acts including
the 1983 bombing of the Marine barracks in Lebanon that killed 241 Marines. Hezbollah has perpetrated attacks in
South America, Southeast Asia, Europe, and various countries in the Middle East, and tried to carry out attacks in
Azerbaijan, Egypt, Thailand, and Cyprus, Cohen said.
The Assad regime has given the group weapons, money, and safe haven for training camps, and now Hezbollah is
repaying the favor by providing training, advice, and logistical support to the Syrian government, he said, especially
in how to wage a counterinsurgency.


"Since the start of the unrest in Syria in early 2011, Hezbollah has directly trained Syrian government personnel
inside Syria and has facilitated the training of Syrian forces by Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, Qods
Force," said Cohen. "Hezbollah has also played a substantial role in efforts to expel Syrian opposition forces from
areas within Syria."


State Department's counterterrorism czar Amb. Daniel Benjamin said that Hezbollah is coordinating directly in
Syria with the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps Quds Force. He pointed to press reports that Hezbollah was
behind recent terrorist attacks on Israelis in Thailand and Belgium, and accused the group of narcotics trafficking
and international money laundering.
"Hezbollah believes that there have been sustained Israeli and Western campaigns against the group and its
primary backers, Iran and Syria, over the past several years. And this perception is unlikely to change," he said.
"Both [Hezbollah and Iran] remain determined to exact revenge against Israel and to respond forcefully to the
Western-led pressure against Iran and Syria:"


The Cable asked both officials if designating Hezbollah for sanctions, which freezes the group's U.S.-based assets
and bars Americans from doing business with Hezbollah, has any added concrete effect if done twice. They said the
added effect is in the court of public opinion.


"It will put the group in a more difficult situation, and, I think, will make them think long and hard before they continue
this campaign in which the Syrian people are being brutalized. So we do see very concrete benefits coming from

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792947 Date: 12/31/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792947 Date: 12/31/2015




this designation," said Benjamin. 'Whether they will be in the area of financial sanctions or not remains to be seen,

but in terms of casting a bright light on what the group is doing, I think that's vitally important."


So the Treasury Department doesn't have to actually do anything to enforce the new designation it wasn't doing

already, and Hezbollah doesn't feel any additional direct pain. Cohen said the Hezbollah's assets should already be

frozen but there is additional impact in adding the new designation.


"The purpose of our designations, whether it's the Hezbollah action today or any of our other designations under our

authorities, is not solely focused on the immediate financial impact, but as Ambassador Benjamin just expressed, to

expose the activity of the party that is being designated for the conduct that has led to the designation," he said.


Benjamin said that the Obama administration hopes other countries will follow suit, not mentioning the European

Union specifically, but he wouldn't say there is any indication other countries are planning any such announcement

any time soon.


Cohen wouldn't comment on whether or not Hezbollah even has any assets in the United States in the first place.


"As noted before, to the extent that they are here, they should have already been frozen, and anyone who has

Hezbollah assets in their possession is required to report those to OFAC. But beyond that, I can't comment," he
said.


For those on Capitol Hill who are skeptical of the administration's sanctions and diplomacy-based approach toward

pressuring the Assad regime to stop killing its own people, today's action seemed less than consequential.


"Today's announcement appears more about politics than policy, style more than substance," one senior Senate
aide told The Cable. "This hollow designation may be pleasing to Obama strategists in Chicago, but it won't do a

thing to help the people dying in the streets of Syria."


In a separate action today, the administration also sanctioned the Syrian state-run oil company Sytrol under the Iran

Sanctions Act as amended by the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions Accountability and Divestment Act.


"These sanctions are because of transactions that Sytrol engaged in with Iran's energy sector, and I think the action

we're taking today highlights the really serious concerns that the United States has about the close ties shared by

the Iranian and Syrian regimes and the fact that we, the United States, are committed to using every tool available

to prevent regional destabilization," a senior administration official said on a different Friday afternoon conference
call.


SHARE:_ 1:1 More     COMMENTS (2)
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792947 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792947 Date: 12/31/2015



lo EXPLORE:DIPLOMACY, IRAN, OBAMA ADMINISTRATION, STATE DEPARTMENT, SYRIA, TERRORISM, U.S. FOREIGN POLICY



Romney's Japan remark raises eyebrows
Posted B Josh Ro in • Frida , Au ust 10, 2012 - 12:33 PM




Mitt Romney's comments Thursday criticizing Japan have U.S.-Japan alliance watchers on two continents worrying

that the ultra-sensitive Japanese might not appreciate being the cautionary tale in Romney's campaign stump

speeches and that a President Romney might not be a good steward of the decades-long relationship.


'We are not Japan," the presumptive Republican nominee told donors at a $2,500-a-plate fundraiser Thursday.

'We are not going to be a nation that suffers in decline and distress for a decade or a century. We're on the cusp of

a very different economic future than the one people have seen over the past three years."

Japan experts on both sides of the Pacific told The Cable that Romney's offhand assertion that Japan has been in

decline for "a century" isn't a fair characterization of a nation that emerged from the ashes of World War II to build

the world's second- (now third-) largest economy on a small island with few natural resources.


Moreover, they worry that Romney is needlessly insulting the face-conscious Japanese and giving them the

impression that if he wins in November, his administration won't appreciate the importance of America's top alliance

in the East at a time when the United States is attempting a diplomatic and military "pivot" to Asia.


"Romney seems to be on a steady streak of insulting our allies," said Japan expert Devin Stewart, a senior fellow at

the Carnegie Council. "Japanese are quite sensitive to statements like this. They are constantly assessing the tone

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792947 Date: 12/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792947 Date: 12/31/2015




of U.S. candidates relative to those made about other Asian countries. Bashing Japan is now quite passé and even
tone deaf. Has Romney even visited Japan? Is he aware of the 2011 earthquake?"
Although liberal pundits such as Paul Krugman have also likened America's present economic malaise to Japan's
"lost decade," this analogy doesn't hold up, Stewart said. 'We aren't Japan -- that's obvious. Unlike Japan we have
a growing population, robust immigration, and a fairly healthy level of inflation," he said.


Eurasia Group President Ian Bremmer wrote in an op-ed Aug. 7, before Romney's Japan remarks, that Romney
had missed an opportunity to embrace Japan when he visited England, Israel, and Poland last month, despite the
obvious place Japan could play in a Romney foreign-policy agenda.
"For Romney to have taken an international trip that would matter, there's one place he might've considered going:
Japan. Between Japan's economic efforts and its rebuilding after the tsunami and Fukushima disasters, it's an
extremely relevant country to U.S. interests that would've welcomed him with open arms," Bremmer wrote.


There's also concern that the campaign isn't taking Japan seriously as it creates its foreign-policy platform. Japan
watchers note that the Romney campaign website's page on "China and East Asia" doesn't even have a Japan
section and mentions Japan, only in passing, as being threatened by North Korea and as a declining economic
power.
"In 2010,. after 30 years of dramatic growth, China surpassed Japan to become the world's second largest economy
after ours," the website reads.


In Japan, the reaction to Romney's remarks has been muted, however, not necessarily because the Japanese aren't
insulted but more because they are getting accustomed to occasionally being used as a talking point for foreign
politicians.


"Mitt Romney seems to have a starkly different calendar that mixes 'decade' with 'century," Tomohiko Taniguchi, a
professor at Keio University and former spokesman for the Japanese Foreign Ministry, told The Cable. "His now-
well-known loose cannon, however, hits Japanese headlines not in too big a way as to jeopardize the alliance that
has lasted six decades, during which many in Japan have gotten used to U.S. campaign rhetoric that means almost
nothing."


The Romney campaign did not respond to requests for comment.


Justin Sullivan / Getty Images




SHARE:_ a More C:::1 COMMENTS (24)
lo EXPLORE:JAPAN, MITT ROMNEY



       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792947 Date: 12/31/2015
