     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786601 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                               RELEASE IN PART B5



From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                             Friday, July 8, 2011 1:37 PM
To:                               .gordonph@state.gov'
Subject:                          Re: Reagan statue



Whew...what a story! Thx.

    Original Message ----
From: Gordon, Philip H [mailto:GordonPH@state.gov]
Sent: Friday, July 08, 201109:57 AM
To: H
Subject: Reagan statue

HRC -- This is way more than you wanted to know, but since you asked (and know some of the characters involved):

Susman email on statue:
This not on government property. The Reagan Foundation bought the land from the City of Westminster and paid for
everything with private funds. Ambassador Tuttle was deeply involved as his father Holmes was Reagan best friend and
got Tuttle his job thru Nancy Reagan.                was to treat the ceremony first class which I did and spoke.

Evening Standard Article: The riddle of the missing US ambassador as London toasts Ronald Reagan centenary Joe
Murphy, Political Editor 5 Jul 2011

It was one of the most glittering events of the year, attracting some of the greatest names in American and British
politics. But as the British roasted lamb and the sunny Californian chardonnay were cleared away, one notable
absence was the hottest topic among guests at the Guildhall dinner in honour of Ronald Reagan's centenary. Where
was the American ambassador to London, Louis B Susman? He had, it soon transpired, been invited. But despite a
guest list that boasted four British Cabinet ministers, ex-Prime Minister, nine US congressmen and a senator and former
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, there was no sign of President Obama's representative in London. And in a warm
atmosphere evoking the closest days of the special Anglo-US relationship of the Eighties, the surprise at Mr Susman's
absence turned to annoyance. "Our ambassador should be here," said Lynn de Rothschild, the American entrepreneur
who is married to Sir Evelyn de Rothschild and was one of Hillary Clinton's key fundraisers in 2008 as well as a supporter
of several Republican presidential candidates. "This was an historic dinner to mark Reagan's centenary and to celebrate
him as the man who ended the Cold War. What could not be more important? "Why is our ambassador not here on
Independence Day? No excuse. How is it that America is not represented in this room by our ambassador? It is appalling
that no representative of our government is in this room. This has the feel of petty partisanship." Where indeed? Mr
Susman had been at the unveiling of a statue of Reagan in Grosvenor Square earlier in the day, and had hosted a
generous breakfast for the entire VIP visiting party and the military band, so he had certainly not snubbed the grand
centenary events. According to the US embassy spokesman: "Ambassador Susman was pleased to be invited to the
dinner but was unable to attend." Mr Susman missed some sparkling speeches and anecdotes, announced by trumpet
blasts, including Foreign Secretary William Hague recounting a gem from the Royal Wedding: "I told an Arab
Ambassador, 'look, a million people are heading for the palace - and we're totally relaxed'." London MP Greg Hands said:
"It was a non-partisan occasion to celebrate a great American and President's 100th birthday." Among the VIPs were
John Major, Defence Secretary Liam Fox, who sat next to Ms Rice, Home Secretary Theresa May, Commons leader Sir
George Young, former ambassador Robert Tuttle, ex-California governor Pete Wilson and the company heads of BP and
Visa. The menu reflected the Anglo-US alliance, starting with a bouquet of English asparagus, organic smoked salmon,
baby leaf salad and dill hollandaise, followed by duet of new season lamb, served with Beringer chardonnay from the
Napa Valley and Peachy Canyon zinfandel, also from California.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786601 Date: 12/31/2015
