     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                                RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                B6



From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Wednesday, November 9, 2011 6:28 PM
To:
Subject:                          FW: Press Briefing Previewing the President's Trip to Hawaii, Australia and Indonesia,
                                  11/9/2011


For your reading pleasure.

From: Rhodes, Benjamin J.
                                                                                                                   B6
Sent: Wednesday, November 09, 2011 5:40 PM
To: Nuland, Victoria 3; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Hammer, Michael A
Subject: FW: Press Briefing Previewing the President's Trip to Hawaii, Australia and Indonesia, 11/9/2011




From: White House Press Office
Sent: Wednesday, November 09, 2011 5:30 PM
To: Rhodes, Benjamin J.
Subject: Press Briefing Previewing the President's Trip to Hawaii, Australia and Indonesia, 11/9/2011

                                            THE WHITE HOUSE
                                     Office of the Press Secretary

           For Immediate Release                                                        November 9, 2011


                                    PRESS BRIEFING
                            BY PRESS SECRETARY JAY CARNEY,
            DEPUTY NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISOR FOR STRATEGIC COMMUNICATIONS
                                      BEN RHODES,
                      AND NSC SENIOR DIRECTOR FOR ASIAN AFFAIRS
                                     DANNY RUSSEL
                           PREVIEWING THE PRESIDENT'S TRIP
                          TO HAWAII, AUSTRALIA AND INDONESIA

                                 James S. Brady Press Briefing Room

12:14 P.M. EST

     MR. CARNEY: Hello, everyone. Welcome to today's off-camera
briefing. I have with me to preview the President's upcoming trip to the
Asia-Pacific region Ben Rhodes, whom you all know, the Deputy National
Security Advisor for Strategic Communications, and on my right, Danny
Russel, who is Senior Director at the NSC for Asia. Why don't we let them
talk you through the trip, take your questions about the trip. And I will
remain to take your questions on other pressing matters.

     Q    Can I just formally register a complaint from the television
folks that this is off-camera?
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




     MR. CARNEY: We think television is in decline, probably not going to
last. (Laughter.) I hear your complaint. Thank you. Here's Ben.

     MR. RHODES: Jake, you've got a good blog, too. (Laughter.) Well,
thanks. We just want to take this chance to run through the President's
trip to Hawaii and then to the Asia-Pacific region. This is a really'
important opportunity for the President to engage in this dynamic region
to create American jobs, secure our interests and stand up for democratic
values.

     I think from the beginning of this administration, President Obama
has engaged on a personal level to restore our alliances in this part of
the world, to raise U.S. standing in this part of the world, and, again,
to make sure that the U.S. remains the preeminent economic and security
power in the Asia Pacific and more brOadly.

     Of course, this takes place at a time when we're making a larger
pivot in our foreign policy. We're winding down the wars of the last 10
years. By the end of this year, we'll definitively end the Iraq
war. We're beginning a drawdown in Afghanistan. We've devastated al
Qaeda. And a lot of the shift in focus and priority that we are able to
do because of those efforts has gone to the Asia-Pacific region.

     And you've heard us talk about this, but we see this as, again, a
region that is really going to shape the future of the 21st century. It's
the fastest-growing economic region in the world. The trade that the U.S.
does with the Asia Pacific supports millions of American jobs.

     The markets that are growing in the Asia Pacific are ones that we
want to be competitive in going forward. The U.S. exports to this region
are essential to the President's goal of doubling U.S. exports in the next
several years. In fact, nearly all of the efforts that we're going to be
making towards that export goal take place in this part of the world. So
that's the economic context.

     On the security side, the U.S. has been an anchor of security in the
Asia Pacific since World War II, essentially. The core of that is our
alliances with Australia, Korea, Japan and several other countries, of
course. But also, we've -- from the beginning of this administration --
engaged the emerging powers in the Asia Pacific -- China and India,
Indonesia and others -- as well as engaged regional institutions, like
APEC and the East Asia Summit that the President will be participating in.

     So this flows very much out of, again, a focus of our foreign policy,
which is winding down the wars and refocusing on a broader set of
priorities, to include U.S. leadership in the Asia Pacific.

     Just to go through the schedule, as you know, the President will
leave Friday and he'll be stopping in San Diego before moving on to
Hawaii, and spending the night in Hawaii on Friday night.


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




     Saturday morning, he will begin by hosting a meeting of the Trans-
Pacific Partnership. Now, as those of you who follow this know, the
Trans-Pacific Partnership is really the most promising vehicle that we see
for achieving economic integration across the Asia-Pacific region and
advancing U.S. interests with some of the fastest-growing economies in the
world.

     As we've concluded the Korea Free Trade Agreement, which was an
essential effort in our -- both our trade agenda and our Asia policy, the
TPP is really the next phase of the U.S. trade agenda, broadly and within
this part of the world. It's nine countries that have worked together
over the course of this administration to try to come up with high
standards for a trade agreement that can encompass, again, the countries
of the Asia-Pacific region. And we can talk more about this in questions
through the next couple of days.

     So he'll be hosting that meeting, again, with the nine leaders of the
members of the TPP. After that, he'll be attending the APEC CEO Business
Summit. And there's a group of business leaders from across the Asia
Pacific, who are a part of a forum that the President has participated in
over the last couple of years. At this one in particular, he'll be
engaging in a dialogue with Jim McNerney, the CEO of Boeing, about the
economic potential of the region and the U.S. efforts to tap that
potential.

     After his attendance at the APEC CEO forum, he will have a bilateral
meeting with Japan, Prime Minister Nodo of Japan. Again, Japan is one of
our key .allies in the region. It's a country that we have a broad range
of economic and security interests with, and this is another effort to
extend those consultations. And we can discuss that more in questions if
you like.

     Q     Is that Saturday morning or afternoon?

     MR. RHODES: This is Saturday afternoon. The bilateral meeting with
Japan is at roughly 12:00 p.m.

     Q     Local time?

     MR. RHODES: Yes, local time. Everything is local time. And the
local times get more and more complicated vis-à-vis U.S. time as we go
through this trip.

     After the meeting with Japan, the President will be having a
bilateral meeting with Russia, President Medvedev of Russia. Of course,
this has been one of our key focus of our foreign policy -- has been the
U.S.-Russia relationship. This meeting will take place at a time when one
of the issues that we've been working very hard is the next phase of the
reset, is poised to come to fruition, which is Russian accession into the
WTO. There is an agreement reached between Russia and Georgia that also
benefited from the participation of the Swiss government to resolve some
of the outstanding questions resolving Russia accession into the WTO. So

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




we anticipate the leaders will have an opportunity to celebrate, again, a
great deal of progress towards a key priority of the two leaders, which
was completing the steps necessary to see Russia join the WTO. We'll, of
course, address with the Russians a broad number of other issues, from
nuclear security, nonproliferation, Iran, North Korea, and the full gamut
of U.S.-Russia relations.

      Following the Russia bilateral meeting, later that afternoon the
President will have a bilateral meeting with,Hu Jintao of China. This is
the first meeting the President has had with President Hu -- formal
meeting that he's had with President Hu since the state visit earlier this
year.

     As always with the Chinese it's an important opportunity to discuss
our economic agenda, including our efforts to sustain global growth
through a rebalancing of global demand as well as a range of regional
security issues, including the agendas for the East Asia Summit that the
President will be attending, as well as, I'm sure, nonproliferation issues
and issues associated with Iran and North Korea as well.

     After the --

     Q     Ben, what time will that one be?

     MR. RHODES: Roughly at 3:45 p.m. local time.

     Q     Saturday?

     MR. RHODES: Saturday. This is still Saturday. So, busy day on
Saturday.

     Following the China bilat, he will, that evening, starting at about
6:00 p.m., host a program for the APEC leaders in. Honolulu. So there will
be a dinner and a cultural program that night, at which the President will
be making remarks. And I should add he'll have the opportunity to make
some brief remarks at the TPP event as well as having his discussion with
Mr. McNerney at the CEO forum.

     Moving to Sunday. Sunday is the APEC Summit, and I'd just say a few
words about APEC. As you know, this brings together 21 member economies
from across the Asia-Pacific region. I think it's important to note that
the APEC nations represent 44 percent of global trade, 55 percent of
global output, and 10 -- 6 of America's 10 largest trading partners are in
APEC.

     Since it was created it's been a forum to really address regional
economic integration and ways in which we can deepen the connections
between APEC nations. Over the last couple of decades we've seen, again,
U.S. exports with APEC countries nearly triple. In 2010, APEC economies
purchased 61 percent of total U.S. exports, supporting nearly 4 million
U.S. jobs. So what we see again here is this is a concentration of
economies that are going to be essential to U.S. efforts to create jobs,

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




to foster economic integration among the most dynamic markets in the world
right now. And the agenda at APEC very much reflects that.

     I think the three components of the agenda that we'd highlight are
steps that we're taking to increase trade within APEC and to strengthen
regional economic integration; secondly, to support green growth and green
jobs going forward, given both the economic benefits of that and the
environmental concerns in the region; and then last, thirdly, promoting
regulatory practices that facilitate trading and investment. So part of
our efforts to integrate this regional economy involves integrating our
regulatory approaches.

     So the first opening plenary will be at 9:45 a.m. The President will
make opening comments at that session. And then that session will focus
on growth and job creation. Then at 11:30 a.m., the leaders will have a
dialogue with the APEC Business Advisory Council. Again, many different
business leaders from across the region will be present. Then there will
be a leaders' working lunch at 12:45 p.m.; followed by a family photo of
the APEC leaders. And then the closing plenary session will focus on
green energy, green jobs going forward.

     Following the APEC Summit, at roughly 4:45 p.m., the President will
have a press conference to wrap up the summit. So he'll have a chance to
sum up what was done and to take your questions.

     Following the APEC Summit, which will conclude at that point, we will
be having the North American Leaders Summit that evening as well. As you
know, this is the annual meeting among the U.S. President and the Mexican
President and the Canadian Prime Minister. The leaders will have a
trilateral meeting, followed by a working dinner that night. This will
start at roughly 6:30 p.m. I think the focus of the North American
Leaders Summit will be North American competitiveness and how the three
nations can work together to support, again, growth and job creation among
the three of us and also of course within the context of the APEC region.

     We'll also be working together to prepare for the Summit of the
Americas next year, which, again, will be the next major hemispheric event
here in the Americas. And to that end, we're looking at a range of issues
from citizen security, again, to regional economic growth, to efforts to
combat climate change. And of course, they'll be able to follow up on
their discussions at the last North American Leaders Summit, again, which
hit upon, in addition to the issues I cited, support for some of the
particular regional challenges such as democratic stability in Haiti. So
that concludes the day on the 13th.

     Monday, the 14th, the President will have a -- we anticipate he'll
have a fundraiser in the morning. And that will be his only event for the
day before we leave on Tuesday morning for Canberra, Australia. Now,
because of the wonders of the world, the flight to Australia takes us
forward a day on the clock. So we now move to Wednesday, November 16th,
in terms of the schedule here. And this is Australia time.


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




      So the President arrives in Australia -- and I'll just say by way of
 introduction the U.S. really has no better ally than Australia when it
 comes to a range of issues. On the security side, Australians are with us
 in Afghanistan. They've cooperated with us on Iran sanctions. They've
 cooperated with us on our nuclear security efforts. So this has been a
 very close and reliable U.S. ally. And the President will be marking the
 60th anniversary of the U.S.-Australian alliance on this trip.

      Australia is also a dynamic economic partner for the U.S. We
 actually run a trade surplus with the Australians from within the
 framework of our free trade agreement. So this is a relationship with
 deep security and economic ties that the leaders will be able to address.

      After an arrival ceremony with the Governor General, the President
 will move into his bilateral meeting with Prime' Minister Gillard. After
 the bilateral meeting with Prime Minister Gillard, the two leaders will
 have a joint press conference. And then following that joint press
 conference, the President will be hosted at a parliamentary dinner at the
 Australian Parliament House that night where he'll also have the chance to
'make some remarks about the U.S.-Australian relationship, and will spend
 that night in Canberra.

      Q      What time is that press conference on Wednesday?

      MR. RHODES: It is, let's see -- well, Australia time, we anticipate
 the press conference being at 6:00 p.m. That's I think very early morning
 early hours Eastern Time. So I think that's like 2:00 in the morning
 Eastern Time. And I'll try to build in some Eastern times for you here
 going forward.

      So on Thursday, the President begins his day by going to an
 Australian war memorial, laying a wreath. Then he'll go the Australian
 Parliament House and he will meet with the opposition leader, Tony Abbott,
 briefly. And then he'll give a speech to the Australian Parliament at
 10:15 a.m. or so, which is roughly 6:00 or 6:15 p.m. Eastern Time the
 previous day. (Laughter.) Bear with me on this.

      Q      10:15 a.m. in Australia?

      MR. RHODES: 10:15 a.m. in Australia. That's -- yes.

      Q       What's the Eastern Time?

       MR. RHODES: 6:15 p.m. on the previous day, Wednesday:

       So this -- (laughter) -- you got this, Jake?

       Q      It will be old news by then.

      MR. RHODES: That's good. That is good. There will be a lot of time
 zone humor throughout'this trip. (Laughter.)


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




     This speech will actually be about the -- again, the U.S.-Australian
alliance, but also this will be a broader speech about the Asia-Pacific
region by the President. This will really be the kind of anchor speech by
the President in his first term on how the U.S. sees the Asia Pacific, the
efforts that we've taken, again, within the region over the course of the
last three years to strengthen our core alliances to engage emerging
powers like China and India and others, and to engage Asian regional
institutions like APEC and the East Asia Summit.

     I think he'll focus on the economic agenda in the Asia Pacific and
the enormous potential of deepening economic ties. He'll focus on the
security agenda, including the U.S. posture in the region going forward,
our defense posture as well as our alliance in political
relationships. And of course, he'll speak about our support for
Democratic values in the region.

     The last trip we took to Asia we were able to travel the four Asian
democracies -- India, Indonesia, Korea, Japan. Similarly on this trip
we're making two stops in Asia -- Australia and Indonesia -- notable that
they are both democracies, and I think it speaks to the success of
Democratic models in Asia. And so the President will speak to that. So I
think both the economic -- or the economic, the security and the values
components of our approach to the Asia Pacific will form that speech.

     Following that speech --

     Q     Ben, can I interrupt again?

     MR. RHODES: Yes, yes.

     Q     Will you have prepared remarks for that speech, do you think?

     MR. RHODES: Yes. I mean, insofar as I can -- we will be very
sympathetic to the need to get information to you guys in a timely way so
that you're able to meet your deadlines. So we will certainly do whatever
we can in that respect.

     Q    When you say "you guys," do you mean the entire media or just
The New York Times? (Laughter.)

     MR. RHODES: Basically we will go out of our way -- welcome back, by
the way, Jake. (Laughter.) I'd remind you that the U.S. government did a
lot to protect you over the course of the last couple weeks. (Laughter.)

     But the -- yes, the complete news media to include ABC, ABC News.

     So after the Australian Parliament we will visit a local primary
school with Prime Minister Gillard. You may remember that when she was
here the two Presidents were able to visit a local Washington
school. Education is very important to both President Obama and Prime
Minister Gillard.


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




     Q     What day is this? I'm sorry.

     MR. RHODES: This is still Thursday. This is still Thursday,
November 17th. So Wednesday, November 16th, on the East Coast.

     So they'll go to a local primary school. Then the President will
drop by our embassy for an embassy greet. After that the President --
again, still Thursday -- the President will fly from Canberra to Darwin,
Australia. We will arrive in Darwin around 4:00 p.m. Australia
time. This, of course, is an historic place in World War II history in
terms of a Japanese attack, and there was U.S. sacrifices in Darwin. The
President will visit a memorial to the USS Peary and lay a wreath at that
memorial.

     And this is -- Darwin is also the site of a Australian military
base. And, again, to reinforce the close cooperation between the U.S. and
Australia in Afghanistan and in many previous wars, and to mark the 60th
anniversary of our alliance with Australia, the President and Prime
Minister Gillard together will address Australian troops in Darwin about
the alliance and about our security cooperation, and about the U.S.
presence in the region and our commitment to the region.

     I'd also note --

     Q     Are those Australian troops?

     MR. RHODES: Yes.

     Q     Or -- there won't be any American troops?

     MR. RHODES: It's principally Australian troops. So it's possible
that there could be, obviously, some people traveling with the President
but it's an Australian troop event.

     Then I'd also note that he'll also be meeting with some of the
community leaders in Darwin on the margins of that event as well.

     Q     Aboriginal leaders?

     MR. RHODES: That will include aboriginal leaders as well. Then that
concludes the Australia portion of the visit. He will fly that night to
Bali and spend the night in Bali.

     Then on Friday, November 18th, the President will have a number of
bilateral meetings. He will meet with the Prime Minister of
India. India, of course, as a rapidly growing economy, as a strong
democracy and as an important security partner and counterterrorism
partner in South Asia is a very important relationship to the United
States. So he and Prime Minister Singh have not had the chance to meet in
some time. They'll have the ability to discuss regional developments, to
discuss Afghanistan, to discuss our deepening economic and commercial ties
with India, as well as to discuss the East Asia Summit.

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




     In addition to India, he'll be meeting for the first time with the
leaders of two important U.S. allies in the region, Thailand and then the
Philippines. We don't have specific times yet for these. But, again,
these are both important U.S. allies. We have close security
relationships with them. We share an interest in counterterrorism and
maritime security and nuclear security with Thailand and the
Philippines. So he'll have an opportunity to discuss those issues, as
well as expanding commercial ties with each of these countries as well.

           Is this still in Darwin?

     MR. RHODES: No, this is in Bali. Friday, November 18th,.this is all
in Bali.

     Q     Do you have a local time for the Indian bilat?

     MR. RHODES: We are tracking towards 9:30 in the morning. Then we
also anticipate in Bali he'll meet with -- have a bilateral meeting with
Malaysia; similarly a key partner on all of our issues in this region, but
also an emerging economy with which we have a deepening commercial
relationship that the leaders will be able to discuss.

     Following that, the president will meet with the ASEAN nations, the
10 Southeast Asian nations. ASEAN has been a critical block of nations in
terms of regional security and economic issues. And the President will
address those with the ASEAN nations. Again, I think we've sent the
signal that the U.S. wants to be at the table in these discussions,
whether it relates to the Asia-Pacific economy or the Asia-Pacific
security architecture. And the ASEAN meetings have been important to that
end.

     Following that ASEAN meeting, he will meet bilaterally with President
Yudhoyono of Indonesia, who is the host, of course, of the East Asia
Summit. Indonesia has been, again, one of the most rapidly growing
economies in the region, a key partner for the U.S. on a range of issues
from counterterrorism to maritime security. Following that, I anticipate
the leaders will have the ability to -- well, we'll update you on kind of
the press components of each of these meetings. But we'd anticipate the
President will be making statements with his counterparts.

     Then that night there is an East Asia dinner that the Indonesians are
hosting. So that wraps up Friday the 18th. And Saturday the 19th is the
East Asian Summit, which will take place throughout the day. So there are
a number of summit sessions throughout the day. Again, I think our main
interests are both to reinforce the importance of the East Asia Summit as
an organization that addresses political and security challenges in the
region. If you think about it, APEC is really a venue to address economic
issues and economic integration in the region.

     And we've invested in the East Asia Summit as the venue to address
political and security challenges in the region. And all of this is in

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




service of having institutions and organizations through which the United
States can join with Asian countries to address pressing issues. I think
in the East Asia Summit context that will include our nonproliferation
agenda. A lot of our efforts on nuclear security, including the
President's goal of securing all nuclear materials in the world, depend
upon cooperation from East Asian Summit members.

     Of course, you have an ongoing proliferation concern in the region
with North Korea. So I'm sure the President will be addressing in his
meetings our commitment to denuclearization on the Korean Peninsula. We
also have an interest in maritime security at the East Asia Summit. And,
again, for instance, whether you look at the South China Sea specifically
or maritime security generally, we have a deep security and commercial
interest in seeing that there be clear rules of the road in terms of how
nations approach maritime security. And so that will be an important
agenda item.

     Disaster relief will be an important agenda item. And, again, I
think I'd highlight that this is a region that saw both the Indonesian
tsunami and the recent Japanese earthquake and tsunami. So strengthening
our ability to work together to respond to those types of natural
disasters is very much in the interest of not just the region, but the
United States as well.

     So with that, that concludes the schedule on Saturday. And with
that, we'll be returning to the United States. I don't know, Danny, if
you want to make any comments.

     Q      What time is he scheduled to leave?

     MR. RHODES: The current schedule has him leaving Indonesia in kind
of the mid to late afternoon on Saturday the 19th. And we'll take your
questions. But, Danny, anything by way of opening?

     MR. RUSSEL: Well, that was very comprehensive. I'd say briefly from
the Asia perspective two or three things. Mostly, the trip needs to be
looked at in context. Part of the context is that this isn't a trip to
the far-flung corners of Asia. This is a trip to the Asia Pacific. The
U.S. is very much an Asia-Pacific nation. We're a resident power. And
the fact that the President begins by hosting APEC in Honolulu is a good
demonstration of that.

     Secondly, the other continuum -- the other context of the trip is the
overall policy that the President has pursued with respect to Asia and
rebalancing in Asia, mainly that when he came into office, he came in with
the insight that the U.S. was overall underbalanced with respect to Asia,
and that in the effort to remedy that, the three basic elements of the
policy that the President articulated and pursued were in the first
instance to bolster, shore up, and modernize America's alliances in the
region; secondly, to develop effective strategic ways of engaging the
emerging powers in the region; and thirdly, to engage with and shape and


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




to lead the regional institutions that were developing either in embryonic
form or that were already in place.

     And this trip reflects the approach very clearly in that he is,
having come off the heels of a very successful state visit by President
Lee, he will be on this trip meeting -- visiting Australia, meeting with
the Prime Minister of Japan, and meeting with two other important allies,
as Ben mentioned, Thailand and the Philippines.

     In terms of engagement with the emerging powers in Asia, he'll be
meeting with the Chinese President Hu Jintao, with the Indonesian
President Yudhoyono, and with the Indian President Minister Singh.

     And in terms of engaging with and shaping institutions, not only is,
as Ben mentioned, the President putting forward an activist agenda at
APEC, and not only is the President taking the Trans-Pacific Partnership
trade arrangement -- a very high-quality, high-level set of standards --
tothe next level in a way that's prompted great interest in the region,
but for the first time -- and this is historic -- he will be participating
in the East Asia Summit.

     While respectful of the existing agendum of that group, we have
advocated for and found support to expand the dialogue among the leaders
to include key strategic and security issues, specifically
nonproliferation and maritime security.

     The President identified that there is a gap in Asia, that while the
infrastructure for collaborative discussion on economic issues is fairly
well developed, there was nothing adequate on the political and security
side. And he has already begun the effort to try to transform the
existing East Asia Summit into a venue where the leaders can not only
discuss but provide guidance and leadership to the other regional
institutions, such as the ASEAN Regional Forum and the meetings of the
ministerials.

     So I think on balance, you can see this trip as emblematic of the
maturation of the Obama approach towards Asia. It's not declaratory, it's
not promising we're coming back, it's manifesting the benefits of U.S.
sustained and deepened engagement in the region.

      MR. RHODES: Questions? Ben?

     Q    Thanks. I had two questions. First, a broader one for either
gentleman. The timing of these foreign trips can often be tricky because
of domestic concerns, and of course there will be things happening in
Congress related to the economy, appropriations and the super committee
while all this is happening.

     Can you synthesize for the American electorate why spending so much
time in Asia is important? I know you've talked'about exports and so
forth, but people will see him overseas now after the G20, APEC in Hawaii,


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




  and then all the way through to Indonesia, spending a lot of time out of
  the country. How does this affect them? How does the President --

       MR. RHODES: Yes. Well, I'd make a number of points. First of all,
  the President's number-one priority is job creation. And our efforts to
  create American jobs are tied very directly to the engagement in the Asia
  Pacific. Our trade with APEC nations supports millions of American
  jobs. Our ability -- if you look at the growth of the U.S. economy and if
  you look at the ways in which we are creating jobs, our ability to export
  is critical, again, to our job creation and growth agenda. And, again,
  the vast majority of the export potential in the world is in the Asia
  Pacific.

       So when the President sets a goal of doubling U.S. exports to support
  hundreds of thousands of American jobs, again, that's very much going to
  be rooted in our ability to open markets in the Asia Pacific, to achieve
  export deals with governments in the.Asia Pacific.

       So the first -- in the first instance, the domestic portion of this
  trip -- and Hawaii, of course, is a domestic stop -- is going to be rooted
  very much in an economic agenda that supports U.S. exports, that increases
  trade, that breaks down barriers to markets in the region and that fosters
  the type of integration across the Asia Pacific that is going to be
  essential to U.S. jobs and U.S. competitiveness.

       And, again -- so all the themes that we talk about domestically --
  our ability to compete, our ability to create good-paying jobs, our
  ability to invest in the industries of the future -- all of that is going
  to be directly related to U.S. leadership in this particular part of the
. world.

       So I think when the American people see the President traveling in
  the Asia Pacific, they will see him advocating for U.S. jobs and U.S.
  businesses. He will be trying to open new markets, and he will be trying
  to achieve new export initiatives, and he will be trying to foster a trade
  agreement through the, for instance, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, that
  takes us beyond the Korea Free Trade Agreement towards a multilateral
  agreement that, again, has very high standards to ensure that our
  interests are being protected.

       So I would see -- when you ask why are we so focused on this region,
  an overwhelming reason why is because of the economic potential, and the
  direct tie-in to people at home.

       Secondly, the U.S. is a Pacific power, and we have been a Pacific
  power since World War II. And we have a deep and abiding commitment to
  allies in this part of the world. And when you look at the security
  challenges we face, whether it's terrorism or proliferation or piracy or
  natural disasters, our ability to work cooperatively and to lead in the
  Asia Pacific is going to be essential to our ability to remain a world
  leader.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




     And the American people want to see America living up to its
responsibilities as a world leader in a way that protects our
interests. And our ability to, again, shape the future in the Asia
Pacific is going to be essential to that, particularly in a context where
you have a region that's very dynamic, that has emerging democracies, that
has a rising China. And I think the American people want to know that the
United States is going to play the historic role that it's always played
in terms of being the anchor of stability in this part of the world and
being able to project our influence on behalf of American interests.

     So I think that's -- the bottom line is that they will see the
President as an effective advocate for U.S. interests. They will see him
taking steps to support economic growth and job creation here at
home. And they will see him standing up for both the security interests
that we have in counterterrorism and nonproliferation, but also the
democratic values that have spread across Asia, frankly because of the
sacrifices of the American people -- whether it was in World War II,
whether it was in Korea, or in a range of other relationships.

     And then I'd just add that when the President is on these trips he's
always able to deal with any matters anywhere in the world. So whether it
was the beginning of the Libya operation on our Latin America trip, or
whether it was being able to engage with his administration and other
leaders back in the United States, he's more than capable of doing that
during his four days here in Asian countries.

     Q    Just a quick follow on a more narrow point. It seems unusual
that the President would take such an extensive trip and have such a down
day -- which sounds like Monday will be in Hawaii with the exception of
the fundraiser. Can you explain why he's doing that?

     MR. RHODES: Well, look, it's principally because we had a summit
that we're hosting in Hawaii, the APEC Summit that has been long
planned. And the Indonesians had a summit that they're hosting in Bali,
the East Asia Summit. And we're working an Australia stop. But those
summit schedules are set far in advance, and so therefore that created the
context for the trip.

     But, again, it's an opportunity for him to engage supporters in
Hawaii, which is obviously a place where he has a lot of backing and a lot
of roots. So I think it also presents an opportunity for him to have that
engagement.

     Q      Thanks.

     Q    As you pursue this pivot to Asia, some of the allies in the
region are worried about the effects of budget cuts here on the defense
posture in Asia. And I'm wondering what kind of assurances the President
will be able to give them. I understand that some of them are even
following the super committee process closely, and the possible
sequestration of defense funds.


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




     MR. RHODES: I actually -- I do think this will be a topic throughout
the trip, in which the President will be providing assurance that the U.S.
is going to continue to play its role within the Asia-Pacific region, and
that we see both our defense commitments and our commitments to our allies
as indispensable to the United States and to the Asia-Pacific region more
broadly.

     I'd also say that he will be making it clear that because the U.S. is
-- the reason that the Asia Pacific has been able to develop in the way
that it has with the enormous economic growth, with the emergence of
democracies, is precisely because the U.S. has been able to be an anchor
of security and stability. And so our force posture, our troop presence,
our naval presence in the region has been fundamental to the peaceful
development and democratic development of Asia. And so I think there will
be a theme of strong reassurance from the President that we're going to
continue to play that role, even in a time of addressing fiscal
consolidation and deficit reduction here at home.

     Q    And can you also talk about what the President will say in the
meeting with Hu about the European crisis, and also about China's own
currency?

     MR. RHODES: Obviously, both President Hu and President Obama were at
the G20 in Cannes, and so were participating in discussions about the
European crisis. I think we saw China indicate some steps that they were
prepared to take, along with emerging economies, to bolster domestic
demand going forward. They have taken steps on currency, but, again, we
don't believe that those are sufficient. So I'm sure that the President
will be raising with President Hu the broader need for global growth that
is supported by demand in China and other emerging economies. Currency is
a part of that picture.

     Similarly, I think they'll be addressing some of the APEC agenda
items, which get at how do you support an innovation agenda across the
region; how do you support regulatory convergence that gives businesses
confidence that they can sell their products and that they can be
competitive across the region. So I think there is a broad economic
agenda with President Hu that includes rebalancing, that includes
currency, but also includes, again, the broader APEC themes as well.

     Brianna.

     Q    Ben, can you talk about the dialogue with the CEO of Boeing at
the business summit? I mean, whose idea was it? How did you come to
choose the Boeing CEO? And what is the President hoping to achieve from
that?

     MR. RHODES: Well, if you look at -- the President has spoken to this
group -- to those of you who covered the last two APEC summits -- he has
spoken to this group the last few years. It's an important group. Part
of what APEC does is it structures an ability for leaders and government
officials, but also business leaders to communicate about economic issues

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




on a regular basis, and to work through problems, work through
challenges. So that's the context for this forum.

     Given the fact that he's spoken to this group a couple of times
already, and the fact that we're hosting it, we thought it would be an
interesting venue for him to have a dialogue that focuses on, again, the
potential of the Asia-Pacific region, as well as the President's
commitment to U.S. exports. Boeing, of course, is an American company
that has a great deal of -- does a great deal of export business in the
Asia Pacific and around the world. So in many respects, both the
President's engagement with Mr. McNerney, but also Boeing's presence in
the Asia. Pacific and around the world makes it a natural fit to have that
type of discussion.

     So I think, again, it's allowing him to have a dialogue with the
business community, allowing him to discuss his own export agenda, and
also hear from leaders and business leaders about, again, how they
approach the region as well. And Mr. McNerney is a natural fit for that
dialogue.

     Q    And then aside from sort of emphasizing economic and military
ties, is he going to really make news? Or is a lot of this about keeping
up relations?

     MR. RHODES: No, I'd expect over the course of this trip that there'd
be specific items that we're looking to make progress on. I mean, at
APEC, we want to take the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement to the
next level. At APEC there are also going to be a number of specific items
within the categories that I talked about where they're going to be
looking to reach some agreement.

     I think in Australia we'll be able to speak about what is the U.S.
commitment to our force posture in the region; what is the next phase in
the U.S.-Australian alliance.

     And then I think at EAS there are obviously specific things that
we're trying to do on the nuclear security side that are important to us,
on maritime security, on human rights.

     So without getting ahead of the actual meetings and events, I think
that the trip will -- we have very specific objectives in
mind. Similarly, we're meeting with very -- we're meeting with, in
addition to almost all of our key allies in the region, we're meeting with
China, Russia, India. So they will have the opportunity to discuss issues
like Iran, which are particularly important in the wake of the IAEA
report, as well as discussing Afghanistan in the lead-up to some important
international conferences on Afghanistan.

     So it's also an opportunity to check in on Asia-Pacific issues, but
also a number of other global issues.



   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




     Q    Ben, two quick questions. On the TPP, what is the long-range
hope for when that can finally be in place?

     MR. RHODES: I think that there have been -- I don't want to put a
date on it. I think we'll have more clarity, frankly, out of these
meetings. There have been negotiations at the trade ministerial level, of
course. And now at the leaders level I think they'll want to essentially
codify the progress that's been made and lay down a marker as to where
they see those TPP negotiations, and then look to the next phase.

     So I think we'll be able to fill in some of those details out of that
-- out of their meeting. But I wouldn't put a timeline on it. But Danny,
do you have anything to add? I mean, the other thing I'd note that -- is
that as they seek to conclude the broad outlines of an agreement, and then
-- and move forward with finalizing that,.there are also a range of other
countries that will continue to indicate an interest potentially in
joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

     So part of the innovation of the agreement is that it provides a
framework for these nine countries as the charter members of the TPP, and
that going forward we can also see if other nations can meet the standards
that have been set on labor, environmental issues, regulatory issues going
forward.

     Q    And also, on the scheduling, since you said these things, the
summits are known, the dates of them far in advance, when the -- at the
end of July when the debt agreement was negotiated and the provisions for
the deficit committee were negotiated, was it discussed or did the White
House bring up the fact that that November 23rd deadline would potentially
conflict and have the President out of the country for the run-up to that?

     MR. RHODES: No. I mean, again, the East Asia Summit has been on the
books for some time now, obviously preceding that. And of course the
President will be back in the United States the weekend before that
deadline of the 23rd. So he'll certainly be there that week.

     Q    Have you made any special provision for him to get regular bills
on what's going on?

      MR. RHODES: He always -- when he's traveling like                     this he always
gets -- he's always in regular contact with White House                     staff back
here.    So it's -- I don't think we need to do anything                    special beyond him
having that type of contact throughout the day with his                     White House staff.

     Q    Couple of questions on Australia. First of all, the much
anticipated basing agreement, enhanced basing agreements between the two
sides. You didn't mention that.

     MR. RHODES: Yes.

     Q      What is in the offing for that?


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




     MR. RHODES: Again, I don't want to get -- I mean, what I would say
is that I think what we'll be discussing in Australia is the future
bilateral cooperation between the U.S. and Australian militaries, and also
the U.S. force posture in the Asia-Pacific region more generally.

     I don't want to get ahead of the discussions that the leaders will
have on those matters, but I certainly think that those issues will be key
to what they'll be talking about.

     Q      There is a new formal agreement in the works, though, right?

     MR. RHODES: Again, before an agreement is -- I don't want to get
ahead of any agreement. I'll just say that we're discussing with the
Australians, again, the future of our alliance in the context, also, of
our future force posture in the region.

     Q    And then one quick scheduling question on Australia. When we've
talked to Australians they've wondered why the President didn't take that
day that he's devoting to a downtime in Hawaii and tack that onto his
visit there since it had been canceled twice before. They're, as you
know, sensitive about this.

     MR. RHODES: Well, look, he'll have two days in Australia, two stops
-- speech to Parliament, bilateral meeting, other events. So I think we
have a very robust schedule in Australia. Again, being in Hawaii we have
two very full days there, and then the opportunity to have -- to meet with
some supporters.

     MR. RUSSEL: It's also considered good manners to allow the host to
get back to the house before the guest arrives. (Laughter.)

     Q      Planes are fast.

     MR. RHODES: Very well put. Very well put. Do you have anything
else?

     Laura.

     Q    Thanks. You sort of alluded to this, but I'm wondering if you
could address more specifically whether the trip to the EAS, and in
general to the region, is meant to reassure U.S. allies that the -- of the
U.S. interest and presence in the region, at a time when China is acting
in, in some cases, aggressive ways and ways that are uncertain for the
future. Is it specifically meant to sort of counter that rising Chinese
influence?

     MR. RHODES: Well, again, I think it's absolutely the case that this
is a region that sees a lot of rapidly developing change, including the
rise of China. But in that context, the U.S. wants to, again, make it
clear that we are going to continue to be a strong Asia-Pacific power;
that we're going to continue to stand by our core alliances; that we're


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




going to build positive relationships with emerging powers like China and
India.

     But also, what we want to foster is an environment where all this
change is channeled to effective regional solutions, because we want to
see, essentially, the success of a rules-based system in this part of the
world. We want to see countries follow the rules of the road on economic
issues. Again, whether that's adhering to intellectual property norms,
whether it's adhering to regulatory norms. So on the economic side we
very much want to have rules of the road in place that all nations are
committed too.

     And then similarly on the security side, we want to have institutions
set up like the East Asia Summit to address multinational issues like
maritime security, or nuclear security, so that we have a rules-based
framework to deal with that as well. So what the U.S. can do is both
reassure our allies, develop strong ties with emerging nations, and then
try to build a regional framework to deal with issues. But Danny might
want to --

     MR. RUSSEL: Yes. Well, I'd add these are institutions in which
China is an active participant. And I would mention that China was the
first country to welcome the President's decision to join the East Asia
Summit. So it's not as if there is a zero-sum condition being set here.

     There's no question but that the Asia -- that the nations in the
region -- the EAS members -- have warmly welcomed the President's personal
participation. They surely see that as yet another indication of the
seriousness of purpose on the part of the Obama administration and the
U.S. government, not only in meeting our commitments to Asia but also the
level of investment that . we are making for the reasons that Ben outlined.

     Q    Do you anticipate that he'll specifically address the South
China Sea and the nine-dash line as part of the maritime issues you're
referring to?

     MR. RUSSEL: Well, as Ben mentioned, the three areas of focus that we
have identified and that the Indonesians as chair of the EAS this year
have agreed will be under discussion among the leaders, are disaster
relief -- where the U.S. has already provided tremendous support in
specific cases and now has put forward proposals for how we can broaden
and institutionalize our ability to be helpful in disaster relief;
nonproliferation and the broad range of issues both on a bilateral and a
multilateral issue; and maritime security. The East Asia Summit brings
together the leaders of the entire Asia-Pacific region. They are at a
forum that allows them to discuss freely the strategic and political
issues of concern to their nations and to their publics.

     And in the context of maritime security, while there are a number of
technical issues about piracy, about capacity building, about information
sharing, and there are a number of programs that are under discussion in
the context of the East Asia summit, within that framework, clearly, the

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




South China Sea is relevant. It is both natural and inevitable that the
leaders will address the South China Sea issues in the context of maritime
security, looking at the shared principles, the consensus around these
shared principles of international norms and law -- freedom of navigation,
the right to unimpeded legitimate commerce, and efforts -- collaborative
efforts to avoid the accidental conflict or miscalculation and see an
incident that could lead to a spike in tensions.

     Now, you should be clear that this is a dialogue forum for leaders;
it is not a tribunal. So it is as if a territorial dispute is being
referred to the EAS. It's not on the agenda, per se. But as I said, I
think it is natural, if not inevitable, that in the context of maritime
security leaders will touch on the principles that should apply not just
in the Bali Sea, but in—the South China Sea as well.

     Q    Can I follow on China as well? All important issues you just
laid out, but you mentioned at the beginning, this is the first bilateral
meeting the President is going to have with President Hu since the state
visit. A lot has happened since then. The U.S. debt, the super committee
-- that's been discussed -- but European debt, China's role in maybe
buying some of that up. How important do you think that will be in the
bilateral meeting as well?

     MR. RHODES: Well, first of all, on the Europe issue, there was a lot
of questions when we were up here as if the Chinese were going to ride
into Cannes and buy up the European debt. And I think what we've seen is
that it was vastly overstated in terms of the role that China was going to
play, per se, in that issue, that frankly it's a European solution that
we're still trying to support. And the Europeans have made some steps
forward. They continue to do so in terms of their agreement.

     But I do think that they will certainly discuss the global economy,
the U.S. and China, the two largest economies. So I think that they'll
discuss the progress that has been made on the European financial
crisis. I think that they'll discuss what we'd like to see, again, on
rebalancing demand by China taking steps to increase demand within their
own economy, to take steps on currency and other issues.

     So I think that, yes, a lot has developed, but we had kind of a
constant dialogue with the Chinese that's grounded in one principle, which
is that to:sustain global growth going forward, the U.S. is going to have
to grow our economy while also addressing fiscal consolidation in the
medium and long term. And the Chinese are going to be a part of
rebalancing global demand, because as their economy grows, they have more
capacity and ability to be consumers of goods.

     So I think that that remains the basis for our dialogue, even as many
events intervened. That's what they talked about in January. They had
some good progress on IPR issues -- intellectual property rights issues --
on innovation policy, and some on currency. But I think we're always
looking to move that dialogue forward.


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




     MR. CARNEY: Margaret.
     Q    So I guess I had two. One is, how much do you think that
President Obama's background, having grown up in Hawaii and spent some
years in Indonesia, has shaped his views of Asia? And would you say that
he thinks that Americans are beginning to change the way they think of
Asia? Or does he still think -- does he think that most Americans still
think of Asia as China and outsourcing?

     MR. RHODES: We've invested a lot in this -- the second part of your
question, so I'll take that first. I think that there's both the kind of
foreign policy piece of this and then the economic piece of this. On the
economic piece of this, I think for a very long time, Asia was a region
that Americans associated with outsourcing and with cheap labor and
cheaper products here at home.

     I think what we've seen over the course of the last several years is
because of the enormous economic growth in Asia, that that is changing
because as these countries develop, and as they develop very large middle
classes, they are going to be markets for our goods. And suddenly you're
going to have -- so when the President went to India, you saw some
substantial export deals reached that supported tens of thousands of
jobs.

     In each of these countries -- countries like, of course, China,
Korea, Japan, very large economies -- but even in countries that Americans
don't usually think of as markets for our goods like Thailand, Malaysia,
Indonesia, you're going to increasingly see U.S. job growth supported by
exports to these countries.

     So on the economic side, I think there is an important shift where
we've tried to communicate clearly to the region, to. the American business
community and to the American people how much of an enormous stake we have
in the future of this region and how much our economic growth at home is
going to be tied directly to our ability to be competitive in these
markets.

     On the political and security side, similarly, I think traditionally,
Americans -- well, all of us, I think when we were coming of age often the
most important relationships that we saw in the world were with the then
Soviet Union at the time and of course European capitals. The Middle East
has been a focus of our foreign policy for some time.

     And I think another point that we're making is increasingly the
center of gravity in the 21st century is going to make the Asia Pacific
critical to all of our interests and that that is manifested in a rising
China. But, again, all of these countries are emerging. And we have a
huge stake in seeing them emerge as successful, peaceful, developing
economies. And we also have a stake, of course, in the success of a lot
of the emerging democracies in this part of the world.

     And so whether it's our ability to stop proliferation or to stop the
smuggling of nuclear material, to deal effectively with a massive natural

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




disaster like a tsunami, America's ability to remain engaged and be a
leader in the Asia Pacific is going to be directly tied to our ability to
be a world leader in the 21st century. So if you want America to be a
world leader in this century, that leadership is going to have to include
Asia Pacific.

     And in terms of the President, I think he has                  a unique understanding
of this part of the world because he has lived in                   it. He obviously was
born in Hawaii, which, again, symbolizes America's                  Pacific presence, but
also lived in Indonesia. So I think he has a deep                   appreciation of Asian
cultural -- Asian and Pacific culture.

     But I think his personal engagement has been very well received in
the region. I think you'll see he has enormous -- he's enormously well
thought of in the region as -- the perceptions of the U.S., of President
Obama and of U.S. leadership are very high in nearly all of these
countries. And that, frankly, allows us to get stuff done, because it
makes countries want to do business with us, it makes leaders want to have
good relationships with us, and it allows us to build cooperative
approaches on the issues that matter to us.

     So,   again, I think his personal standing in the region and the
personal   investment he's made in the region has opened a lot of doors for
American   business and American security interests, and it's why trips like
this are   so important to us.

     MR. CARNEY: I just want to -- I've just got a couple of minutes and
I have to leave to make an appointment, if you had anything for me.

     Q    I may bank off the comment directly on the hot-mic comments from
the G20, but I wanted to ask Ben: Abraham Foxman of the Anti-Defamation
League issued a statement yesterday, and obviously a lot of Republicans
have also, but I'll -- without getting into the politics of this, Foxman
said that he was "deeply disappointed and saddened by the decidedly un-
presidential exchange between Presidents Sarkozy and Obama. President
Obama's response to Mr. Sarkozy implies that he agrees with the French
leader when he called Netanyahu a liar." And I was just wondering if you
could explain the conversation from the President's perspective, and his
opinion about President Sarkozy's calling Prime Minister Netanyahu a liar?

     MR. RHODES: Well, I mean, in the first instance I'll echo what Jay
said in that I don't think we're going to get into the details of this
conversation. I think what I will say that's important to note is, first
of all, throughout the course of the G20 -- even as we were dealing with a
pressing economic crisis -- the President was personally engaging foreign
leaders to review his opinion that he opposed Palestinian membership in
U.N. agencies. He personally did register his view, not just with
President Sarkozy but with other leaders, that this was counterproductive,
that unilateral Palestinian efforts at the U.N., whether it was to seek
full U.N. membership or membership in U.N. agencies, was
counterproductive. And so I think it speaks to his commitment to Israel's


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




security that he was doing that even in the context of a very pressing and
urgent economic crisis.

     As relates to Israel, he has a very close working relationship with
Prime Minister Netanyahu. They speak very regularly. I think they've
probably spent more time one on one than any other leader that the
President has engaged in. That's rooted in the fact that the U.S. and
Israel share a deep security relationship but also a values-based
relationship. And I think our actions speak very loudly, which is that
this President has taken security cooperation with Israel to unprecedented
levels, he has stood up time and again against delegitimization of Israel
-- whether it was the Goldstone report, the flotilla or, of course most
recently, Palestinian efforts to seek unilateral measures at the U.N. to
shortcut negotiations.

     So our record speaks very Clearly about the President's commitment to
Israel, and he, again, I think has maintained a very close working
relationship with Prime Minister Netanyahu where they've been able to
communicate clearly on these issues. And insofar as these matters --
insofar as the Middle East came up at all at the G20, it was President
Obama raising with other leaders his opposition to Palestinian membership
in U.N. agencies.

     Q    I understand that's what you want to talk about, but the other
part of it is Sarkozy insulting Netanyahu and President Obama saying
something along the lines of, "You think it's bad -- I have to deal with
him every day." Again, getting into that close working relationship that
you just referred to, I suppose, I'm wondering, has there been any attempt
by the White House or the State Department to reach out to Netanyahu to
explain this away, to smooth it over? It's obviously been covered quite a
bit in the European media and the Israeli media.

     MR. RHODES: Again, what we have here is reports of a private
conversation that we're not going to comment on the details of. We
communicate at a variety of levels with the Israeli government on a near-
daily basis, so I think it's certainly the case that we're in contact with
them about a lot of pressing issues.

     I think, frankly, in the context of the coming days we'll be
consulting with them about not just the ongoing issues at the U.N. but
about a very important IAEA report on the Iranian nuclear program. So
it's certainly true that we're going to be in close contact at a variety
of levels with the Israeli government, and I think that speaks to the
depth of our relationship.

     Q      Thanks.

     MR. CARNEY: Yes.

     Q    Jay, has the President followed the scandal at Penn
State? What's his reaction to it, and including the retirement of Joe
Paterno?

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




     MR. CARNEY: I haven't discussed it with him. I'm sure he's aware of
it because of the widespread media reports, but I don't have a reaction to
it.

     Yes.

     Q    On the cost-cutting initiative today, how much money does the
President expect it will save? And is it going to change the budget
figures that we can expect, or is it money that's going to be used for
other things?

     MR. CARNEY: Well, on the first part, I think we're talking about a
20 percent reduction in spending on the areas that are included. And that
would be, by my fifth-grade math, about $4 billion.

     Q      How much?

     MR. CARNEY: Four billion -- is that correct?

     Q      Four billion?

     MR. CARNEY: Yes, four billion.

     Q      Does that get saved or spent elsewhere?

     MR. CARNEY: Well, I mean, it's saved, but, again, there are budget
processes going on. But I don't --

     Q      Annually.

     MR. CARNEY: Annually, yes.

     Q      Over a year.

     MR. CARNEY: Annually. Yes. (Laughter.) Is that a trick question?

     Q    No. But is it money that's going to change, like, the budget
figures that he's already released or --

     MR. CARNEY: Well, I think --

     Q      Or is it part of the savings that's already been agreed to?

     MR. CARNEY: I don't -- this is a new initiative. So -- but would
that $4 billion would be all that it took to deal with our meeting the
long-term deficit issues; obviously it doesn't. But this is important to
do because it demonstrates the need to tighten our belts and make sure
that we're spending taxpayer dollars wisely. And it's another action that
this President can take using his executive authority to make sure that
we're doing just that.


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




     Q    On the President's executive authority, there is -- Fannie Mae
reported their third-quarter results. They lost a lot more money, and
they're now saying to the Treasury Department they want $7.8 billion more,
even more bailout funds than they got previously at the tail end.of the
Bush administration.

     Is the President going to do anything to step in? There are a lot of
law makers, including Rockefeller on the Democratic side and McCain on the
Republican side, saying enough is enough between the bonuses, and now
they're seeking more bailout.

     MR. CARNEY: Well, this is a broader issue. I mean, our position
about GSEs and the need to deal with them. But I don't have a specific
response for that, to that request. Maybe Treasury does.

     MR. CARNEY: Kristen.

     Q    Thank you, Jay. On Iran -- can you discuss what, if any,
stiffer sanctions the administration might be looking into, and who the
President has spoken to about the IAEA report?

     MR. CARNEY: Well, obviously he's had a lot of internal discussions
about it, but the -- or not a lot, but he's been briefed on it and it's
been discussed here. I don't have any other conversations to report, or
any predictions to make about steps that we might take in our efforts to
further isolate and pressure Iran to change its behavior with regards to
its nuclear program.

     Q     Has he spoken to any other leaders?

     MR. CARNEY: I don't have any foreign leader calls or conversations
to report.

     I'll take Ann. Last one.

     Q      Jay, can I ask you one more on the cost-cutting?

     Q     Will he curtail his own travel under this order today? The
President?

     MR. CARNEY: The President makes trips as part of his capacity as.
Commander-in-Chief and President of the United States. There are no --

     Q      So he's not affected by this?

     MR. CARNEY: -- plans to change his travel.

     Q      So where is the White House going to cut under these --

     MR. CARNEY: I can get you more details on the -- which I think there
was paper put out, and we can get you more details on the actual
program. I'll get you more details on it.

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015




         Thanks, guys.

         Q         Thank you.

                                              END                                     1:25 P.M. EST




Unsubscribe

The White House • 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW • Washington DC 20500 • 202-456-1111




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783136 Date: 12/31/2015
