     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782596 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                           RELEASE IN FULL



From:                            Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                            Friday, September 16, 2011 12:31 PM
To:
Subject:                         Fw: (SBU) Abbas speech highlights


Abbas speech highlights from today


From: Rubinstein, Daniel H
Sent: Friday, September 16, 2011 12:27 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3
Subject: FW: (SBU) Abbas speech highlights




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Waters, John R
Sent: Friday, September 16, 2011 7:10 PM
To: Wailes, Jacob; Hale, David M; Rangaswamy, Roopa; Sutphin, Paul R; 'Shapiro, Daniel B.'; Waller, Robert P; Rudman,
Mara; 'Ross, Dennis B.'; Goldberger, Thomas H; Silverman, Robert 3; Rubinstein, Daniel H; Lempert, Yael; Schwartz,
Jonathan B; Johnson, Mark C; Forden, Robert W; Sachar, Alon (Tel Aviv); Horak, Gail R (USUN); Knopf, Payton L (USUN);
Bass, Warren; Ryu, Rexon Y; Bitar, Maher B; Beran, Sarah; Russell, Melissa H
Cc: Waters, John R
Subject: (SBU) Abbas speech highlights

Below are quick highlights from the speech. He reiterated what he and others have said publicly before,
namely that he will seek full membership in the UN, and confirmed that the letter will be submitted the day
of his speech (September 23). This time, he added, "all other options (i.e., UNGA) will be studied and
decided upon later." The decision was justified in terms of leveling the playing field for future negotiations,
in which the (territorial) terms of reference would be set, and repeated his line that the Palestinians do not
want to "isolate" Israel but rather the policies of occupation and settlement. Abbas also emphasized the
importance of keeping demonstrations on the ground peaceful, lest this be used to discredit the
statehood drive.

-Rick




"We are going to the UN Security Council. This is our decision which we have communicated to
everyone. Once I deliver my speech, I will deliver the accession the letter to the UNSG who in turn will
hand It over to the Presidency of the Security Council. All other options will be studied and decided upon
later."

Key highlights of the speech:

Heading to the UN tomorrow to get our people's concern to this forum. Our people have suffered years
after years.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782596 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782596 Date: 12/31/2015



Our rights are being violated every day.. While the world hears and listens.

The tragedy of our people has been born along with the UN. Dozens of resolutions have passed.

We are going to get our right which is full membership in this organization.

Going to the UN came as a result of the failure of negotiations caused by the Israeli inflexibility.

Going to the PLO won't have any bearing on the status of the PLO, the sole legitimate representative of all
Palestinians.

As you know the PLO is the high reference and authority for the Palestinian people. The PLO is the creator
of the PA. Those who speak about undermining the PLO status and role, are not accurate. (i.e., a
refutation of Goodwin-Gill...) The PLO will stay until a solution is found to all outstanding issues mainly the
refugees.

Three reasons for September:

Obama said in September he hopes to see a Palestinian state, member in the UN. Quartet said in
September is a deadline to negotiations and thirdly we had set september as deadline to end
government institutions building plan and so was attested by the World Bank last month.

We put our prisoners on top of our priority.

We don't want to raise expectations. We won't be able to get independence out of this move. We should
not downplay the significance f the move either.

We go to the UN to get full membership from the UNSC.

We are going to the UN armed with an Olive branch which was held earlier by late Arafat. (Hope they
won't strip us of it).

We are going to the UN not to de-legitimize Israel but to isolate Israeli occupation and practices against
our people. They have trained dogs, unleashed pigs, and unleash other means to fight our people at the
time we head to the UN. These aggressions remind us of Shatila and Sabra massacres and other
massacres in the past. Today is the anniversary of Sabra and Shatila massacre. For the past 63 years we
have experienced such massacres. Its about time to end this and relax...

The occupation is the main reason for instability.

Let me be honest... We are going to face difficult times. If we succeed, the following day the occupation
will not end. But we would have achieved recognition that its not a disputed territories but a state under
occupation. Today, Israel denies that this land is ours. They claim that its their lands/ borders. We stand to
stay that settlement is illegal and this is out land. This would lead us to a state to state negotiations and not
a disputed territories.

I promise that any outcome will be put on the table for the leadership to study it. Going to the UN is not
our strategy but a part of this strategy. Creation of a state on 1967 is the goal etc.

I call on our people every where not to give anyone the excuse to undermine our status while we are
seeking this achievement in the UN. Our people will be able to prevail. We affirmed the peaceful nature
of our actions. Some Israeli intelligence say 'we have never heard Abu Mazen utter the word peaceful.' I
don't utter anything but the word peaceful.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782596 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782596 Date: 12/31/2015



I read some views about those who say you should embrace other means (he was speaking in front of a
Palestinian audience that included all of the PLO factions). I urge you not to deviate from peaceful
marches. Any other action will give others an excuse to discredit our struggle.

We will continue to seek reconciliation, unity of the people and the land is our main weapon. We will keep
this unity and we need to strengthen our internal standing.

 We are going to the UN security council. This is our decision which we have communicated to
everyone. Once I deliver my speech, I will deliver the accession the letter to the UNSG who in turn will
hand It over to the Presidency of the security council. All other options will be studied and decided upon
later."




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782596 Date: 12/31/2015
