UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779476 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL


                                   Libya: Coalition Forces
                                      Media Reaction

                                 London Hub & RRU coverage
                                      Pan-Arab Media
                                   3-20/21-2011 5:00 am



       LONDON HUB COVERAGE

        Pan Arab TV coverage, Monday March 21, 2011

       Main news     on all channels today was air attack on Qaddafi's headquarters in
        Tripoli (Bab al-Aziziya) which serves as his military headquarters. Channels
        report there was no news of civilian casualties.
        Other developments in Libya include:
           • Libyan army orders ceasefire
           • Celebrations in Benghazi
           • Sec Gates says the US will not have a major role in operations in Libya and
                will transfer mission leadership to France and Britain or to joint NATO
                command.
           • Qatari planes are heading towards Libya, some to take part in enforcing
                UN resolution and others to carry humanitarian needs for the Libyan
                people.
           • Un-named Arab countries are reported by al-Jazeera to be taking part in
                the Libya operations too.
           • Amr Mousa's comments were responded to by Abdel Hafeez Ghouka, a
                spokesman of the Libyan National Council who asked Mousa how else to
                enforce a no-fly zone and save the Libyan people. It is reported that
                Mousa has an eye on Egyptian presidential elections.
           • While Gates says that Qaddafi is not a target; Hague confirms that Qaddafi
                has to go.


       Pan-Arab TV snapshot: 3-20-2011 5 EST/9 GMT

       Of note: News on Libya talks about the damage wrought by Western bombing
       raids, reactions of people in the region, and the situation of refugees on the
       border. Libya is not at all the sole focus this morning; the news bulletins give
       equal focus to events in Syria, Yemen, Morocco, and Bahrain; William Hague's
       comments reported; AJ reports goals of operation unclear - topple Qaddafi or
       not? - and hints that that is the US' goal.


       Al-Jazirah:



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779476 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779476 Date: 12/31/2015




           •   Bombing raids continue; Washington emphasizes it is a "limited"
               operation;
           •   In Tunis: A] conducts interviews with Tunisians in the street about Libya;
               those interviewed support the Libyan uprising but reject the "imperialist
               intervention;"
           •   From the refugee camps on the Libyan-Tunisian borders: UN official
               confirms that over 800,000 refugees have fled Libya; A] reports from the
               borders and interviews Africans fleeing Libya; "we worked hard; we just
               want to go home," they say; IOM official interviewed at a camp about its
               efforts; some are young men who are coming to support the Libyan
               fighters;
           •   Reports efforts by the Libyan authorities' attempts to persuade other
               news agencies to stop transmission of Al's signal; report accompanied by
               film of the incident in question;
           •   Terror in Tripoli as it is exposed to a second night of bombing;
           •   Huge explosion targets Qaddafi's residence in Bab al-Aziziyah;
           •   French government spokesman says no reports of civilian casualties;
           •   AJ comments that Washington says it does not aim to. topple Qaddafi
               but its actions speak otherwise;
           •   Crowds celebrating in liberated town;
           •   Gates says US will not take the lead in this operation but will hand over to
               the UK and France via NATO: West is very cautious of Arab fears;
           •   Hague shown saying it's hard to predict the future of Libya;
           •   A] reports much debate over the real goals of the US ad its allies;
           •   Fears among some of a situation like Iraq emerging in Libya;
           •   Amr Mousa (3/20) quoted saying this is not what the Arab League agreed
               to; an opposition spokesman challenges him, asking who will stop the
               annihilation of the Libya people otherwise;
           •   Position of Western allies unclear on final goal: EU leaders' statement
               contrasted;
           •   Qatar's military participation reported, with footage of planes taking off
               from Doha;
           •   Demonstrations in front of French embassy in Tunis protesting France's
               involvement in the Libya operation;

       Al-Arabiyah:
          • Reports on Qaddafi's whereabouts and asserts that the Western forces
             bombed undisclosed places;
          • Reports that the situation in side Libya is extremely difficult;
          • Due to blocking efforts from the Libyans, AA has changed its satellite
             frequency;
          • Covers UK FM's statements on events in Libya including his comment that
             no planes are being used to target civilians



       BBC Arabic:




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779476 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779476 Date: 12/31/2015




            •reports on the destruction by allied forces of Qaddafi's residence;
             eyewitnesses describe how civilians had come to protect it and were a
             100 meters away when the bombs hit;
           • Continued to carry clips of Amr Mousa's comments 3/20 that the Arab
             League had not agreed to the bombing;
           • Reports on reactions among European countries


        OTHER NEWS:
           • In other news, BBC Arabic reports extensively on the protests in Dera,
             Syria, and the destruction of two offices owned by the Syria President's
              cousin, Rami Makhlouf; ; BBC reports conflicting positions by the
              Government; eyewitnesses interviewed by phone;
           • Al-Arabiyah likewise carries an extensive report on Dera and the use by
              the Syrian authorities of tear gas; unconfirmed reports of protests in
             areas of Damascus;
           • BBC Arabic reports on the 3/20 protests by the Feb. 20 movement in
              Morocco;
           • AJ reports on the Yemeni President's dismissal of his cabinet and on the
              huge protests in Sanaa 3/19 calling Salih to step down; Protestors quoted
             saying they will not leave until he does;
           • Al-Arabiyah reports that the Bahraini authorities claim to have stopped a
              foreign plot against Bahrain; there are allegations of extensive Iranian
              interference and the use of media equipment to record events in side
              Bahrain; a person has been detained in this regard;
           • AJ reports on the results of the Egyptian referendum; voting participation
              reached unprecedented levels


        RRU COVERAGE

        Pan-Arab

        Al-Jazeera TV comments weapons companies are the biggest beneficiary from this
        operation.

        Al-Hayat newspaper demands a wider participation from Arab countries in imposing
        the no-fly zone on Libya and calls on countries that have strong Air Forces, such as
        Saudi Arabia, to take part.

        Al-Quds al-Arabi newspaper reports that the Libyan army orders a cease fire and a
        "peaceful march" towards Benghazi.

        Al-Quds al-Arabi sees "media propaganda" for the military campaign and compares it
        to the falsification of information in Iraq in 1991 and 2003. It opines history is being
        repeated, and expects "US intervention" to cause bloodshed with unknown results.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779476 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779476 Date: 12/31/2015




          Al-Sharq al-Awsat newspaper reports that the air strikes paralyze the Libyan Air
          Force and that Qaddafi distributes weapons among his supporters and promises that
          this "Christian crusade" will be a long war.

          Al-Sharq al-Awsat thinks that Qaddafi may have now "a last chance" to find a
          peaceful exit from the crisis after passing up several previous chances.

          Al-Sharq al-Awsat opines although the UNSC resolution doesn't demand the removal
          of the Qaddafi regime, the fierceness of the initial attacks indicates that is the Allies'
          aim. The writer thinks the region will be better without Qaddafi.

          Jordan
          Al-Ghad newspaper finds strong support from Arab public to the military operations,
          which is a shift from their position on the Iraq war.

          Qatar
          Al-Raya newspaper sees the position taken by the government of Qatar is right and
          important to stop the bloodshed against the innocent Libyan.

          Saudi Arabia
          Al-Ryadh newspaper thinks Qaddafi ruled his country ignorantly and calls on him and
          his sons to be wiser in dealing with their people.

          UAE
          Al-Bayan newspaper urges Qaddafi to be wiser and take "a suitable decision" while
          dealing with opposition as there is an international consensus on stopping his
          belligerence.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779476 Date: 12/31/2015
