     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781604 Date: 12/31/2015


                                                                                                         RELEASE IN
                                                                                                         PART B5



From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Tuesday, August 2, 2011 7:59 PM
To:
Subject:                          FW: Tonight Leaders' meeting - RESULTS AND NEXT STEPS



Jim Jeffrey's update on tonight's Iraq leader's meeting. Bottom line was that the political leaders seem to be embracing
a follow-on training presence.

Dep PM Rowsch Schaways just gave me a debrief. Here is a summary of results:

1-STATEMENT ON US PRESENCE:

"Political Blocs Leaders have met today at the Presidency Headquarters, hosted by President Jalal Talabani to discuss the
security training matter with the American side. Participants have agreed to mandate the Iraqi Government to start the
talks with the American side. Talks are limited to training issues under the Strategic Framework Agreement due to Iraq's
need for the training. Any relationship must be designed at all aspects to support the full sovereignty of Iraq. The
political leaders will monitor the talks to consider any final agreement with the American side. These talks must be
conducted with a spirit of relationship and cooperation."

The only party that according to Rowsch did not support this was the Sadrists. They supposedly abstained, but said they
were not in principle against a training presence, whatever the hell they mean by that. Rowsch said the strong
commitment of all the parties minus Sadrists to the text, and their understanding that their 'consider any final
agreement' language means likely parliamentary action, augur well for getting this done.

2-All parties agree to implement Erbil agreement especially regarding the formation of the National Council for High
Policies, and the decision to form the NCHP will be presented to the Iraqi parliament to for vote soon. Per Rowsch,
Talabani has agreed to submit it to parliament asap. (That's important as T had objections.) Also included in here
someplace is to establish the bylaws for the Council of Ministers.

3-In the next two months the Iraqi parliament will form a committee to review the statues of the employees of Iraq's
Defense and Interior Ministries from General Manager Position and up and evaluate and check their qualification for the
jobs they already holding in these ministries. Per Rowsch, this is to ensure 'balance' among the groups.

4-Both, Iraqia list and National Alliance will present their nominees for the Defense and the Interior ministries' post in
the next two weeks. Rowsch saw this as a breakthrough, even though there is no guarantee the two parties' nominees
will be taken. He and I agreed that the Kurds are going to have to work with Iraqiyya to ensure Dr. A doesn't blow this as
he blew half the Irbil agreements with his festooning with creative additional ideas.

NEXT STEPS




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781604 Date: 12/31/2015
