        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787469 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                               RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                               B5,B6


From:                                H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                                Sunday, February 13, 2011 9:38 AM
To:                                  'sullivanjj@state.gov'
Subject:                             Re: Early AM discussions with Asst MinDef and ForMin




    Original Message ----
From: Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
To: H
Sent: Sun Feb 13 09:30:47 2011
Subject: Fw: Early AM discussions with Asst MinDef and ForMin




From: Burns, William J
To: Sullivan, Jacob J; Wells, Alice G
Sent: Sun Feb 13 02:42:15 2011
Subject: Fw: Early AM discussions with Asst MinDef and ForMin



Jake,

Assume S is ok with above. I'll plan to go a little later.
                                                                                   Have a good Sunday. Bill




From: Burns, William J
To: Scobey, Margaret; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Wailes, Jacob; Sullivan, Jacob J; 'Denis R. McDonough
                                        IDennis_B._Ross
'Daniel_B. Shapiro                                                   ; 'Sergio_L._Aguirre
                                   Wells, Alice G; Shampaine, Nicole D; Schlicher, Ronald L;
                          'Antony J. Blinken
'Herro_K._Mustafa
Sent: Sun Feb 13 02:38:15 2011
Subject: Re: Early AM discussions with Asst MinDef and ForMin



Many thanks again, Margaret.




I'll head back to DC later today from Amman, and look forward to seeing you soon. Warm regards, Bill




From: Scobey, Margaret
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787469 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787469 Date: 12/31/2015




At the apex of this phenomenon, its leading edge in power of example and in power outright, supposedly sits China. Its
economic miracle story has recently loomed so large in our imaginations that it has convinced many Americans that its
rise at our expense, indeed its eventual overtaking of the United States, is a foregone conclusion.




The are few places, however, for which the disgraced exit of Egypt's Hosni Mubarak carries greater relevance, or where
the nature of that country's popular uprising warrants shaking up a conventional wisdom that was shallow stale to begin
with and has become badly outdated.




Immediate evidence of this has been provided by the response of China's censors, who have worked furiously to contain
news of the events in Egypt within their country, and as that has become less and less practical, to spin the news to fit
an- unthreatening or even self-reinforcing narrative. For days, Chinese readers have been preposterously treated to
stories about evacuation flights put on by their government to bring Chinese nationals back from Egypt, along with
residents of Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan.




Nowhere have these stories attempted an honest explanation of why an evacuation was needed in the first place. To do
so would require getting into some deeply messy topics in post-Tiananmen China about popular demands for democracy
and accountability and about the military's ambivalent relationship to the political leadership. For the most part, the
Chinese media has ended the discussion about Egypt with bromides about how unrest equals instability and about how
instability hurts growth, and by familiar inference how growth is the only thing that matters.

It is hard, though, to overstate the difficulties of spinning the Egypt situation from the perspective of the star of the
Authoritarian International, in the delightful phrase of Chrystia Freeland, of Reuters. Things were so much simpler when
so-called Color Revolutions swept a number of constituent parts of the former Soviet Union and the Balkans in the early
2000s. Beijing could indulge in the paranoid or cynical fantasy that this was a case of the West using its insidious non-
governmental organizations and funding for civil society to undermine authoritarian regimes that had traditionally been
in the socialist orbit. This was cast as a hostile takeover, and Beijing used this as an excuse to tighten controls on
association both real and virtual. It also spread its word of caution in the non-democratic world: "Beware. If you let your
guard down, this is what the West will do to you."




But Hosni Mubarak looked in vain for a Western plot to take over Egypt, and so will Chinese propagandists. The
revolution in Tahrir Circle was homegrown, and moreover from the people's perspective, at least, it was peaceful. This
presents the second huge headache for the authoritarian spin on events. China strives to present democracy as
something inappropriate for many peoples, starting of course with the Chinese themselves. Whenever the subject of
democracy in Taiwan is highlighted in the news in China it is to exhibit footage of brawls in the parliament. Disorder in
China, it is implied, would not be so easily contained as a legislative shoe fight. It could engulf the entire country, leading
to great violence and destruction, such as China has already experienced in living memory. The unsubtle idea here is to
say that democracy leads to disorder. Better to keep your nose down, to maintain "harmony" and to pursue growth.




The thing is that despite repeated provocation by the police and by a president who, reluctant to depart, played with
expectations and all but taunted the'huge crowds in Cairo, those crowds refused to become a mob. The democratic


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787469 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787469 Date: 12/31/2015




revolution that is just beginning in Egypt has so far handsomely resisted becoming anything like the Cultural Revolution,
which employed mass violence to overturn an existing order.




How then to disparage what is going on in Egypt? It is not an easy challenge, and the dangerous messages for the
Authoritarian International, and its putative leader, China, have only just begun to be unpacked.




As hard as it has worked to discredit the universal applicability or appeal of democracy, Beijing has worked just as hard
to conjure an alternate moral universe, one in which economics trumps all. Some Western analysts have even naively
bought into the notion that if you just take care of growth, people will be willing to suspend all manner of other
demands and happily leave governance to the mandarins.




In its beautiful complexity, Egypt gives the lie to all of this. A society in its entirety, from the lowliest workers to the
privileged professional class, wants a cluster of goods: economic growth, transparency, accountability, and a say in who
governs it. There are no either-ors in this formula, no contradictions. But there is a name. When you add it all up, you
can call it dignity.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787469 Date: 12/31/2015
