        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766193 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                                      RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                      B6



From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Saturday, September 26, 2009 6:57 AM
To:                               H
Subject:                          FW: MCC Public Event - UNGA



FYI


From: Bohn, Matthew L (MCC/COS) [mailto
Sent: Friday, September 25, 2009 4:16 PM
To: Campbell, Piper; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Cc: Mans, Darius ( MCC/ Acting CEO); Enstrom, Karen L
Subject: FW: MCC Public Event - UNGA

Darius Mans thought you might be interested in a readout from one of the MCC events at UNGA. It was a real
success. Note the AP article linked below referencing the USG and MCC (text pasted in below)...


From: Sherinian, Aaron H (MCC/CPA)
Sent: Friday, September 25, 2009 9:01 AM
To: Broughton, Chrisptoher; 'Seiden, Maya D'; Kornblau, Mark (USUN) [DoS]; 'Brown, Jefferson T.'; Hyde, Dana [DoS];
DeRuiter, Dana M.; Enstrom, Karen L [DoS]
Cc: Morford, Richard A (MCC/PIR/DR); Bohn, Matthew L (MCC/COS); Anderson, Jennifer Nevin (MCC/CPA); Kraham,
Sherri G (MCC/PIR/Acting VP)
Subject: MCC Public Event - UNGA

Colleagues:

Many of you have requested a quick readout from the MCC public event co-hosted with InterAction on the margins of
UNGA. The event was a resounding success (capacity — standing room only), with three heads of state represented
(Burkina Faso, Tanzania and PM of Albania) and FMs from Cape Verde and Sierra Leone. InterAction CEO Sam
Worthington and Africare CEO Julius Coles also had key speaking/moderating roles during the event. Keynote remarks
focused on the importance of partnership--not patronage--in order to achieve lasting economic development (citing the
President's Accra speech and tenets of the Secretary's statements in Africa). The panel raised questions about how civil
society organizations, disaporas and other non-government actors can further leverage USG-led initiatives such as MCC
that have country-led development at their core. Dialogue was free flowing, with an interesting brainstorming session
between civil society leaders and government representatives dominating the final 20 minutes of the session. Each of
the non-USG presenters praised the U.S. for embracing country-led development as a key component of the Paris
Declaration and for the leadership of the Administration for its commitment to "smart" long-term development
assistance.

I have attached a link to the MCC press release and an Associated Press article on the event for your review. A transcript
will be available within the next few days and will be posted to MCC's website. We will also post highlights as part of the
regular MCC CEO blog.

AP: "US Praised for helping countries escape poverty" -
http://www.google.com/hostednews/ap/article/ALeqM5jBwRrE3c97qfTDIA3kWTcVySJ2kAD9ASLM2G0
MCC and InterAction Press Release - http://www.mcc.gov/mcapress/releases/release-092209-mccandinteraction.shtml

Please feel free to contact me with any questions.

Best,
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766193 Date: 12/31/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766193 Date: 12/31/2015




-Aaron


US praised for helping countries escape poverty
By EDITH M. LEDERER (AP) – 2 days ago

UNITED NATIONS — In words of praise rarely heard at the United Nations, leaders of several poor countries thanked the
U.S. government and American taxpayers Tuesday for helping with economic development.

The presidents of Tanzania and Burkina Faso and the prime minister of Albania said a U.S. government aid agency -
which lets recipients decide on the best programs to reduce poverty — is having a major impact on the development of
their countries.

The three countries are among 38 nations in Africa, Asia, Europe and Central America that are receiving grants totaling
over $7.3 billion from the Millennium Challenge Corporation, an independent agency created by Congress in 2004 to
help fight against global poverty.

On the sidelines of the U.N. ministerial meetings, the assembled leaders strongly backed the corporation's innovative
approach. It requires recipients to commit to good governance, economic freedom and investments in their citizens.
That done, recipients are free to choose their own projects but within strict timetables.

"I would like to thank U.S. government and U.S. taxpayer for their very generous help," Albanian Prime Minister Sali
Berisha said. "It is my deep belief that this money was of great efficiency and help to my nation. Sixty million dollars
granted three years ago...were used in several projects which really changed my country."

Berisha said Albania used part of the money to streamline the lengthy, bureaucratic and corrupt system for registering a
business with the government.

This "changed the climate for business in my country," he said, citing a recent World Bank survey in which Albania now
ranked second in the world in improving opportunities for business.

Albania also used part of the money for a system to file tax returns on the Internet. "No more 'friendly meetings'
between taxpayers and tax collectors," he said, noting government revenue increased by $5 billion in four years.

Tanzanian President Jakaya Kikwete said his government and people were "grateful recipients of generous support from
the government and people of the United States."

Kikwete said none of the projects in Tanzania's compact with the corporation were "dictated by the U.S. government."

"We identified the projects and we set the priorities. We made the strategic choices, and in our case we decided to use
the entire compact resource in embracing some of our most pressing infrastructure challenges — roads, energy, water
and airports," he said.

Burkina Faso's President Blaise Campaore said "without development there is no peace, there is no help, and there is no
knowledge."

"I'm here," he said, "to thank president Obama and all the people of America ... and all the people who are working on
the ground."

Burkina Faso signed a five-year $481 million compact with the MCC last year aimed at improving agricultural productivity
through investments in water management, irrigation and technical assistance and credit to farmers. It also went into
construction of new classrooms at schools that cater to girls as well as boys.



         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766193 Date: 12/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766193 Date: 12/31/2015




Sierra Leone's Minister of Mineral Resources Alpha Kanu said his country was trying to meet the requirements to join
the compact.

Copyright © 2009 The Associated Press. All rights reserved.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766193 Date: 12/31/2015
