      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779007 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                     B6



From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Sunday, January 30, 2011 6:41 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: Cairo Update 1030 January 30



Fyi



From: Cutrona, Aimee
To: Cutrona, Aimee; Tueller, Matthew H; Walles, Jacob; Blome, Donald A; 'Daniel_B._Shapirc
                     _       .        ISergio_L_Aguirre                                                      ; Shampaine,
Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes, Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D;
Sullivan, Jacob 3; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley, Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan,
Jacob 3; Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1; McHale, Judith A; Hensman, Chris D; NEA-PD-DL;

Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,
Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore 3; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle,
Robert F
Sent: Sun Jan 30 03:46:21 2011
Subject: Cairo Update 1030 January 30

Protesters are expected to return to Tahrir again today. The military has now blocked key roads to downtown and is
turning around cars seeking to come downtown. Protesters interviewed by Al Jazeera in Cairo report they will continue
to protest until Mubarak leaves office. Internet access remains blocked. Egypt TV reports that 1,400 prisoners escaped
from a prison in Fayoum and 8,000 in Wadi Natrun and are on their way to nearby cities of Cairo and Alexandria as well
as towns in the Delta province of Beheira. They report that prisoners overpowered prison guards and are now armed.


Management:
We are currently compiling lists for post's authorized departure. No other updates since conference call.


Consular:
No updates

Security:
Consular support to the airport will depart at 10:35am.


Political:
No senior government officials have made any announcements about the new government or the future of the
country. An opposition contact told us that a broad coalition of opposition leaders would be meeting at approx 1100
local time to discuss the way forward. He said he would advocate for a transitional government under the leadership of
the current VP and PM, believing military men were needed in order to regain control over security in the country. A
military spokesman issued two statements (one in the name of now former MOD Tantawi) calling on Egyptians to
protect their homes, noting the military is going after looters and affirming some have been arrested by military
forces. There continue to be rumors about the whereabouts of members of the former government. A contact
reported that Former Finance Minister Yousef Boutros Ghali is staying at a friend's house. Not clear if he is trapped
there or avoiding returning to his home. We had previously received word from another contact that Boutros-Ghali had
fled the country. Prominent Coptic businessman Naguib Sawiris called into an Egyptian state TV talk show this morning
to confirm that he did not leave the country as alleged on Al Jazeera.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779007 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779007 Date: 12/31/2015



The theme of the official news here is that there is an outside agenda to promote chaos in Egypt. Egypt TV hosts told
viewers that the satellite networks had an agenda in Egypt. They urged viewers to get their news from official
sources. The call-in show also noted efforts by citizens to defend the country including video of young men defending
the National Museum and sweeping the streets of Tahrir square. EN 1 is playing patriotic music videos during
commercial breaks. The same channel had another guest that told viewers that violence when defending ones home
and family is permitted in Islam.

MB Arabic Website lkwanonline's front page banner reports its editor was attacked by an "organized gang" in Cairo,
posts the free emergency number established by the military to report problems, and reiterates an earlier call by the MB
Supreme Guide that calls on the "youth" and the "Egyptian people" to protect public and private property. January 29
MB Guide Badie issued a statement posted early afternoon on Ikhwanweb that explicitly endorsed the protests, noted
MB participation. It called for an end to the state of Emergency, dissolution of parliament, new elections, release of
political prisoners, a transitional national unity government, a national committee to investigate violence against
demonstrators; all "demands" that track with earlier statements from other opposition groups including the National
Association for Change which has some MB members. This is the first formal statement we've seen from the MB leader
both endorsing the protests and affirming MB participation.

Aimn.ee Guctrot&A
ECPC)
x.3852
Ceti.                                                                                                                       B6


This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Sunday, January 30, 2011 1:51 AM
To: Cutrona, Aimee; Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A; 'Daniel_B._Shapirc
'Sergio_L._Aguirre                  Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J,. Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J., Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1; McHale, Judith A; Hensman,
Chris D; NEA-PD-DL
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,
Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew 5; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S
Subject: Cairo Update 0145 January 30

Sorry time correction.



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Sunday, January 30, 2011 1:49 AM
To: Cutrona, Aimee; Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A; 'Daniel_B._Shapiro
'Sergio_L._Aguirre                  Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1; McHale, Judith A; Hensman,
Chris D; NEA-PD-DL
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779007 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779007 Date: 12/31/2015



Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S
Subject: RE: Cairo Update 2330 January 29

This will be the last SitRep for a few hours. We'll resume in the morning Cairo time.

Staff reporting to us on events in Tahrir has now gone home. Protestors remain in Tahrir but numbers appear to be
dwindling due to the late hour and cold weather.

Consular:
Although consular staff continued to receive many calls from Amcits worried about potential violence near their homes
in various Cairo neighborhoods, thus far we have no reports of Amcits injured. Routine consular services are suspended
for Sunday January 30. Although there are some reports of chaotic conditions at Cairo Airport, we confirmed that
Amcits and other travelers departed safely on the Air France flight to Paris on Saturday afternoon. Consular staff will
attempt to visit the airport Sunday morning with RSO assistance.

Security:
The neighborhood around the Embassy is quiet. Looting is still going on around the city. The Military has taken control
of Maadi. There are reports of gunfire in Maadi, most of it appears to be coming from the Military whom we assume are
going after looters.

Political:
Mona Suef of the Hisham Mubarak Center appearing on Al Jazeera Intl reported that today there were tens of
thousands of "all types" of Egyptians in Tahrir square including families and children. She added that in clashes between
police and protestors in front of the Ministry of the Interior, the Army acted only as "bystanders." She reported that one
protestor died in those clashes. The Army, she said, was not intervening on behalf of protestors or the police. Al Ahram
analyst Di'a Rashwan told Al Jazeera viewers that the new government might survive if they took advantage of the
historic opportunity to implement reform. This includes constitutional changes and new parliamentary
elections. Rashwan added that Mubarak might even remain at the helm if the new government implemented real
changes. Press is reporting that more than a dozen Egyptian businessmen fled to the UAE.


This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Saturday, January 29, 2011 11:43 PM
To: Cutrona, Aimee; Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A; 'Daniel_B._Shapiro
'Sergio_L_Aguirre                   Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J., Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1; McHale, Judith A; Hensman,
Chris D; NEA-PD-DL
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,
Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew 9; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S
Subject: Cairo Update 2330 January 29

Protests in Tahrir Square continue but the crowd has dwindled noticeably. Media reports that the crowd continues to
chant anti-Mubarak slogans. One staff reports that he witnessed an uptick in anti-American sentiment in Tahrir, with
more chanting slogans against the U.S. After the swearing in of Vice President Suleiman was carried live on Egyptian TV
there have been no additional announcements by Mubarak or members of the new government.

Consular:
Consular staff continue to receive a high volume of calls from Amcits around the city seeking assistance in returning to
the U.S. For most of the afternoon it was a mix of calls from tourists and residents. After dark the majority of calls have

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779007 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779007 Date: 12/31/2015




been from dual national Amcits in areas where looters are prevalent in the neighborhoods. Amcits are reporting no
police or military presence and no answer when they try to phone police stations.

Security:
Earlier this evening, the building adjacent to our 100% USG residential building, Boulas Hanna, was looted. The 10 family
members in Boulas Hanna sought refuge in the safe haven of the top most apartment. A neighborhood watch
eventually ran the looters out of the area as they began to target our building. A second apartment building, this time in
Maadi, was attacked by looters at approx 2000. The embassy maintains two of the eight residences. The looters
departed as a tank approached the building at the request of the Embassy. We have requested the assistance of the
military in securing our residences, Since approximately 2200 we have received a series of reports that military units,
supported by armored vehicles, tanks, and troop trucks, have arrived at our residential compounds in Maadi and
Zamalek. RSO now has direct contact with senior Army commander who has been responsive to requests for emergency
response at several standalone residences where occupants were under siege by looters.

Police are still absent from streets in Cairo. The stand-off between protestors and police at the MOI quieted for some
time, but media reports sporadic but very heavy gunfire from in front of the Ministry of Interior. Two APCs block the
street between Tahrir and the MOI building and several hundred protestors reportedly are milling around.

Press and staff report that some military (and 'civilian militias') were checking ID's randomly to prevent people going
into areas where they do not reside. Numerous reports that civilian militias arrested plain-clothed MOI officers, many of
whom were driving around on motorbikes and were possibly involved in looting.

Political:
Reports are circulating on twitter that Mubarak sons Gamal and Alaa Mubarak have landed in London. The tweets
include what is alleged to be the family's address in London. One contact reports to us that former PM Ahmed Nazif has
departed his home with a "large entourage." An NDP contact tells us that he is frustrated with the current chaos noting
"we" (party reformers) had been warning "them" of this scenario for a long time. He felt that the NDP itself was
moribund, but believed it could return to the political scene if "faces change." He added that the Ahmed Ezz resignation
should have come right after the failed elections. Now it was meaningless. He added, once again we told a "closed
party committee" you can't have "boys" dealing with these issues, but they did not act. The contact said he believed
that people were looking for more than what Mubarak had offered. He added that while some reform measures might
calm people down for a time, they will not be happy unless he goes. Finally, he applauded President Obama's remarks
which he viewed as endorsing the will of the Egyptian people.




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Saturday, January 29, 2011 7:53 PM
To: Cutrona, Aimee; Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A; 'Daniel_B._Shapiro
'Sergio_L._Aguirre                   Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1; McHale, Judith A; Hensman,
Chris D; NEA-PD-DL
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,
 Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S
Subject: Cairo Update 1930 January 29

Violence is escalating in Cairo. There is widespread looting and Embassy staff in Maadi, Mohandiseen and Giza report
gunfire. Press reported an attempt to break into the Central Bank Printing office was thwarted by the Egyptian
Army. Contacts and LES staff report that organized gangs of thugs roam the city and that they believe them to be

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779007 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779007 Date: 12/31/2015



affiliated with the security services. Shops in most neighborhoods are closing. We have several reports that citizens are
forming committees to defend their neighborhoods. An Army general appeared on State TV asking Egyptians to defend
their homes and deal with looters "harshly." He also said the Army would fire on looters.

Protestors continue to arrive in Tahrir square and contacts tell us the atmosphere is peaceful and festive. One contact
told us the crowd is treating the military like "rock stars." Al Hurra TV showed one soldier with a bull horn telling
protestors you may protest as much as you like, but no violence. And, leave the looters to us.

As of 19:10 Egypt Air New York Flight Manager Mr. Tarek Gabr advised that the airport is open and Egypt Air flights are
operational with minor delay.

While several of our contacts see Omar Suleiman as a popular figure with broad support, they see his appointment as
Vice President as too little too late. Contacts report crowds in Tahrir booed the announcement. Many in Tahrir
continue to shout "People and Army, one hand!," but others have shifted from "No Mubarak" to "No Suleiman" or
"Civilian not Military." Staff in Tahrir report some anti-U.S. sentiment, with protestors suggesting that the new Vice
President was hand-picked by the U.S.

Opposition and activist contacts tell us the Soliman announcement, as well as the naming of former military officer and
Civil Aviation Minister Ahmed Shafik as Prime Minister, is "not enough" to satisfy protestors. Some suggest an
immediate end to the Emergency Law or an announcement of the dissolution of parliament and new elections as
needed additional steps. Others say that only Mubarak's departure would be enough to calm the crowds. One contact
told us protestors are now also chanting "Trial for Mubarak." A leader from Baradei's National Association for Change
(NAC) told us that this appointment is "is more of the same," the Mubarak regime with "new faces" and not the change
we are looking for.




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Saturday, January 29, 2011 5:28 PM
To: Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Blame, Donald A; 'Daniel_B._Shapiro
'Sergio_L._Aguirre                   Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,
Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore 3; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S
Subject: Cairo Update 1700 January 29

At approximately 1715 Egyptian TV announced EGIS director Omar Suleiman as Vice President. This was following the
mid-day announcement that that the government had formally resigned and later reports in the afternoon that
President Mubarak was meeting with his new cabinet. Mubarak is expected to make an announcement "shortly."

People continue to flow into Tahrir square. As of 1300, crowds are again swelling in the Maadi and Tahrir Square
areas. Military units have taken up positions throughout the area, many staffed by M60 tanks and a variety of other
types of armored personnel carriers.

We have been able to resume contact with a wide range of activist contacts. All of them tell us that they still believe
protests must continue and that President Mubarak should step down. Several senior activist contacts report that they
are participating in protests. One activist contact told us that he had been shot with a rubber bullet by security outside
the Ministry of the Interior building a block behind the parliament. Protestors have been attempting to reach the MOI
all day.
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779007 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779007 Date: 12/31/2015




At 1330 local time the military announced an expanded curfew which began at 1600 and will end one hour later at
0800. We are watching closely the military's interaction with protestors. Al Jazeera has issued a series reports that
appear contradictory, and suggest a disagreement between the military and the presidency on how to deal with
protestors. NDP SYG Safwat Sherif announced that party organizational secretary Ahmed Ezz, charged with organizing
recent elections, had submitted his resignation. He did not elaborate on the reasons behind the resignation. An NDP
contact told us he believes the police will return to the street "shortly."

Demonstrations continued through the evening of January 28 in Cairo. Finally wearing down in the early morning hours,
only small bands of demonstrators roamed throughout the area of the Embassy by 0600. The Army's Republican Guard
took up positions around the Embassy perimeter beginning at approx 2300. The Colonel who was tasked with our
security was also given the unenviable job of coordinating with the local police. Police were exhausted and demoralized
after having been on duty since Monday.

The battles throughout the day were devastating and the police appeared leaderless and without motivation. The police
have established weak checkpoints adjacent to the bollard lined perimeter of the streets surrounding the US and British
Embassies. The police are not equipped for less than lethal force, carrying sniper rifles, RPGs, machine guns, and AK-
47s. We have, varying reports on the numbers of casualties resulting from clashes yesterday between police and
protestors. The highest estimate we've seen is 150.

We have accounted for 18 of the 23 vehicles taken from our "Polish Parking Lot", approximately 100 meters north of the
embassy. According to local security sources one of the armored vehicles was involved in an accident in which between
3-6 police officers were killed. While attempting to recover the diplomatic plates from one of the vehicles which was
found on the Corniche, approximately 2 miles south of the embassy, one of the ARSOs was chased by a sword and knife
wielding crowd who appeared to be waiting for someone to stop at the vehicle.

Pblice in Maadi, a residential area, were involved in numerous live fire gun fights throughout the night, adjacent to the
embassy residential compound known as 11/11. The embassy continues to advertise the stand fast instruction via the
radio network and the mission phone tree.

Member of El Baradei's National Association for Change (NAC) affirmed to us at 1345 that Baradei had never been under
house arrest, but had remained at his home overnight. Contacts told us the NAC had understood Baradei would go out
today but that he changed his plans this morning and will remain at home. NAC members said they had planned to
protest today but needed to consider the new curfew. The NAC, which includes several opposition parties and protest
movements as well as some members of the MB met this afternoon issued a set of demands that includes replacing
Mubarak, establishing an interim government, drafting a new constitution, an end to the Emergency Law, release of
political prisoners, and a series of economic demands (full text attached). The NAC has also called for the formation of
local popular committees to secure neighborhoods. Egyptian TV is reporting that the Muslim Brotherhood is also
forming its own neighborhood committees. We have been told that the parallel parliament will meet tomorrow to issue
its own statement.

Activist and opposition contacts report that they are disappointed with President Mubarak's speech. They are looking
for more and believe that protests must continue in order to demonstrate that they are serious about change. Several
expected the new Prime Minister would be from the military. Contacts with close contact with the Muslim Brotherhood
affirm the MB played a role in yesterday's protests but believes them "very cautious," suggesting they were never more
than 20 percent of the crowd.

Many newsstands closed today, but newspapers did get published late and were out in some places. Pro Government
papers (Al Ahram, Akhbar, and Gomhouria) all ran similar front page stories re
"Mubarak asks Govt to resign and warns against plots to shake stability & violate legitimacy." Independent and
opposition papers Al Wafd, AMAY, and Al Shorouk were all on the newsstands.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779007 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779007 Date: 12/31/2015




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Tueller, Matthew H
Sent: Saturday, January 29, 2011 12:51 AM
To: Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A; Cutrona, Aimee; 'Daniel_B._Shapirc
Sergio__Aguirre
         L                        ; Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feitman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip J; Catalano, Elise; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob 3; PeIton, Erin
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,
Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S
Subject: Cairo Update midnight Friday

All personnel at the Embassy compound are accounted for and will remain through the night in safe haven
area. Egyptian military have established checkpoints outside the compound perimeter. In coordination with
RSO, DATT, and Ministry of Interior officials the military units appear to be making progress on restoring
control of the roads adjacent to the Embassy. Preliminary assessment is that 23 USG vehicles have been taken
from the Polish parking. We are unable to assess other physical damage to facilities. One Embassy vehicle can
be seen on its side burning on a side street. Guard booth at the north parking lot has been gutted by fire, booth
at one drop arm has been damaged. There are a number of burned police vehicles in the area. Police remaining
around the Embassy are demoralized and extremely tired. Some appear to be under pursuit by protestors.

The number of protestors moving into the main square of the city is increasing notwithstanding the curfew and
deployment of military forces. Sound of gunfire is ongoing.

We have been able to contact and account for all but 9 U.S. Direct Hire employees via landline phone calls or
checking on residences. Efforts to ascertain the whereabouts of those we have been unable to contact are
ongoing.

RSO reports seeing protestors armed with AK-47's and there is gunfire being exchanged between military and
protestors. We also have credible reports of gunfire from Embassy residents in Maadi. Looters have been
observed in Maadi as well as burning of stores and vehicles. Earlier in the evening a large group of protestors
were trying to get to the Israeli Ambassador's residence near the main Maadi police station. ,

Senior Mission staff in our residential neighborhoods spent time before nightfall contacting families and
checking on mood which appears to run the gamut. Many are understandably jittery giving sound of gunfire
and sighting from balconies of fires and looters. As circumstances permit on Saturday we will explore other
ways of convening mission employees and family members to convey information and assess morale.

One consular officer at the Embassy and seven from their homes are fielding calls from concerned U.S.
citizens. We are advising U.S. citizens to remain safely in their homes or hotels. Most U.S. citizen concerns
center around lack of internet access and potential airport closures. We are not aware yet of any Amcits injured
in today's events.

Five private Amcits have taken refuge on the Embassy compound and are in the safe haven area.

Due to communication limitations we are unable to provide any reaction to President Mubarak's speech. Once
mobile phone and internet access is restored, post will make every effort to reach out to wide range of contacts
for an assessment.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779007 Date: 12/31/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779007 Date: 12/31/2015




Matthew H. Tueller
Deputy Chief of Mission
U.S. Embassy Cairo
Office Tel: +202-2-797-2307


SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779007 Date: 12/31/2015
