      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765714 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                            RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                            B3 DIA/NRO/NGA,B6


From:                             sbwhoeop
Sent:                             Thursday, November 12, 2009 9:54 AM
To:                               H
Subject:                          Re: FYI: Murdoch makes his move to Cameron. Attack on BBC to follow. Sid


Peter prided himself on his close personal relationship with Murdoch. He pioneered it for Tony. The thing has come apart
at the seams. Also, Peter has engineered getting himself named momentarily Minister of Information (not a joke from a
Graham Greene novel) and will hold weekly briefings for the press, becoming the public face of the government.
Other subjects: D'Alema is campaigning to be EU foreign secretary. I received a call today from Francesco Olivieri, whom
I mentioned to you, former diplomat, now in DC. Also working for D'Alema is his former aide Marta Dassu, a friend of
mine, now head of Aspen Institute Rome. They are looking to insure that the US stamps him acceptable by having
European papers call John Podesta and have him give anodyne quotes. Francesco reminded me of D'Alema's good
relationship with President Clinton, which was quite true. I do nothing, stay in touch with them.
Also:           desperately wants to send a memo on the limits of counter-insurgency. You remember meeting

      Will send when I receive. I am going back and forth with Bill Murray, who was CIA station chief in Pakistan among
other things, who called and wants to advance his views. Will get.
                                                                                                       B3 D IA/N RO/N GA
Sid
                                                                                                    B6
    Original Message
From: H <HDR22@clintonemail.com>
To: 'sbwhoeop
Sent: Thu, Nov 12, 2009 9:41 am
Subject: Re: FYI: Murdoch makes his move to Cameron. Attack on BBC to follow. Sid

That's quite the match--Murdochs v Mandelson.



        Original Message

From: sbwhoeo.

To: H

Sent: Thu Nov 12 08:51:40 2009

Subject: FYI: Murdoch makes his move to Cameron. Attack on BBC to follow. Sid



The Independent

November 12, 2009



Has Cameron done a deal with Murdoch?



By Andy McSmith




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765714 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765714 Date: 12/31/2015



Lord Mandelson's attabk shines spotlight on Tory leader's links with media mogul




David Cameron has been accused of making a "contract" with Britain's biggest

media company to trade political support before an election for government

favours afterwards if the Tories win.

The accusation was levelled yesterday by the Business Secretary Peter Mandelson,

who is increasingly the public face of Gordon Brown's government. Ministers are

angry at the campaign that The Sun has run against the Prime Minister all this

week over the spelling mistakes in a letter Mr Brown sent to the mother of a

young soldier killed in Afghanistan.

They suspect that the Conservative Party has been tailoring its policies on

media regulation and the BBC to suit the commercial interests of News

International, which owns The Sun, and that the paper's aggressive support for

the Tories is a pay-off that could spread to other parts of the mass media.

Examples of the apparent tie-in between what News International's boss, James

Murdoch, wants, and what David Cameron is ready to promise include the recent

decision by the Conservatives to abandon the idea of "top slicing" the BBC

licence fee. It had been proposed that part of the money paid to the BBC would

be siphoned off to help regional television companies meet the threat from the

internet. But this would also have helped them compete more effectively against

Sky News, which is part of the Murdoch media empire.

When the policy was abandoned in September, Jeremy Hunt,.the shadow Culture

Secretary, said that it was because enacting it might make the commercial

television companies "focus not on attracting viewers but on attracting

subsidies". There was no gain for the BBC in the climbdown, because David

Cameron had already said that the Tories will freeze the licence fee. What it

will mean is that the BBC's income will be capped, without the regional

television companies seeing any government help, which will strengthen the

market position of Britain's only satellite television company, Sky. "This was

done for News International," a Tory insider said yesterday. "Murdoch wants Sky



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765714 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765714 Date: 12/31/2015



to go head to head with the BBC. He doesn't want the independent companies

strengthened."

In April 2008, James Murdoch complained bitterly about the media regulator Ofcom

in his first major speech after taking over as chief executive of News

Corporation in Europe and Asia. The following year, David Cameron announced that

a Conservative government would cut Ofcom down to size.

Last summer James Murdoch attacked the "abysmal record" of the BBC Trust - the

body created by Labour to over see the BBC - in a lecture he gave at the

Edinburgh Festival, singling out its "total failure" to stop the BBC buying the

Lonely Planet travel guides, a takeover that Murdoch denounced as an "egregious"

invasion of private enterprise by the state. Less than two months later, Jeremy

Hunt promised that the Tories would abolish the Trust.

In the same lecture, Murdoch complained that BBC performers like Jonathan Ross

are being paid salaries that "no commercial competitor can afford". He had

barely uttered the words before Ed Vaizey, a shadow media minister, promised

that a Tory government would compel the BBC to publish the salaries of its top

performers.

Lord Mandelson alleged yesterday that the Conservatives and News International

had "effectively formed a contract, over the head, incidentally, of the

newspaper's editor and their readers, in which they are sort of bound to one

another".

Speaking to the BBC's Today programme, he added: "What The Sun can do for the

Conservatives during the election is one part of the contract and, presumably,

what the Conservatives can do for News International if they are elected is the

other side of the bargain. But there is a wider question. When The Sun creates

the news in this way, this is then followed up by Sky News, which then puts

pressure on the BBC to follow suit."

This was "absolutely, categorically" denied yesterday by The Sun's political

editor, Tom Newton Dunn, who accused Lord Mandelson of talking "preposterous

nonsense".

The Sun, which supported Labour through three general elections under Tony



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765714 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765714 Date: 12/31/2015



Blair's leadership, announced that it was jumping ship on the day that Gordon

Brown delivered his annual speech to the Labour Party conference in September.

Its onslaught on Gordon Brown for the mistakes made in a handwritten letter to

Jacqui Janes is the most aggressive attack that the newspaper has directed at

any Labour Party leader since Neil Kinnock stood down after losing the 1992

general election, a defeat for which The Sun claimed victory with the slogan "It

was The Sun wot won it".

But there were signs yesterday that the attack may have rebounded on The Sun. Mr

Brown, who is blind in one eye, has admitted that his handwriting is bad and has

apologised to Mrs Janes, whose 20-year-old son, Jamie, was killed by a makeshift

bomb in Afghanistan last month.

A poll yesterday for the website PoliticsHome, whose main shareholder is the

Conservative Party deputy chairman Lord Ashcroft, found that 65 per cent of

those polled thought that The Sun's attack was "inappropriate" compared with 23

per cent who thought it was "legitimate".

The closeness of the new Tory-Sun axis is shown up by the revelation, from an

inside source, that David Cameron personally consulted the editor of The Sun,

Dominic Mohan, in three separate conversations before he abandoned his

"cast-iron" promise to hold a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty, now that all 27

members states of the EU have ratified it.

Mr Cameron was understandably wary of how The Sun might react to the abandonment

of that promise. The paper has campaigned for years against what it sees as the

growth of an EU superstate. It was in an open letter to readers of The Sun that

Cameron first made his guarantee, two years ago.

His announcement that a referendum is off the agenda was subjected to a scathing

attack in the Daily Mail, but in The Sun it was given kid-glove treatment under

the headline "Cameron's crusade for UK rights".

The person behind this aggressively pro-Tory policy is James Murdoch, not his

father, Rupert, who created The Sun virtually from scratch in the 1970s. Rupert

Murdoch claimed in an interview with Sky News Australia that he "regretted" his

son's decision to turn against Gordon Brown, "who is a friend of mine", but



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765714 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765714 Date: 12/31/2015



defended it on the grounds that Brown has been a "disappointment".

Yesterday, The Times, another Murdoch newspaper, announced that its veteran

political editor, Phil Webster, is leaving the Commons, where he has been based

for decades. Mr Webster is very well thought of by New Labour. His replacement,

Roland Watson, was a friend of David Cameron's at Eton but has no political ties

with the Tories.

Tom Newton Dunn, newly appointed as The Sun's political editor, is another Old

Etonian. His father, Bill, used to be a Tory MEP, but defected to the Liberal

Democrats in 2000.

Independent News and Media Limited
<http://license.icopyright.net/user/external.act?publisher id=1204>




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765714 Date: 12/31/2015
