UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777786 Date: 12/31/2015


                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL


                                         UNCLASSIFIED
                                                                                    August 13, 2014



 Purpose: The purpose of this paper is to articulate a common Afghan-U.S. vision for 2015,
 which will serve as a common aim point to align our efforts in the near term, and as the preamble
 for our Strategic Partnership Declaration to be agreed by May 2011 that will specify details of
 our multi-dimensional long-term relationship.

                                            Vision 2015

 By 2015 — more than 10 years after the Bonn conference and the creation of the Afghan
 constitution — Afghanistan has established a foundation for full and responsible sovereignty and
 is on a path toward sustainable self-reliance in security, governance, economic and social
 development, and regional relations. The United States and Afghanistan have established a
 strong and enduring bilateral partnership which provides the foundation for securing common
 interests and sustaining Afghanistan's security and continued economic growth beyond 2015.

 Afghanistan's sovereignty and territorial integrity are assured and sustained by Afghan security
 forces in the lead across the country, capable of quelling internal threats, supported by a strong
 and enduring bilateral partnership with the United States and an enduring NATO-Afghanistan
 partnership. As a result of international and Afghan efforts since 2001, by 2015, there is no
 significant presence of al-Qa'ida in Afghanistan capable of conducting major attacks within
 Afghanistan or externally beyond Afghanistan's borders. The Taliban insurgency is substantially
 degraded by the combination of military and political means, and does not threaten the
 overthrow of the government. Afghanistan may face residual elements of an armed insurgency,
 but these are diminishing and manageable by Afghan security forces. United States forces
 remain at the invitation of the Afghan government in reduced numbers with the missions of
 supporting Afghan security forces and conducting counter-terrorism operations, and their
 presence is governed by a status of forces agreement.

 Politically, in 2015 Afghanistan's political system remains founded on the Afghan constitution
 and reflects its pluralistic society. Afghanistan's democratic institutions continue to develop.
 Significant factions are no longer contesting the government through armed insurgency, and
 insurgents have reentered the Afghan political process through a combination of reintegration at
 local levels and reconciliation at senior levels. Afghan governmental institutions at all levels
 increase their responsiveness to the civil and economic needs of the Afghan people and deliver
 key services to them. These efforts are bolstered by sustained capacity-building efforts
 undertaken by the United Nations, bilateral partners, and Afghan public and private entities.
 Afghan institutions actively seek to protect and respect the rights of all its citizens, including
 women and minorities, consistent with Afghanistan's Constitution and laws and its international
 human rights obligations. The United States and Afghanistan have a conventional bilateral
 diplomatic relationship, including American diplomatic presence in Kabul and in major urban
 centers.

 Economically, in 2015 Afghanistan is increasingly on the path toward sustainable and equitable
 growth and improved standards of living. The economy continues to grow at a steady pace,
 employment opportunities continue to expand, the financial sector is healthy, and government
 revenue is increasing. Afghanistan's agricultural growth continues and the country is on a path

                                         UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777786 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777786 Date: 12/31/2015




                                        UNCLASSIFIED
                                                                                   August 13, 2014



 to food security. Afghanistan has established a transparent and accountable regulatory regime,
 consistent with international norms and basic rule of law concepts, for collecting and managing
 public resources, including those generated by its natural resource base, which holds the promise
 of fiscal sustainability and increased economic growth. The United States shares Afghan goals
 to achieve self-reliance and prosperity through developing its human and resource potential
 beyond 2015. United States and international assistance has transitioned from stabilization to
 long-term development.

 Regionally, Afghanistan in 2015 has improved strategic relationships with its neighbors
 including Pakistan. Sustained bilateral and multilateral diplomatic engagement of Afghanistan's
 neighbors have built support for our common vision, and are helping mitigate external
 interference, reinforcing the principles of non-interference and sovereignty, and facilitating
 Afghanistan's political and economic integration into the region. Reconciliation led by the
 Government of Afghanistan is supported in the region and among the international community
 states.




                                         UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777786 Date: 12/31/2015
