      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789394 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                           B6


From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                             Monday, March 28, 2011 7:42 PM
To:                               'sullivanjj@state.gov'
Subject:                          Re: EMBARGOED: The President's Address to the Nation on Libya--As Prepared for
                                  Delivery



That's much improved and I think without any of the problems that worried us.


From: Sullivan, Jacob J [mailto:SullivanJJ@state.gov]
Sent: Monday, March 28, 2011 07:29 PM
To: H
Subject: Fw: EMBARGOED: The President's Address to the Nation on Libya--As Prepared for Delivery

Final text


From: Milakofsky, Ben [mailto:
Sent: Monday, March 28, 2011 07:25 PM
To: Lu, Chris                                    Smith, Elizabeth S.                                    ; Greenawalt,
Andrei                                         Phadke, Shilpa                                 McCarthy, Nell
                               Milakofsky, Ben                                            Maisel, Chad P.

Subject: EMBARGOED: The President's Address to the Nation on Libya--As Prepared for Delivery

Dear Chiefs of Staff and WH Liaisons:

Please see the embargoed text of the President's remarks on Libya.

--Cabinet Affairs
                                             THE WHITE HOUSE
                                          Office of the Press Secretary


EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY
March 28, 2011
            The President's Address to the Nation on Libya - As Prepared for Delivery
                                  National Defense University
                                        Washington, DC
                                         March 28, 2011

As Prepared for Delivery —

Good evening. Tonight, I'd like to update the American people on the international effort that we
have led in Libya - what we have done, what we plan to do, and why this matters to us.

I want to begin by paying tribute to our men and women in uniform who, once again, have acted
with courage, professionalism and patriotism. They have moved with incredible speed and strength.
Because of them and our dedicated diplomats, a coalition has been forged and countless lives have
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789394 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789394 Date: 12/31/2015




been saved. Meanwhile, as we speak, our troops are supporting our ally Japan, leaving Iraq to its
people, stopping the Taliban's momentum in Afghanistan, and going after al Qaeda around the
globe. As Commander-in-Chief, I am grateful to our Soldiers, Sailors, Airmen, Marines, Coast
Guardsmen, and their families, as are all Americans.

For generations, the United States of America has played a unique role as an anchor of global security
and advocate for human freedom. Mindful of the risks and costs of military action, we are naturally
reluctant to use force to solve the world's many challenges. But when our interests and values are at
stake, we have a responsibility to act. That is what happened in Libya over the course of these last six
weeks.

Libya sits directly between Tunisia and Egypt - two nations that inspired the world when their
people rose up to take control of their own destiny. For more than four decades, the Libyan people
have been ruled by a tyrant - Moammar Gaddafi. He has denied his people freedom, exploited their
wealth, murdered opponents at home and abroad, and terrorized innocent people around the world
- including Americans who were killed by Libyan agents.

Last month, Gaddafi's grip of fear appeared to give way to the promise of freedom. In cities and
towns across the country, Libyans took to the streets to claim their basic human rights. As one Libyan
said, "For the first time we finally have hope that our nightmare of 40 years will soon be over."

Faced with this opposition, Gaddafi began attacking his people. As President, my immediate concern
was the safety of our citizens, so we evacuated our Embassy and all Americans who sought our
assistance. We then took a series of swift steps in a matter of days to answer Gaddafi's
aggression. We froze more than $33 billion of the Gaddafi regime's assets. Joining with other nations
at the United Nations Security Council, we broadened our sanctions, imposed an arms embargo, and
enabled Gaddafi and those around him to be held accountable for their crimes. I made it clear that
Gaddafi had lost the confidence of his people and the legitimacy to lead, and I said that he needed to
step down from power.

In the face of the world's condemnation, Gaddafi chose to escalate his attacks, launching a military
campaign against the Libyan people. Innocent people were targeted for killing. Hospitals and
ambulances were attacked. Journalists were arrested, sexually assaulted, and killed. Supplies of food
and fuel were choked off. The water for hundreds of thousands of people in Misratah was shut off.
Cities and towns were shelled, mosques destroyed, and apartment buildings reduced to rubble.
Military jets and helicopter gunships were unleashed upon people who had no means to defend
themselves against assault from the air.

Confronted by this brutal repression and a looming humanitarian crisis, I ordered warships into the
Mediterranean. European allies declared their willingness to commit resources to stop the killing. The
Libyan opposition, and the Arab League, appealed to the world to save lives in Libya. At my
direction, America led an effort with our allies at the United Nations Security Council to pass an
historic Resolution that authorized a No Fly Zone to stop the regime's attacks from the air, and
further authorized all necessary measures to protect the Libyan people.

Ten days ago, having tried to end the violence without using force, the international community
offered Gaddafi a final chance to stop his campaign of killing, or face the consequences. Rather than

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789394 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789394 Date: 12/31/2015




stand down, his forces continued their advance, bearing down on the city of Benghazi, home to
nearly 700,000 men, women and children who sought their freedom from fear.

At this point, the United States and the world faced a choice. Gaddafi declared that he would show
"no mercy" to his own people. He compared them to rats, and threatened to go door to door to inflict
punishment. In the past, we had seen him hang civilians in the streets, and kill over a thousand
people in a single day. Now, we saw regime forces on the outskirts of the city. We knew that if we
waited one more day, Benghazi - a city nearly the size of Charlotte - could suffer a massacre that
would have reverberated across the region and stained the conscience of the world.

It was not in our national interest to let that happen. I refused to let that happen. And so nine days
ago, after consulting the bipartisan leadership of Congress, I authorized military action to stop the
killing and enforce UN Security Council Resolution 1973. We struck regime forces approaching
Benghazi to save that city and the people within it. We hit Gaddafi's troops in neighboring Ajdabiya,
allowing the opposition to drive them out. We hit his air defenses, which paved the way for a No Fly
Zone. We targeted tanks and military assets that had been choking off towns and cities and we cut off
much of their source of supply. And tonight, I can report that we have stopped Gaddafi's deadly
advance.

In this effort, the United States has not acted alone. Instead, we have been joined by a strong and
growing coalition. This includes our closest allies - nations like the United Kingdom, France, Canada,
Denmark, Norway, Italy, Spain, Greece, and Turkey - all of whom have fought by our side for
decades. And it includes Arab partners like Qatar and the United Arab Emirates, who have chosen to
meet their responsibility to defend the Libyan people.

To summarize, then: in just one month, the United States has worked with our international partners
to mobilize a broad coalition, secure an international mandate to protect civilians, stop an advancing
army, prevent a massacre, and establish a No Fly Zone with our allies and partners. To lend some
perspective on how rapidly this military and diplomatic response came together, when people were
being brutalized in Bosnia in the 1990s, it took the international community more than a year to
intervene with air power to protect civilians.

Moreover, we have accomplished these objectives consistent with the pledge that I made to the
American people at the outset of our military operations. I said that America's role would be limited;
that we would not put ground troops into Libya; that we would focus our unique capabilities on the
front end of the operation, and that we would transfer responsibility to our allies and partners.
Tonight, we are fulfilling that pledge.

Our most effective alliance, NATO, has taken command of the enforcement of the arms embargo and
No Fly Zone. Last night, NATO decided to take on the additional responsibility of protecting Libyan
civilians. This transfer from the United States to NATO will take place on Wednesday. Going
forward, the lead in enforcing the No Fly Zone and protecting civilians on the ground will transition
to our allies and partners, and I am fully confident that our coalition will keep the pressure on
Gaddafi's remaining forces. In that effort, the United States will play a supporting role - including
intelligence, logistical support, search and rescue assistance, and capabilities to jam regime
communications. Because of this transition to a broader, NATO-based coalition, the risk and cost of
this operation - to our military, and to American taxpayers - will be reduced significantly.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789394 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789394 Date: 12/31/2015




So for those who doubted our capacity to carry out this operation, I want to be clear: the United
States of America has done what we said we would do.

That is not to say that our work is complete. In addition to our NATO responsibilities, we will work
with the international community to provide assistance to the people of Libya, who need food for the
hungry and medical care for the wounded. We will safeguard the more than $33 billion that was
frozen from the Gaddafi regime so that it is available to rebuild Libya. After all, this money does not
belong to Gaddafi or to us - it belongs to the Libyan people, and we will make sure they receive it.

Tomorrow, Secretary Clinton will go to London, where she will meet with the Libyan opposition and
consult with more than thirty nations. These discussions will focus on what kind of political effort is
necessary to pressure Gaddafi, while also supporting a transition to the future that the Libyan people
deserve. Because while our military mission is narrowly focused on saving lives, we continue to
pursue the broader goal of a Libya that belongs not to a dictator, but to its people.

Despite the success of our efforts over the past week, I know that some Americans continue to have
questions about our efforts in Libya. Gaddafi has not yet stepped down from power, and until he
does, Libya will remain dangerous. Moreover, even after Gaddafi does leave power, forty years of
tyranny has left Libya fractured and without strong civil institutions. The transition to a legitimate
government that is responsive to the Libyan people will be a difficult task. And while the United
States will do our part to help, it will be a task for the international community, and - more
importantly - a task for the Libyan people themselves.

In fact, much of the debate in Washington has put forward a false choice when it comes to Libya. On
the one hand, some question why America should intervene at all - even in limited ways - in this
distant land. They argue that there are many places in the world where innocent civilians face brutal
violence at the hands of their government, and America should not be expected to police the world,
particularly when we have so many pressing concerns here at home.

It is true that America cannot use our military wherever repression occurs. And given the costs and
risks of intervention, we must always measure our interests against the need for action. But that
cannot be an argument for never acting on behalf of what's right. In this particular country - Libya; at
this particular moment, we were faced with the prospect of violence on a horrific scale. We had a
unique ability to stop that violence: an international mandate for action, a broad coalition prepared to
join us, the support of Arab countries, and a plea for help from the Libyan people themselves. We
also had the ability to stop Gaddafi's forces in their tracks without puffing American troops on the
ground.

To brush aside America's responsibility as a leader and - more profoundly - our responsibilities to
our fellow human beings under such circumstances would have been a betrayal of who we are. Some
nations may be able to turn a blind eye to atrocities in other countries. The United States of America
is different. And as President, I refused to wait for the images of slaughter and mass graves before
taking action.

Moreover, America has an important strategic interest in preventing Gaddafi from overrunning those
who oppose him. A massacre would have driven thousands of additional refugees across Libya's
borders, putting enormous strains on the peaceful - yet fragile - transitions in Egypt and Tunisia. The
democratic impulses that are dawning across the region would be eclipsed by the darkest form of
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789394 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789394 Date: 12/31/2015




dictatorship, as repressive leaders concluded that violence is the best strategy to cling to power. The
writ of the UN Security Council would have been shown to be little more than empty words,
crippling its future credibility to uphold global peace and security. So while I will never minimize the
costs involved in military action, I am convinced that a failure to act in Libya would have carried a far
greater price for America.

Now, just as there are those who have argued against intervention in Libya, there are others who
have suggested that we broaden our military mission beyond the task of protecting the Libyan
people, and do whatever it takes to bring down Gaddafi and usher in a new government.

Of course, there is no question that Libya - and the world - will be better off with Gaddafi out of
power. I, along with many other world leaders, have embraced that goal, and will actively pursue it
through non-military means. But broadening our military mission to include regime change would
be a mistake.

The task that I assigned our forces - to protect the Libyan people from immediate danger, and to
establish a No Fly Zone - carries with it a UN mandate and international support. It is also what the
Libyan opposition asked us to do. If we tried to overthrow Gaddafi by force, our coalition would
splinter. We would likely have to put U.S. troops on the ground, or risk killing many civilians from
the air. The dangers faced by our men and women in uniform would be far greater. So would the
costs, and our share of the responsibility for what comes next.

To be blunt, we went down that road in Iraq. Thanks to the extraordinary sacrifices of our troops and
the determination of our diplomats, we are hopeful about Iraq's future. But regime change there took
eight years, thousands of American and Iraqi lives, and nearly a trillion dollars. That is not something
we can afford to repeat in Libya.

As the bulk of our military effort ratchets down, what we can do - and will do - is support the
aspirations of the Libyan people. We have intervened to stop a massacre, and we will work with our
allies and partners as they're in the lead to maintain the safety of civilians. We will deny the regime
arms, cut off its supply of cash, assist the opposition, and work with other nations to hasten the day
when Gaddafi leaves power. It may not happen overnight, as a badly weakened Gaddafi tries
desperately to hang on to power. But it should be clear to those around Gadaffi, and to every Libyan,
that history is not on his side. With the time and space that we have provided for the Libyan people,
they will be able to determine their own destiny, and that is how it should be.

Let me close by addressing what this action says about the use of America's military power, and
America's broader leadership in the world, under my presidency.

As Commander-in-Chief, I have no greater responsibility than keeping this country safe. And no
decision weighs on me more than when to deploy our men and women in uniform. I have made it
clear that I will never hesitate to use our military swiftly, decisively, and unilaterally when necessary
to defend our people, our homeland, our allies, and our core interests. That is why we are going after
al Qaeda wherever they seek a foothold. That is why we continue to fight in Afghanistan, even as we
have ended our combat mission in Iraq and removed more than 100,000 troops from that country.

There will be times, though, when our safety is not directly threatened, but our interests and values
are. Sometimes, the course of history poses challenges that threaten our common humanity and
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789394 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789394 Date: 12/31/2015




common security - responding to natural disasters, for example; or preventing genocide and keeping
the peace; ensuring regional security, and maintaining the flow of commerce. These may not be
America's problems alone, but they are important to us, and they are problems worth solving. And in
these circumstances, we know that the United States, as the world's most powerful nation, will often
be called upon to help.

In such cases, we should not be afraid to act - but the burden of action should not be America's alone.
As we have in Libya, our task is instead to mobilize the international community for collective action.
Because contrary to the claims of some, American leadership is not simply a matter of going it alone
and bearing all of the burden ourselves. Real leadership creates the conditions and coalitions for
others to step up as well; to work with allies and partners so that they bear their share of the burden
and pay their share of the costs; and to see that the principles of justice and human dignity are upheld
by all.

That's the kind of leadership we have shown in Libya. Of course, even when we act as part of a
coalition, the risks of any military action will be high. Those risks were realized when one of our
planes malfunctioned over Libya. Yet when one of our airmen parachuted to the ground, in a country
whose leader has so often demonized the United States - in a region that has such a difficult history
with our country - this American did not find enemies. Instead, he was met by people who embraced
him. One young Libyan who came to his aid said, "We are your friends. We are so grateful to these
men who are protecting the skies."

This voice is just one of many in a region where a new generation is refusing to be denied their rights
and opportunities any longer. Yes, this change will make the world more complicated for a time.
Progress will be uneven, and change will come differently in different countries. There are places, like
Egypt, where this change will inspire us and raise our hopes. And there will be places, like Iran,
where change is fiercely suppressed. The dark forces of civil conflict and sectarian war will have to be
averted, and difficult political and economic concerns addressed.

The United States will not be able to dictate the pace and scope of this change. Only the people of the
region can do that. But we can make a difference. I believe that this movement of change cannot be
turned back, and that we must stand alongside those who believe in the same core principles that
have guided us through many storms: our opposition to violence directed against one's own citizens;
our support for a set of universal rights, including the freedom for people to express themselves and
choose their leaders; our support for governments that are ultimately responsive to the aspirations of
the people.

Born, as we are, out of a revolution by those who longed to be free, we welcome the fact that history
is on the move in the Middle East and North Africa, and that young people are leading the way.
Because wherever people long to be free, they will find a friend in the United States. Ultimately, it is
that faith - those ideals - that are the true measure of American leadership.

My fellow Americans, I know that at a time of upheaval overseas - when the news is filled with
conflict and change - it can be tempting to turn away from the world. And as I have said before, our
strength abroad is anchored in our strength at home. That must always be our North Star - the ability
of our people to reach their potential, to make wise choices with our resources, to enlarge the
prosperity that serves as a wellspring of our power, and to live the values that we hold so dear.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789394 Date: 12/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789394 Date: 12/31/2015




But let us also remember that for generations, we have done the hard work of protecting our own
people, as well as millions around the globe. We have done so because we know that our own future
is safer and brighter if more of mankind can live with the bright light of freedom and dignity.
Tonight, let us give thanks for the Americans who are serving through these trying times, and the
coalition that is carrying our effort forward; and let us look to the future with confidence and hope
not only for our own country, but for all those yearning for freedom around the world. Thank you,
God Bless you, and may God Bless the United States of America.

###
The White House 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW • Washington DC 20500 • 202-456-1111




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789394 Date: 12/31/2015
