      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788149 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                 B6


From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Sunday, January 22, 2012 8:00 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Burma: Update from David Eubank, Free Burma Rangers

Importance:                       High




From: Aung Din
Sent: Sunday, January 22, 2012 04:48 PM
To: Campbell, Kurt M; Mitchell, Derek 3; Yun, Joseph Y; Posner, Michael H; Baer, Daniel B; Verveer, Melanne S; Rapp,
Stephen J; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob 3; deBacaLC@state.gov <deBacaLC@state.gov>; Kennelly, Nan E
Cc: Murphy, W Patrick; Barboriak, Eric M; Nanavatty, Katharine Bernsohn; Osullivan, Susan X (DRL); May, Stacey A;
Murphy, Erin L; Landry, Kelly C; Busby, Scott W; Trani Hoa T; Yu, Wenchi; Laszczych, Joanne; Taylor, Mark B;
Honigstein, Michael D; Schwartz, Robert L; Harkin, Jennifer M; Luehrs, Anne M
Subject: Burma: Update from David Eubank, Free Burma Rangers

Dear All,

Below is an email update from David Eubank, Director of Free Burma Rangers who is now in West of
Kyaukkyi Township in Karen State, providing humanitarian assistance to IDPs in that area.
I would like to request your attention on his update.

Best regards,

Aung Din

From: David Eubank
Sent: Saturday, January 21, 2012 1:11 PM
To: jennifer                          ; aungdin
Subject: from dave

Dear Jen and Aung Din,

We are relaying this update out from where we are on relief missions in Karen State, Burma. In spite of
positive changes in Burma; such as release of many political prisoners, easing of
restrictions on the press, and beginning of ceasefire talks with Shan, Chin, and Karen groups, the Burma Army
continues its attacks in some ethnic areas and resupplying in all areas.

Here in Karen State there is no ceasefire we see on the ground yet in spite of talks between the Burma Army
and the pro-democracy Karen resistance- Karen National Union (KNU). In Northern Burma over 40,000 Kachin
villagers have been displaced by ongoing attacks in an offensive by over 100 Burma Army battalions. Tonight,
Karen, Karenni, Mon and Shan team members here all expressed concern that the attacks against the Kachin,
while ceasefire talks were being held with other groups, was a continuation of the government's divide and
rule strategy. They asked,
"While the army offers talks with us and then attacks the Kachin, how can we believe they are sincere?"


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788149 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788149 Date: 12/31/2015




Among the many patients we treated here recently, there were a little boy who was burned and a mother in
labor whom we could provide funds for treatment, but could not fully treat in the jungle. But because of the
KNU, we were able to send the mother through Burma Amy lines to a hospital and to make arrangements for
the boy to be sent out later. The resistance is strong in these areas and is limiting Burma Army attacks on
villages. The situation in other ethic areas varies from the ability to hold back the Burma Army and provide
services, to just holding on and
trying to survive. In all areas, wherever people choose to resist together, there is freedom and this freedom
shines as a beacon of hope throughout Burma and to the whole world. Earlier, during Christmas here, I was
giving out gifts and I asked if anyone needed anything else. We all stopped still when one of our lady medics,
                       , said, "I want my father and mother." When she was 16 years old, on Christmas Day, her
parents were shot dead in their home by the Burma Army. I went over to her, held her hand and prayed. I told
her I was sorry. She looked at me and said, "It is ok," and as I looked into her eyes, she smiled. Hsa Kae has
chosen in the midst of her sadness to reach out and help others.

All of us can reach out and help respond to the current changes with prayer, openness, unity and confidence
in the truths we stand on: that people were made to be free, that love is the greatest power of all, that justice
must be done and that reconciliation is the only way to real peace. Maybe by the time you get this there will
real ceasefires but we want to testify to what we see now. We have sent the letter below to the government
of the Union of Myanmar (Burma).

Dear leaders of the Union of Myanmar,

We pray for you and encourage you to reconcile with all the people of
Burma and if there is any constructive way we can help you in this
please let us know.

Thank you and may God bless you,

Free Burma Rangers.

Our 59 relief teams from 11 different ethnic groups - Karen, Karenni, Kayan, Pa-Oh, Naga, Kachin, Chin, Lahu,
Arakan, Mon, and Shan — continue to bring help, hope and love to people under attack, to shine a light on the
situation, and to build up young leaders for freedom, justice and reconciliation in Burma. As one of our new
Rangers said about the uprising in 1988, "Now I realize that we made a mistake in 1988 by not showing the
Burma Army generals love. The students called for punishment and the generals reacted by cracking down
until today. The next time, we must show love and forgiveness to the generals. Then we will win." We have
been praying for change in Burma based on this kind of love and are supporting the process of dialogue,
understanding, and, we hope, an end to the conflict. But it has not ended and we will keep giving help, hope
and love to those in need and doing our best to shine a light.

Thank you and God bless you, Dave, family and teams




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788149 Date: 12/31/2015
