      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785999 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                               RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                               B6


From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Wednesday, December 28, 2011 9:11 AM
To:
Subject:                          FW: Segregation and Harassment of Women Increases in Israel as Ultra-Orthodox
                                  Community Moves into Secular Cities
Attachments:                      StateSeal.gif


                                                                                                                          B6
From: Lurie, Mike
Sent: Wednesday, December 28, 2011 7:30 AM
To: NEA-Staff-Assistants-DL; NEA-IPA-DL; NEA-SEMEP-DL; SGWI; DRL-NESCA-DL; Lillis, Amy J; Renner, Erin B; Toiv,
Nora F; 'rwaller                'ssimon                'jfiner
Cc: Tel Aviv Front Office; Tel Aviv POL Section; Tel Aviv ECON; Tel Aviv PD; Crippen, Ramona S; Arellano, Juan L; Mire,
Lawrence J
Subject: FW: Segregation and Harassment of Women Increases in Israel as Ultra-Orthodox Community Moves into
Secular Cities

FYI



                                                  UNCLASSIFIED
                                                          SBU




MRN:                           11 TEL AVIV 4354
Date/DTG:                      Dec 28, 2011 / 281221Z DEC 11
From:                          AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
Action:                        WASHDC, SECSTATE ROUTINE
E.O.:                          13526
TAGS:                          PGOV, PHUM, KWMN, KIRF, IS
Captions:                      SENSITIVE
Reference:                     A) 11 TEL AVIV 930
                               B) 11 TEL AVIV 1505
Subject:                       Segregation and Harassment of Women Increases in Israel as Ultra-Orthodox Community
                               Moves into Secular Cities


 1. (SBU) Summary and Comment: Two recent incidents have highlighted a public debate on women's rights in
 Israel. In one case, a religious women named Tanya Rosenblit refused to move to the back of a public bus from Ashdod
 to Jerusalem. In another case, media reported on an extremist group of ultra-Orthodox who spit on and cursed at
 eight-year-old AmCit Naama Margolese in the town of Beit Shemesh, apparently because she was wearing "immodest"
 clothes. In response, PM Netanyahu spoke against segregation and harassment of women at recent Cabinet meetings,
 and appointed an inter-ministerial team to examine the recent incidents and submit recommendations within 60


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785999 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785999 Date: 12/31/2015




days. A protest against segregation of women in Beit Shemesh attracted 3,000-4,000 people December 27, including
Leader of the Opposition Tzippi Livni and several other Knesset members.

2. (SBU) Some political pundits and opponents, including Livni, are casting this issue as part of a wider "culture war"
against religious-backed elements who are demanding gender segregation in public spaces. But this debate is also
reflective of a struggle within the wider Israeli Orthodox Jewish sector, between mainstream modern Orthodox and
ultra-Orthodox Jews (also called "Haredim") on one hand, and small groups of zealots. As ultra-Orthodox families move
to predominantly secular Jewish cities like Ashdod and Beit Shemesh from traditional Haredi neighborhoods, they seek
to "sanctify" their new communities, including in the public square. Spitting on young girls for wearing "immodest
clothing" is an extreme phenomenon that draws nearly universal condemnation within the ultra-Orthodox
community. But many Haredim, and also some modern Orthodox, support calls for greater gender separation in public
spaces. The Israeli Supreme Court has already ruled to forbid forced gender segregation on public buses—and the
government has stated its intention to enforce this ruling and related laws. End Summary and Comment.

Case One: The "Rosa Parks of Israel"

3. (SBU) On December 16, Ashdod resident Tanya Rosenblit boarded a bus headed for Jerusalem. She was the first
passenger that morning so she sat behind the driver. As ultra-Orthodox male passengers boarded the bus they
demanded that she sit in the back of the bus as is common on that route which connects a religious neighborhood in
Ashdod with one in Jerusalem. She refused to move, even after the driver and a policeman intervened and asked her
to move to the back (see http://www.vnetnews.com/articles/0,7340,L-4163399,00.html for Rosenblit's account of the
incident.) Newspapers and social media sites dubbed Rosenblit the "Rosa Parks of Israel." Israeli officials were quick to
denounce the incident. At the December 18 Cabinet meeting, PM Netanyahu said "Today I heard about a case of
moving a woman on a bus. I strongly oppose this. I think that marginal groups cannot be allowed to dismantle our
common denominator and we must maintain the public space as an open and safe for all Israelis."

4. (SBU) On January 7, 2011 the Supreme Court ruled that gender segregation on public buses could not be imposed or
ordered, but could occur only on a voluntary basis. The NGO Israel Religious Action Center (IRAC), told us that they
have received several outside complaints since the Supreme Court ruling and that their staff has also been harassed
and asked to sit in the back of buses on undercover rides to investigate the incidence of segregation. IRAC filed a
petition to the Supreme Court in 2007 against the practice of segregation and "modesty" rules (e.g., long skirts, no
pants, covered sleeves and collar bones) on separate buses known as "mehadrin" lines operated by the Israeli public
bus company, Egged. Transportation Minister Yisrael Katz (Likud) submitted a recommendation to the Supreme Court
in 2010 that "mehadrin lines" be allowed to operate on a voluntary basis. He suggested that buses should be allowed
to put up "signs that provide an explanation and a request from the passengers to sit separately — while stressing that
there is no obligation to do so." In its ruling, the Supreme Court declared that "A public transportation operator, like
any other person, does not have the right to order, request or tell women where they may sit simply because they are
women...they must sit wherever they like."

Case Two: Report of Spitting at Eight-Year-Old Girl

5. (SBU) On the heels of public outcry over segregation on public buses, Channel 2 aired a video report December 23
that included an interview of Naama Margolese, an 8-year-old Amcit girl from a modern orthodox (or "national
religious") family in Beit Shemesh who was allegedly spit on and cursed at on her way to school (see
http://972mag.com/watch-ultra-orthodox-spit-on-immodest-8-year-old-girl-in-bet-shemesh/31268/ for full video and
English subtitles). PM Netanyahu was once again quick to condemn the harassment. At the December 25 Cabinet
meeting, PM Netanyahu stated that "In liberal, western democracies the public space is open and secure for everyone -
- men and women alike. There is no place here for any harassment or discrimination." He instructed Attorney General
Yehuda Weinstein to determine whether the laws against segregation of women were being enforced by municipalities
and to examine whether signs in streets instructing women to use the other side of the street were legal. He also
appointed an inter-ministerial team to examine the recent incidents and submit recommendations within 60 days,
including sanctions on municipalities where such segregation occurs. After the Beit Shemesh municipality announced

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785999 Date: 12/31/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785999 Date: 12/31/2015




December 26 they would install 300-400 cameras to monitor harassment of women, there were reports of riots and
one police officer sustained mild injuries after he was hit by a stone.

Beit Shemesh Center in Eye of Storm


6. (SBU) A Beit Shemesh contact who is a neighbor of the Margolese family told us that the problem of segregation has
existed for a number of years and neither the municipality nor the police have done anything about it. He estimated
that there are a group of about 50 men who fall into the zealot category of spitting at women and girls, but that no one
appears ready to stop them. Recent efforts to take down segregation signs on public streets have largely failed, as new
ones are put up or spray painted to replace the old ones. He was not hopeful that anything would change. A Haredi
advisor to the IDF, GOI and city of Beit Shemesh also told us that the number of zealots was small, but estimated that
up to 25 percent of the ultra-Orthodox community in Beit Shemesh passively supported them. He said that these
zealots do not require rabbinical acceptance and that they are unlikely to compromise, especially in light of media
attention. A protest in Beit Shemesh December 27 against segregation attracted 3000-4000 people, including MKs
Tzippi Livni and Shelly Yacimovich. Reacting to the protest, on December 27, PM Netanyahu said at the opening of the
country's annual Bible Quiz that "We have recently witnessed an unacceptable phenomenon of the exclusion of women
from the public domain, which contradicts the spirit of the Biblical tradition and contradicts the values of Judaism, since
it is said 'love thy neighbor.'"

Comment Pressures On the Ultra-Orthodox Leadership to Speak Out Against Zealots

7. (SBU) The Haredi leadership has strongly condemned the Beit Shemesh spitting incident, but is largely defensive of
gender segregation. Both Minister of Interior Eli Yishai (chairman of the religiously oriented SHAS political party) and
leading Ashkenazi Rabbi Shalom Elyashiv have called on followers to boycott GOI programs set up for ultra-Orthodox in
national and military service in protest of what they view as an unfair, sweeping attack against the sector. However,
despite public defensiveness, an internal debate within the religious community is slowly brewing, and some are calling
for more forthright community actions against zealots. SHAS rebel MK Haim Amsellem has publicly visited the
Margolese family and spoken out against the zealots. One columnist in the Haredi on-line newspaper Kikar HaShabbat
stated in a December 27 op-ed, "When all the other bus-passengers in the ultra-Orthodox neighborhoods in Jerusalem
run away from a group of rioters who expel women in disgrace and remain silent, can someone still be surprised why
the Prime Minister, and even the U.S. Secretary of State think that this topic has transgressed all possible borders?"


Signature:                     SHAPIRO


Drafted By:                    TEL AVIV:Lurie, Mike D
Cleared By:                    CONS - ACS:Crippen, Ramona S
                               POL:Silverman, Robert J
Approved By:                   Front Office:Goldberger, Thomas H
Released By:                   TEL AVIV:Lurie, Mike D
Info:                          ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE ROUTINE
XMT:                           AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI


Action Post:
Dissemination Rule:            Released Copy




                                                   UNCLASSIFIED
                                                       SBU


        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785999 Date: 12/31/2015
