      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782550 Date: 12/31/2015


                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                  B6



From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, September 8, 2011 4:10 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: Guest List for the First Lady's Box at the President's Address to Congress




From: King, Colleen
Sent: Thursday, September 08, 2011 03:43 PM
To: King, Colleen
Subject: Guest List for the First Lady's Box at the President's Address to Congress

Dear Chiefs of Staff and WH Liaisons:

Please see below the guest list for the First Lady's box at tonight's address.

Thank you.

--Cabinet Affairs



                                                THE WHITE HOUSE
                                             Office of the Press Secretary

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
September 8, 2011

                Guest List for the First Lady's Box at the President's Address to Congress

Jeffrey Immelt
Jeffrey R. Immelt is the ninth chairman and CEO of GE, a post he has held since September 7, 2001.
Immelt currently serves as the chairman of the President's Council on Jobs and
Competitiveness. Immelt has held several global leadership positions since coming to GE in 1982,
including roles in GE's Plastics, Appliance, and Medical businesses. In 1989 he became an officer of
GE and joined the GE Capital Board in 1997. In 2000, Immelt was appointed president and chief
executive officer. Immelt has been named one of the "World's Best CEOs" three times by Barron's,
and since he began serving as chief executive officer, GE has been named "America's Most Admired
Company" in a poll conducted by Fortune magazine and one of "The World's Most Respected
Companies" in polls by Barron's and the Financial Times. • Immelt is also a member of The Business
Council, and he is on the board of the New York Federal Reserve Bank. Mr. Immelt earned a B.A.
degree in applied mathematics from Dartmouth College in 1978 and an M.B.A. from Harvard
University in 1982. He and his wife have one daughter.

Steve Case
Steve Case, currently chairman & CEO of Revolution LLC and chairman of the Startup America
Partnership, is one of America's most accomplished entrepreneurs and philanthropists. Steve co-

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782550 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782550 Date: 12/31/2015




founded America Online in 1985, and under his leadership, AOL became the world's largest and
most valuable Internet company. In 2005, Steve founded Revolution LLC, focused on investing in and
building disruptive, innovative, consumer-facing companies such as Zipcar, LivingSocial and
Exclusive Resorts. Earlier this year at the White House, Case helped launch the Startup America
Partnership, an independent private-sector coalition delivering strategic and substantive resources to
help entrepreneurs start and scale companies across the U.S., in response to the President's call to
action. Case also serves as a co-chair of the National Advisory Council on Innovation and
Entrepreneurship, and is a member of the President's Council on Jobs and Competitiveness, where he
co-chairs the working group on high-growth companies. In addition, Steve chairs the Case
Foundation, which seeks to tap new technologies and entrepreneurial approaches to help strengthen
the social sector.

Darlene Miller
Darlene Miller is a small business owner and CEO of Permac Industries, a precision machining
company custom manufacturing precision parts for customers worldwide in virtually all industries
located in Burnsville, Minnesota. Miller currently serves as a member of the President's Council on
Jobs and Competitiveness. She started working as a Sales Representative at Permac in 1992, became
part owner in 1993 to 100% ownership of the company in 1994. Under Miller's leadership Permac
Industries was named the U.S. Chamber Small Business of the Year for the entire USA in 2008. Miller
is currently a member of the U.S. Chamber Board of Directors and Advisory Council, board of
directors for PMPA and MPMA (Manufacturing Trade Associations), and the Minnesota Valley
Medical Manufacturers network (MEDNET), which she co-founded in 2006.

Kenneth Chenault
Kenneth Chenault is the Chairman and CEO of American Express Company. Ken Chenault joined
American Express in September 1981 and assumed his current responsibilities as CEO and Chairman
in 2001. Chenault currently serves as a member of the President's Council on Jobs and
Competitiveness. Chenault serves on the boards of American Express and several other corporate
and nonprofit organizations; including IBM, The Procter & Gamble Company, the Arthur Ashe
Institute for Urban Health, the National Center on Addiction & Substance Abuse at Columbia
University, the Smithsonian Institution's Advisory Council for the National Museum of African
American History & Culture, and the World Trade Center Memorial Foundation. He also is on the
boards of the Partnership for New York City, The Business Council and the Business Roundtable and
serves as Vice Chairman of each of these organizations.

Richard Trumka
Richard Trumka is the president of the AFL-CIO. Mr. Trumka was elected president of the AFL-CIO
in September 2009. His election followed 14 years of service as Secretary-Treasurer of the AFL-CIO.
Trumka is a third-generation coal miner from Nemacolin, Penn., began working in the mines at age
19. Trumka currently serves as a member of the President's Council on Jobs and Competitiveness. As
a member of UMWA Local 6290, he served as Chairman of the Safety Committee. He soon became an
activist in the Miners for Democracy reform movement. Trumka worked in the mines for more than
seven years, supporting himself while attending Pennsylvania State University, where earned a
Bachelor of Science degree, and through Villanova University, where he received a law degree. He
served four years on the legal staff of the United Mine Workers before returning to the coal mines in
1979. He was elected to the UMWA executive board in 1981 and elected international president in
1982.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782550 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782550 Date: 12/31/2015




Governor Martin O'Malley
Governor Martin O'Malley is currently serving his second term as governor of Maryland. He also
serves as the chair of the Democratic Governors Association and co-chair of the National Governor's
Association's Special Committee on Homeland Security and Public Safety. Prior to assuming the
governorship, O'Malley served on the Baltimore City Council from 1991 to 1999, was appointed
assistant state's attorney for the city of Baltimore, and then served as the Mayor of Baltimore for two
terms. As Governor, O'Malley has focused on job creation by spurring innovation in all sectors of
business, academia, and government. O'Malley holds a BA from Catholic University and JD from the
University of Maryland. He and his wife, Katie, a District court judge have four children.

Mayor Mark Mallory
A lifelong Cincinnatian, Mallory was elected Mayor of Cincinnati. in 2005 and won a second term in
2009. In 1994, he succeeded his father, Majority Floor Leader William L. Mallory, Sr., in the Ohio
House of Representatives. Four years later, he moved to the Ohio Senate where he rose to the
position of Assistant Minority Leader. He is the first directly-elected black Mayor of Cincinnati and
holds a bachelor's degree from the University of Cincinnati.

Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa
Antonio Villaraigosa was first elected mayor in 2005, then re-elected in 2009. He is the current
resident of the U.S. Conference of Mayors (USCM). In 2008, Mayor Villaraigosa passed a sales tax
increase to invest in creating 166,000 transportation jobs in Los Angeles. As president of USCM, he
has led a bipartisan coalition of 165 mayors in support of an extension of the transportation
reauthorization bill.

Dr. Albert Green
Dr. Green is CEO of Kent Displays, a rapidly expanding small business in Kent, Ohio, and serves on
its Board of Directors. He has held these positions since joining the company in June 2007. In
February, Dr. Green participated in the "Winning the Future Small Business Forum" in Cleveland. As
Kent Displays CEO, he has used his unique skill set to drive development and commercialization of
the company's ReflexTM No Power LCDs for several high growth applications including eReaders,
eWriters, electronic skins and eCard displays. Since Dr. Green took the reins of Kent Displays CEO in
2007, he has guided the company's transition from a focus on research and development to product
development and manufacturing. Under his leadership, Kent Displays successfully launched the
award-winning Boogie Board LCD Writing Tablet in 2010 and formed Improv Electronics, a Kent
Displays subsidiary focused on consumer products. The tablet's writing surface is a flexible Reflex
LCD manufactured on the world's only roll-to-roll LCD production line, which began operation in
2008 at the company's headquarters in Kent, Ohio. This successful consumer product has driven a
doubling of revenue and employment in the past 2 years.

Jan Heister
Jan Heister is president and chairperson of the Board of Directors for Premier Tooling and Mfg., Inc.
in Peosta, Iowa. Jan participated in a small business session during the Rural Economic Forum in
Peosta, Iowa last month. Jan originally became involved in the office and administrative operations
of Premier to relieve James Heister of a number of duties in these areas. These duties have expanded
over the past few years to encompass her current total management of the company. Prior to joining
Premier, Jan worked in hospital and clinic settings as a Registered Nurse. While working in the
hospital she served as supervisor of an operating room, recovery room, and charge nurse on the

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782550 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782550 Date: 12/31/2015




medical-surgical unit. She has also worked 12 years as an office nurse in an orthopedic clinic. Jan is a
graduate of The Finley Hospital School of Nursing.

Philip Maung
Philip Maung is a small business owner and founder of Hissho Sushi, a 200-employee company
headquartered in southwest Charlotte that trains sushi chefs and distributes ingredients for the food
across the country. The company was founded 13 years ago. The company has grown consistently in
the past decade, including a 62 percent increase in revenues last year. Philip Maung arrived in
America with just $13 in his pocket and a dream of making a new life. He pursued the emerging
supermarket sushi industry and spent years learning every facet of the sushi business. In 1998, Philip
and his wife Kristina pooled.their finances to form Hissho Sushi and founded the company in the
family dining room. The company began providing fresh sushi daily to supermarkets and
cafes. Today, Hissho Sushi is a dynamic foodservice and distribution company managing and
operating more than 400 sushi bars across the U.S. Their 46,000 square foot, state-of-the-art
headquarters are located in Charlotte, NC.

Gracey Ibarra
Gracey Ibarra, a mother of two children, is a 2009 high school graduate and has earned her Certified
Nursing Assistant (CNA) certification. Gracey enrolled in the WIA Youth Program through Inter-
County Community Council, which combined education with clinical experience and led her to a
career in the medical field. She currently works as a CNA in a nursing home.

Joseph Kidd
Joseph Kidd, a 30 year old father, joined the U.S. Navy in 2003 and completed Hospital Corpsman
School. Upon graduation, Kidd received his orders to Naval Hospital Okinawa, in Japan. Once his
rotation was complete, he moved to Camp Lejeune, NC. While at Camp Lejeune, Kidd was attached
to a Marine Corps command, and deployed to Iraq in 2007. After he returned from Iraq, his daughter
was born in January of 2009, and he was deployed again in May of 2009 as part of the 22D Marine
Expeditionary Unit. Once Kidd returned, he was appointed to the Emergency Room at Camp Lejeune
and later became the Leading Petty Officer. In April 2011, Kidd received his separation orders. In
August, Kidd was one of five veterans to eat lunch with President Obama in Cannon Falls, MN
during the rural bus tour. Kidd asked the President to help with credentialing programs that would
allow a service member to take his or her skills from the military directly into the private sector. The
President's staff is now actively working on the concept of a "career ready military." In late August,
Kidd returned to school and studying pre-nursing.

John Raftery
John Raftery served in the U.S. Marine Corp with 1st Marine Division and currently serves as the
president and CEO of Patriot Contractors, a construction firm, specializing in interior and exterior
architectural specialties. A service-disabled, veteran-owned company founded in 2007, John has seen
growth in revenues and employees each and every year of operation. Today, Patriot Contractors has
21 employees. In 2010, John's company generated revenues that hit $2M, and he is on track to exceed
$5M in 2011. John is a 2007 graduate of the Entrepreneurship Bootcamp for Veterans at Syracuse
University and holds a BBS from Dallas Baptist University.

Nicole Gentile



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782550 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782550 Date: 12/31/2015




Nicole Gentile, married with two children, is a third grade teacher at Marion-Sterling Elementary in
Cleveland, Ohio. She is at risk of being laid off given the district's budget situation. Thirteen of her
colleagues are also at risk of being laid off.

Kelcie Fisher
Kelcie Fisher is currently a senior at Open High, a Blue Ribbon school located in downtown
Richmond, Virginia. Open High School will be 100 years old this year and needs to be
modernized. Born and raised in Richmond, Kelcie has been a part of the Richmond Public Schools
family throughout her entire educational career.

Hector R. Sealey
Hector Sealey began working with Fort Myer Construction in August 2006 and continues as
corporate director of safety, risk management and compliance officer for the corporation. Sealey has
18 years of safety and quality control management experience and 4 years of project management,
with an overall of 30 years experience in the construction industry. Hector, along with almost a
million workers, is at risk of losing his job if Congress does not act and the transportation bill expires.
Hector joined President Obama in the Rose Garden when he called for a clean extension of the
transportation bill last month.

Kirk Bergstrom
Kirk Bergstrom, 43, is a project engineer with Denver Transit Partners (DTP), the consortium of
investment, engineering, construction and operations and maintenance companies currently
executing the $2 billion Eagle Public-Private Partnership in Denver, Colorado. The Eagle P3 Project is
a new commuter railroad line that will connect Downtown Denver and Denver International Airport
and also downtown with a portion of western Denver. Before the Eagle P3 Project, Kirk was going to
have to leave his family and travel back-and-forth to Kansas to work on another construction project.
DTP, thanks to this federally funded project, was able to give him a career close to his home.

David Catalano
 In 2006 David Catalano co-founded Modea, a digital advertising agency in Blacksburg, VA. In five
short years as president, Catalano and his executive team have grown the company 75-100% each
year - eclipsing $10 million in annual revenue. Catalano has been able to maintain his home in rural
Virginia and build a globally competitive company, highlighting the importance of the need to
provide high speed broadband access to all parts of the country. Modea has hired over 80 creative
professionals from across the country. In the late 90s Catalano came to Blacksburg, VA to pursue a
degree at Virginia Tech. Halfway through his senior year, Catalano put his degree on hold to co-
found a product marketing agency producing content for the largest e-commerce sites on the web.
After leading it to profitability in 2005, Catalano left the company to finish his Finance degree and
start Modea.

Dannie and Sabrina Mangrum
Dannie Mangrum is a Maryland corrections officer and Sabrina is getting her teaching degree at
Coppin State. The couple has two sons and a daughter, and is earnestly anticipating the adoption of
three foster children. A tax cut would benefit their family as they are looking for ways to provide for
their children and their education.

Jessica Pickett

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782550 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782550 Date: 12/31/2015




Technician Jessica T. Pickett joined Fairfax County Fire and Rescue Department in April 2006 where
she currently functions as a field Firefighter/Medic. Technician Pickett is actively involved with the
International Association of Fire Fighters Local 2068 and serves as the Chairperson of the EMS
Committee. Technician Pickett was awarded the Fairfax County Chamber of Commerce Certificate of
Valor in 2010 for actions involving personal risk and demonstration of judgment beyond the expected
performance of duties. Prior to joining the Fairfax County Fire and Rescue Department, Technician
Pickett studied Biological Sciences at The George Washington University in Washington, DC and was
a George C. Marshall Scholar and Rhodes Scholarship finalist.

Marlena Clark
Marlena Clark is a graduate of Anne Arundel Community College (AACC) and a resident of
Maryland. After working a number of minimum wage jobs and worrying about her future, she
decided that her local community college would provide the best opportunity for a career path to
success. She worked two jobs, as a housekeeper and a bartender, while taking courses in the
Information Systems Security program at Anne Arundel. While enrolled at community college,
Marlena was involved in a mentoring program focused on retaining women in IT careers and was
able to participate in an internship at a local IT company. She is now a full-time systems engineer at
the company, supporting the sales team and customers with networking solutions. As part of her
ongoing outreach on community colleges, Dr. Biden visited Anne Arundel Community College last
September to highlight the school's workforce development programs.

Tamara Washington
Tamara Washington is a single mother, taking care of her 3 year old son Amir, in Torrance,
CA. Tamara believes her hard work will enable her to provide quality healthcare and education for
her son. While it has not been easy, many programs and organizations were there to help, including
subsidized employment in the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) Emergency
Contingency Fund, which allowed her to obtain a job that enabled her to support her son.

###




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782550 Date: 12/31/2015
