      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791045 Date: 12/31/2015


                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                  B5,B6



From:                             Sullivan, Jacob.' <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Thursday, June 7, 2012 11:29 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: UNSC/Syria: Annan Tells Council Plan Not Implemented, Calls for United
                                  International Pressure



Report from Annan/NY today.



From: Ryu, Rexon Y
Sent: Thursday, June 07, 2012 11:23 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Fw: UNSC/Syria: Annan Tells Council Plan Not Implemented, Calls for United International Pressure


Report of council session.

I'll have to you by very early tomorrow morning a summary from NY of susan's 1-1 with annan. Bottomline is that his




From: Ried, Curtis R (USUN)
Sent: Thursday, June 07, 2012 10:22 PM
To: Adam Smith <                                 .>; Black, Joshua J (USUN); Catalano, Elisa; Cintron, Dan; Connelly,
Maura; Desjardins, Marc L; DiCarlo, Rosemary A (USUN); Djerassi, Alexander M; Finerty, Tressa R (USUN); Ford, Robert
S; Garbe, Danielle N; Grant, William K (USUN); Hagar_H._Hajjar                                                 15.;


Hallett, Stephanie L; Hill, Steven (USUN); Hof, Frederic C; Horak, Gail R (USUN); Howard, Jeremiah "Jerry"; Hudson,
William J; Irwin, Matthew T; Johnson, Amanda L; Kim, Yuri J; Knopf, Payton L (USUN); Lapenn, Jessica; Lasensky, Scott
B; Mahoney, Haynes R (Istanbul); Malik, Arslan - IO/PSC; Martin, Williams S; Mills Jr., Richard M; NEA-Syria-DL; Neville,
Colleen C; Pforzheimer, Annie; Pittman, H Dean; Razzouk, Kelly L; Reisser, Wesley J; Ried, Curtis R (USUN); Ryu, Rexon
Y; Simonoff, Mark A (USUN); Smyth, Reece; Suleman, Arsalan; Tenbrink, Shawn N; Tess, Caroline; Wachtel, Howard
(USUN); Zurcher, Kenneth M; simon, steven N; Pomper, Stephen <!
Cc: Metcalf, Maria K (USUN)
Subject: FW: UNSC/Syria: Annan Tells Council Plan Not Implemented, Calls for United International Pressure

Colleagues, Please see a readout of today's Council session on Syria attached. Curtis



SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: SMART Core
Sent: Thursday, June 07, 2012 10:18 PM
To: Ried, Curtis R (USUN)
Cc: USUN, SMARTS; ANKARA-SMARTS; BEIRUT, SMARTS; Cairo-SMARTS; BERLIN-SMARTS; LONDON-SMARTS; BEIJING-
SMARTS; ISLAMABAD, SMARTS; NEWDELHI-SMARTS; BAKU-SMARTS; LOME, SMARTS; PARIS-SMARTS; GUATEMALA-
SMARTS; PRETORIA, SMARTS; RABAT, SMARTS; LISBON-SMARTS; Bogota, SMARTS; UNVIE, SMARTS
Subject: UNSC/Syria: Annan tells Council Plan Not Implemented, Calls for United International Pressure
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791045 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791045 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                UNCLASSIFIED
                                                    SBU




MRN:                         12 USUN NEW YORK 336
Date!DTG:                    Jun 08, 2012 / 080217Z JUN 12
From:                        USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
Action:                      WASHDC, SECSTATE ROUTINE
E.O.:                        13526
TAGS:                        PUND, KPKO, UNSC, SY
Captions:                    SENSITIVE
Subject:                     UNSC/Syria: Annan tells Council Plan Not Implemented, Calls for United International
                             Pressure


   1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon and Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan briefed the
      Security Council June 7 on recent events in Syria and discussed options for possible next steps by the
      international community. Ban cited the recent increase in hostilities, including gross violations of
      human rights by the Syrian government (SARG) and called for the Council to remain united in it
      action. Annan stated plainly that the SARG had not implemented his six-point plan and reported that
      his trip to Damascus had yielded no progress. He called for the Security Council to use the tools at its
      disposal to push the SARG to implement the plan. Western countries called for the Council to respond
      to Annan's request with a Chapter VII resolution that includes consequences for continued SARG non-
      compliance. Russia announced its proposal for an international conference of key players. Annan
      supported the suggestion, but stated that violence must cease before such a conference can take
      place and underscored that for the contact group to be successful, it would need to agree upon a
      roadmap for a political transition. End Summary.

Secretary-General Ban Highlights Government Violence and Underscores Threats to UNSMIS

   2.    (SBU) Ban opened by stating that the situation continues to deteriorate and Syria is now at a "tipping
        point." Referring to the increased violence in recent days and after listing the various gross human
        rights violations by the Syrian regime, Ban called on the Council to push for the implementation of the
        six-point plan by the SARG and also for the opposition to cease hostilities. He noted that the longer
        violence continues, the more difficult the situation will be to resolve and said that a political solution
        to the crisis requires united action by the international community, in particular the Council. Ban
        cited various incidents of major SARG assaults using heavy weapons and confirmed the recent
        practice of using helicopters against civilian targets. Regarding yesterday's killings in al-Qubeir, Ban
        said that the village is surrendered by SARG forces and he relayed multiple reports that villagers were
        killed by severe physical abuse and the slitting of their throats. Ban said that UNSMIS was prevented
        from accessing the village today, but he hoped the observers would be able to visit the site and
        compile a more comprehensive report soon. Ban noted that the al-Qubeir incident followed closely
        after the Houleh massacre and the discovery last week of 13 bodies near Deir az-Zour. He reaffirmed
        that the SARG is responsible for the vast majority of human rights violations. Ban stated that acts

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791045 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791045 Date: 12/31/2015




       committed both recently and throughout the conflict in Syria may amount to crimes against humanity
       and he stated for the first time that the conflict in Syria might now be considered a "non-international
       conflict subject to international humanitarian law," which also raises the question as to whether war
       crimes have been committed.

   3. (SBU) Regarding UNSMIS operations, Ban reported that there are now 283 observers and 95 civilian
      staff in Syria. In the coming days, UNSMIS plans to establish a new team site in Tartus. He confirmed
      that UNSMIS has been directly targeted and recounted a recent incident near Horns during which
      heavy weapons were fired near an UNSMIS convoy and another in which an empty UNSMIS vehicle
      was hit with armor-piercing bullets. Ban reported that the opposition has become increasingly
      skeptical of UNSMIS as violence continues to rise and he noted that the Mission has been denied
      access to by opposition members who fear of suffering reprisals from SARG forces. Ban cautioned
      that it may become necessary to ask ourselves whether UNSMIS is sustainable under in its current
      form and he announced that he will be discussing various options for the Mission with General Mood
      in the coming weeks after which he will come back to the Council with proposals. Regarding the
      humanitarian situation, Ban noted the recent agreement with the SARG, but expressed concern at
      repeated bureaucratic delays in negotiating with the authorities and called for humanitarian access to
      all those in need.

Annan Says SARG Has Not Implemented Plan and Calls for United International Pressure

   4. (SBU) Annan began by condemning the al-Qubeir killings and said that just as it is hard for the
      international community to grasp what these people are going through, it is hard for the Syrian
      people to understand why the international community cannot do more to stop the ongoing violence
      and facilitate a peaceful transition. He characterized his six-point plan as a "ladder" for the SARG to
      use in making a strategic shift. Annan said that the SARG had clearly failed to seize this opportunity
      and he feared that chances for a peaceful solution were dwindling. Recalling his visit to Damascus,
      Annan reported that his meeting with Assad had done nothing to alleviate his concerns despite his
      frank words that "bold actions" were required if the plan is to succeed. He said that he was clear with
      Assad that the government has a far greater level of responsibility for the actions committed as well
      as disproportionate force. Despite these appeals, Annan told the Council that we have seen no
      positive action by the SARG, but rather increased levels of violence, continued shellings, and an ever
      more important and deadly role being played by pro-government militias. As a result of these SARG
      actions, Annan reported that armed groups have said they see no reason to respect the six-point
      plan. At the regional level, Annan reported that it was clear to him during his visits to Lebanon and
      Jordan that the possibility of spillover effects for the broader region was very real. In Doha, Annan
      attended the Arab League ministerial meeting on Syria where he sensed frustration and anger among
      Arab leaders.

   5. (SBU) Annan commended the efforts of the UN observers who are working in difficult and dangerous
      conditions and highlighted that they continue to provide the Council with important incontrovertible
      facts as well as serving as an important liaison between the parties on the ground. He singled out as
      unfair the recent calls by the opposition for the observers to stop the violence and reminded the
      Council that this is the duty of the protagonist. Annan warned that a descent into civil war would
      bring untold suffering to the Syrian people, but in the end would still require a negotiated settlement
      to be resolved. He questioned rhetorically whether we want such a dialogue to happen after an
      abominable civil war or before it. He recalled that the Council's actions in endorsing his plan and
      deploying UNSMIS initially had an impact on the ground, but noted that if we now again demand the

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791045 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791045 Date: 12/31/2015




      Council's decisions be implemented, it must be clear that there are consequence for non-
      compliance. Stressing that his efforts should not be open-ended, Annan called for the international
      community to act with unity to push his plan forward or consider what other options are available
      outside the framework of his mission. If there was a hope of his efforts bearing fruit, he required a
      response by the Council that delivers sustained pressure.

Western Countries Decry SARG Violence, Propose Chapter VII Resolution

   6. (SBU) All Council members expressed support for Annan's efforts, called for an end to violence,
      stressed the need for a political solution to the crisis, and appealed for continued Council
      unity. Western countries decried the regime's horrific violence —in particular the massacres
      committed in Houla and al-Qubeir — and stressed that violence has now exceeded pre-April 12
      levels. The UK said that the Council has a duty to respond to Annan's request to act swiftly and save
      his plan. He urged the Council to consider adopting a Chapter VII resolution that demands the
      implementation of the plan within a specific timeline, authorizes an investigation into recent atrocities
      (possibly to include a referral to the ICC), imposes tough measures against the Al-Nusrah Front and
      other terrorists groups, highlights the need for the opposition to respond to a SARG cessation of
      violence in kind, and either imposes or threatens sanctions. The UK added that the Council also
      needed to come to a collective understanding on the political dialogue. France concurred with the
      UK's suggestion and stressed that the SARG has no excuse not to immediately implement the second
      of the plan's six points and cease the use of heavy weapons and the deployment of troops in urban
      centers. Germany also supported the UK's proposal for a Chapter VII resolution and suggested that it
      should establish a separated Council-mandated Commission of Inquiry. Portugal stressed that the
      longer the violence endures, the lower the chance of a political settlement to the crisis
      become. Colombia expressed concern that UNSMIS is a "target" and he stressed that the possibility of
      a fatal attack against its observers is stark. Guatemala expressed support for moving forward in the
      Council with discussions on a Chapter VII resolution.

   7. Ambassador Rice thanked the Secretary-General for his constantly principled position regarding Syria
      and Annan for his leadership which has allowed the Council to remain united. Rice said that violence
      is now at higher levels than before April 12 and told the Council that Assad had responded to Annan's
      visit with yesterday's massacre near Hama and the use of helicopters against civilians. Ambassador
      Rice dismissed efforts of Council members to equate actions by both sides and underscored that the
      Annan plan was clear that the government must act first. She recalled that the Council faces three
      distinct paths forward. In the first, the SARG, under pressure from those members of the
      international community with influence on them, would finally fulfill its commitments and implement
      the Annan plan. The second option would be for the Council to come together in short order and
      assert unified pressure on the SARG, including sanctions, to prompt compliance with the Annan
      plan. There third option was all out civil war, which entail the end of the Annan plan and
      UNSMIS. Regarding Russia's proposal for a conference, Rice said that no conference or process can
      solve this problem if it is not accompanied by decisive measures to bring about progress on the Annan
      plan.

South Africa, India, Pakistan Take Middle Ground

   8. (SBU) South Africa said it was "encouraged" that Annan had been able to meet with SARG authorities
      and called for his deputy, Nasser al-Qidwa, to be granted the same access. He said that violence by
      both parties had increased both parties and stressed that they must both recommit to the

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791045 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791045 Date: 12/31/2015




       implementation of the Annan plan. South Africa said that any actions, such as the arming of the
       opposition, which are at odds with the plan, must cease. Similarly, India noted that "the parties" had
       failed to implement the Annan plan and recalled a previous statement by Russia that the international
       community has also failed to do so. After raising a series of rhetorical questions about hypothetical
       actions by the Council, he stated that the most important thing for India is stop the militarization of
       the conflict. India also characterized the deployment of UNSMIS as "bordering on reckless" and
       questioned what could possibly be achieved by expanding it. Pakistan described the situation as
       "bleak" and said that both parties had increased violence. Morocco said Annan had made clear what
       the Council must do to support him and he called for the opposition should continue to work under
       the aegis of the Arab League to achieve greater unity.

Russia Proposes International Conference of Key Players

   9. (SBU) Russian PermRep Churkin told the Council that we are faced with a situation where the SARG
      has implemented "some but not all" of the Annan plan whereas the opposition had abandoned
      it. While stating that Russia agreed that some of the SARG's actions were unacceptable, he
      questioned whether the Syrian National Council's call for an armed intervention into its own county or
      the killing of 80 SARG soldiers helped contribute to the implementation of the plan. Churkin lamented
      that many members continue to call for pressure on the SARG, but do not call for the same on
      opposition. He presented Russia's idea of an international conference to the Council and explained
      that it would assemble the players who have real impact to bring about full compliance with the
      Annan plan. Churkin said that Russia is "not wedded to Assad" and "would not be upset at all if the
      parties decide he must go." China delivered a rote statement calling for the ceasefire to be
      implemented so that a political dialogue could proceed as set forth in the Annan plan. He also stated
      that UNSMIS has had a great influence in stabilizing the situation on the ground. Regarding the
      possibility of Council action, China said the Council must decide whether such action would actually
      support Annan's efforts.

Annan: International Conference Should Result in Transition Roadmap

   10. (SBU) Again stressing the need for unity among the international community, Annan opined that the
       differences between key players are not limited to the positions of Russia and China, but also include
       vastly differing views within the region itself. He said that the Russian initiative for a contact group
       conference is something that we must all look at carefully. Laying out his vision of such a conference,
       Annan stated that it would bring together all the countries who have real influence in the crisis. He
       said that if the group decides that a Syrian-led political transition is the only way forward, then the
       group must produce a roadmap to guide such a process. In Annan's view, he would suggest that such
       a roadmap include proposals for a transitional government that would govern for an interim period
       while preparations are made for free and fair legislative and presidential elections. Responding to a
       question from Ambassador Rice as to whether Annan considered an end to violence a necessary
       precursor to such a meeting, Annan affirmed that violence must indeed cease before such a
       conference is possible.




Signature:                  Rice


Drafted By:              USUN NEW YORK:Ried, Curtis R (USUN)
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791045 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791045 Date: 12/31/2015




Approved By:              US Mission to the UN:Rice, Susan E (USUN)
Released By:              USUN NEW YORK:Ried, Curtis R (USUN)
Info:                     ANKARA, AMEMBASSY ROUTINE; BEIRUT, AMEMBASSY ROUTINE; CAIRO,
                          AMEMBASSY ROUTINE; UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE ROUTINE


Action Post:
Dissemination Rule:       Released Copy




                                           UNCLASSIFIED
                                               SBU




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791045 Date: 12/31/2015
