      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015


                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                           B5,B6


From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Friday, November 11, 2011 11:02 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Press Gaggle Aboard Air Force One En Route San Diego, CA


Apropos of what Evan said - leaning into China.



From: Rhodes, Benjamin 1 [maitto•
Sent: Friday, November 11, 2011 10:40 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J; Nuland, Victoria J
Subject: FW: Press Gaggle Aboard Air Force One En Route San Diego, CA

FYI




From: White House Press Office [mailto:noreply@messages.whitehouse.gov]
Sent: Friday, November 11, 2011 7:15 PM
To: Rhodes, Benjamin J.
Subject: Press Gaggle Aboard Air Force One En Route San Diego, CA

                                            THE WHITE HOUSE
                                     Office of the Press Secretary

           For Immediate Release                                                  November 11, 2011


                                            PRESS GAGGLE
                                   BY PRESS SECRETARY JAY CARNEY
                               AND DEPUTY NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISOR
                                    FOR STRATEGIC COMMUNICATIONS.
                                             BEN RHODES

                                         Aboard Air Force One
                                    En Route San Diego, California


3:39 P.M. EST


     MR. CARNEY: So I have with me Ben Rhodes, Deputy National Security
Advisor for Strategic Communications, just in case you have or want to ask
him questions about foreign policy, national security issues involving
this trip. But you're not obligated to do so. But I dragged him back
here just in case.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015




     Before I get started, I want to alert you to the fact that the
President today at the beginning of the flight reached out separately to
Senator Murray and Representative Hensarling. With the Joint Select
Committee's deadline to report approaching, the President wanted to hear
from the bipartisan leadership of the committee on the status of their
discussions.

     The President urged them to encourage the committee to reach a
deal. The President reminded them that he put forth a very detailed plan
for deficit reduction to the committee, and reiterated that any approach
must be balanced and will required tough choices by both sides, including
looking at revenues and entitlements.

     The President also made clear that he will not accept any measure
that attempts to turn off part of the sequester. The sequester was agreed
to by both parties to ensure there was a meaningful enforcement mechanism
to force a result from the committee. Congress must not shirk its
responsibilities. The American people deserve to have their leaders come
together and make the tough choices necessary to live within our means,
just as American families do every day in these tough economic times.

     The President urged both leaders to get this done.

     With that, I will take your questions.

     Q     He called them at the beginning of the flight, separately?

     MR. CARNEY: About an hour or so in, yes.

     Q     Individual calls?

     MR. CARNEY: Yes.

     Q    And what prompted his particular warning about turning off the
sequester?

     MR. CARNEY: Well, we've seen some discussions on Capitol Hill about
changing the sequester or turning off part of it, so that's what prompted
it.

     Q     So he would veto any measure that would do it?

     MR. CARNEY: Well, I'm not going to speculate about how this will
play out, because there is no bill to talk about in those terms. But he
said he strongly opposes that, those efforts, because the sequester was
voted on and supported by the members of both parties for a reason, so
that there was a serious enforcement mechanism to make the Joint Select
Committee have -- to prod it to reach the finish line here. So*he thinks
it's important that the committee do its work and Congress do its work.

     Q     So it's not a veto threat? You wouldn't call it that?


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015




        MR. CARNEY: There's no bill, there's nothing to threaten a veto
over.

        Q   How would you --

     MR. CARNEY: -- in what he said. He said -- made clear -- the
President made clear he would not accept any measure that attempts to turn
off part of the enforcement mechanism. We'll see what Congress
does. Right now the important thing is for the committee to focus on its
work to achieve what is eminently achievable, which is a significant
deficit and debt reduction package that, in a balanced way, makes sure
that not any single segment of society is unfairly burdened by the effort.

     Q    What was the update that he received? He asked for a status
update, so what was --

     MR. CARNEY: He spoke with both Senator Murray and Congressman
Hensarling about the progress the committee is making. I'll leave it to
them to describe their side of the conversation.

   .4        Is he satisfied that they are making progress?

     MR. CARNEY: Well, I think he got a good update on where things
are. They're obviously continuing to work. We remain hopeful that the
committee will get the job done.

     As I said earlier this week, it's not that complicated how you go
about this. Some of the choices are very difficult, but what the choices
are and what needs to be done is not that complicated.

        Q    How long were the conversations?

        MR. CARNEY: Five to 10 minutes.

     Q    Can we hear from Ben, maybe, on the trip? Can you talk a little
bit about China, Ben? And is part of the agenda for this trip to reassure
some of the East Asian countries that the U.S. will be a reliable partner,
maybe, in managing China's rise?

     MR. RHODES: Well, I think one of the messages of the trip, as well
as our entire foreign policy, is that the United States is all in as it
relates to the Asia Pacific region in the 21st century.

     On the economic side, we're building an alignment of countries
through the TPP that adhere to very high standards of free trade,
addressing labor issues, environmental issues, as well as issues around
technology and innovation.

     As it relates to our security posture, I. think we're going to be
making it clear over the course of the trip that the United States will
continue to play the role it has throughout the last half century in being
an anchor of security and stability in the region, and having the type of

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015




force posture in the Asia Pacific that can protect our interests as well
as those of our allies in the region.

     And then in each of these institutions, I think what you see is a
desire for U.S. engagement and U.S. leadership from many of our allies and
partners in the region. So whether you're talking about APEC or the East
Asia Summit, I think we have reengaged those organizations over the course
of the last two or three years. The U.S. had been absent before that, at
a time when we had seen the emergence of not just China but many other
nations who have had fast-growing economies.

     And so I think the message we're sending is that the U.S. is going to
play an active role in shaping the future of this region. We're going to
play an active role in each of these institutions. And we're going to be
able to secure American interests, as well as be that anchor of stability
in the region that has allowed it to develop peacefully and successfully.

     Q    Do cuts in the defense budget, would that possibly inhibit the
United States' ability to project force and influence in that region?

     MR. RHODES: Well, I'd say a couple things. First of all, since the
beginning of the administration, what we've focused on doing is drawing
down our presence in the wars so that we can focus on a broader set of
priorities. And in particular, as we end the war in Iraq and wind down in
Afghanistan, one of the places that we are shifting our focus and priority
to is the Asia Pacific region.

     So we very much, throughout our foreign policy, in terms of our
defense approach, in terms of our diplomacy, want to be increasing the
focus on the Asia Pacific, because we believe that's where the growth of
the 21st century is going to come; that's where America's security
interests are going to be particularly acute in the 21st century as
well. So we believe we can, again, assure our role, play our role in
terms of having a robust force posture even in a time of fiscal austerity
in cuts in a defense budget.

     Q    Will the U.S. be talking -- I'm sorry, will President Obama be
talking to Hu Jintao on the issue of currency rebalancing?

     MR. RHODES: Yes, I think he'll be talking to the Chinese about a
range of issues. On the one hand, you have the rebalancing approach that
we've taken in which we've talked to the Chinese not just about the need
to move -- not just about our concerns about appreciating their currency,
but also about taking other steps to increase demand within China's
market, because, again, to sustain global growth we're going to need to
see greater demand from the emerging economies including China.

     But we also raise issues around intellectual property, around
innovation and other things that are very important to U.S.
businesses. And I think in the broader sense this Asia Pacific trip and
the APEC Summit in particular is a chance to build out the U.S. agenda to
include other nations in terms of building trade in the TPP nations, in

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015




terms of elevating innovation policy through APEC so that the United
States is setting high standards for trade, is increasing our trade
relationships and export relationships with nations that meet those
standards, as well as raising them on a bilateral basis with the Chinese.

     Q    Jay, back to the sequester -- back to the super committee
stuff. Did the President indicate or is the administration posture --
would it be okay with extending the deadline if it was necessary, if they
thought they could get something done, extending the deadline beyond
December -- beyond the end of the year?

     MR. CARNEY: I think that discussion is premature because there is a
deadline mandated by law. The super committee has had ample time to work
on this and has had substantial help in its work with the variety of
proposals that have been put forward -- responsible proposals by the
President's fiscal commission, by the Domenici-Rivlin commission, by the
President himself in his growth and deficit reduction plans.

     Q    -- give specific warning sort of the way he did on the
sequester?

     MR. CARNEY: They did not discuss that issue about the deadline. He
expects the Congress and the committee to act.

     Q    And the continuing resolution, assuming. there is one on the
18th, is he going to robo-sign it? How will you guys handle this?

     MR. CARNEY: I'll have to take that question to figure out how that's
done. Let me check.

     Q    Can you tell us what the President told President Sarkozy and
Chancellor Merkel yesterday when they spoke?

     MR. CARNEY: Say that one more time?

     Q    What did President Obama tell Chancellor Merkel and President
Sarkozy when they spoke yesterday?

     MR. RHODES: Well, first of all, he called them after he spoke to
President Napolitano of Italy. and in his call with the President of
Italy, President Obama expressed confidence in the leadership of President
Napolitano in the steps that he was taking, again, to assure that Italy
meets its responsibilities in addressing its own economic issues in the
context of the eurozone crisis.

     So that when he then called Chancellor Merkel and President Sarkozy,
first of all, he was able to update them on his conversation with the
President of Italy, and then, building on that, they were able to discuss
the ongoing efforts in the eurozone, the situation in Italy and the steps
that are being taken there, as well as continuing the discussions they had
at the G20 as it relates to, again, building a strong firewall,


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015




implementing the plan that the European leaders have agreed to, to
stabilize the eurozone.

     Q      In these calls -- I'm sorry -- when was the call to Napolitano?

     MR. RHODES: He called Napolitano early afternoon, and then he called
Chancellor Merkel and President Sarkozy later in the afternoon. And
again, Napolitano was able to update the President on his efforts within
Italy, and President Obama expressed great confidence in the leadership of
President Napolitano and the steps that he was taking, again, the assure
that Italy was able to meet its challenges.

     Q    Can you tell us how much of a front-burner issue the
consultations on the IAEA report will be --

     MR. RHODES: I.would expect that the IAEA report will be a subject
particularly in the Russia-China bilateral meetings. Russia and China
obviously are part of the P5-plus-1 grouping of nations that we have
worked with on Iran. The IAEA report recently came out -- there's a Board
of Governors meeting upcoming at the IAEA. So I think this will be our
first series of consultations at this level with the Russians and the
Chinese since the report came out.

     So it will principally be with those two nations. I think the other
Meetings that the President has will probably focus on other matters.

     Q    -- Israelis at this point, any talks, any consultations with the
government of Israel?

     MR. RHODES: We're in consultation with the Israelis on a regular
basis at a working level, so we've certainly been in touch with the
Israeli government since the IAEA report came out -- not at the level of
the President. But we'll continue to be consulting closely with the
Israelis. We have a regular dialogue with them and many other nations
about the Iranian nuclear issue that will continue.

     Q    Back on Medvedev, following the reaction of Russia to the
report, are you concerned at all that the front of international
cooperation, which was part of the reset against Iran, is at risk? I
mean, is it going to continue -- is it going to fray at all? Do you see -
- (inaudible) -- reaction is kind of the full voice of Russia on this?

     MR. RHODES: I'd say a couple of things. First of all, I think the
report just recently came out. I think everybody needs to take the time
to review the report. I think the Iranians have not responded
sufficiently to the. report. And we'll want to communicate directly with
the Russians about our concerns with the report. This will be the first
communication between President Obama and President Medvedev since it came
out. So, again, I think it -- there are additional consultations that
need to take place between the United States and Russia about next steps,
both on a bilateral basis and within the IAEA Board of Governors.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015




     And secondly, I think I think it's also always been the case that the
Russians are part of an international front that is exemplified by U.N.
Security Council Resolution 1929, which enables the multilateral
sanctions. The Russians had taken steps on top of those sanctions where
it cancelled certain military contracts.

     But it's also the case that there are like-minded nations with the
United States that have gone far above and beyond the baseline and
foundation of 1929 to continue to apply pressure and additional
sanctions. So we'll always be looking to work with both our P5-plus-1
partners to maintain that front of international pressure on the Iranians,
and also building out from that, with a number of like-minded states to
apply the type of sanctions on Iran that have ground its economy to a
halt, have caused even President Ahmadinejad to acknowledge that the
sanctions are having a serious impact on their economy.

     So, again, it's an important meeting with the Russians to discuss
this, and at the same time we're examining ways with a range of nations to
increase our sanctions on the Iranian government in the coming weeks.

     Q    -- on the super committee, in the conversations today did the
President say that he would be checking in with them again while he's
away?

     MR. CARNEY: He will be, I'm sure, updated -- I know he will be
updated regularly by his own staff and is prepared to make phone calls as
necessary. And of course, senior administration officials remain in
Washington to advise as necessary the members of Congress involved in this
process. But let's not forget that this is a congressional committee
established by a piece of legislation that members of both parties voted
for and it is Congress's responsibility to act. The President, at the
beginning of the process, put forward his own very detailed, comprehensive
proposal, balanced proposal, and if they're looking for the President to
guide them, they need only look to that proposal and they can find their
way forward.

     Q    Does the President expect the NLRB situation with Boeing to come
up when he has this meeting with Boeing's CEO?

     MR. CARNEY: Well, as you know, Chuck, the NLRB is an independent
agency, so I don't expect that that would come up in a conversation.

      Q      You don't expect --

     MR. CARNEY: I don't. I, of course, don't know, but I don't expect
from our end.

     Q    Jay, what are the nature of the President's comments going to be
on the carrier this evening? Is it a veterans message?

     MR. CARNEY: It is a Veterans Day event. I mean, obviously it's a
sporting event, but it's being held on the carrier on this day because of

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015




what this day means annually for Americans of all kinds, and Americans who
served in our military in the past. And he wants to use this occasion to
remind Americans of the remarkable sacrifice and service that our men and
women in uniform have performed for us in the past and continue to perform
for us.

     So he's looking forward to that aspect of it -- principally the
uniqueness of the event and the fact that because of the uniqueness of the
event, it may draw more attention to the importance of this day. And he's
also a basketball fan, so I'm sure he'll enjoy the game.

     Q     Only way to watch basketball right now.

     MR. CARNEY: What's that?

     Q     Only way to watch basketball right now.

     MR. CARNEY: I think there is a limit on the amount of basketball you
can watch this season, sad to say. So I know he's looking forward to
this.

     Q    Can I do one with Ben? Sorry. Ben, just following up on what
you said on China, coming into this summit China seemed a little bit
disgruntled. It said that you guys are trying to do too much on trade and
green issues. Now there's been this kind of exchange over Tibet. Are you
concerned at all that what you're trying to achieve may be sort of watered
down a little by China's attitude?

     MR. RHODES: Well, first of all, we have through the TPP an alignment
where you have nine nations who are working towards an agreement that sets
very high standards for multilateral free trade. There are also
indications, for instance, that additional nations may want to come in --
to come be a part of that. Japan has made indications of that nature as
recent as today.

     And so what we're focused on is not any one nation but what are the
standards by which nations should be pursuing trade, what are the ways in
which we can forge win-win outcomes that allow for our economies to grow
but that protect intellectual property, have sound innovation policy, have
regulatory convergence across the region, again, so that all nations can
participate in a dynamic and growing economy.

     So none of the -- the measures that we're pursuing, again, our in our
interests but we also think they're in the interests of .the region's
economy. They're not targeted at any one nation. Through the APEC agenda,
obviously separate from the TPP, we are focused on a range of areas --
innovation, regulatory convergence, green growth -- again, that we think
are in the interests of all the nations that are there at the table. And
that's why the United States has pursued an ambitious agenda to try to
move forward on a range of issues that are necessary for economic growth.



   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015




     So, again, we're very clear about what we think the important
components of a thriving Asia Pacific region are. We're going to raise
that through the TPP, we're going to raise that through the APEC Summit,
and we'll continue, again, to work on behalf of a region that has
economies adhering to rules of the road and engaging in the type of trade
that can be beneficial to all nations.

     As it relates to Tibet, I think we've consistently had a dialogue
with the Chinese on this issue and that dialogue will be ongoing. We've
made it clear we respect, of course, the territorial integrity of China
and the sovereignty of China. We've also made clear our support for the
religious and cultural identity of the Tibetan people.

         Q        Thanks.

         MR. CARNEY: Thanks, guys.

                                                   END                              3:51 P.M. EST




Unsubscribe

The White House 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW • Washington DC 20500 • 202-456-1111




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783545 Date: 12/31/2015
