      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790838 Date: 12/31/2015


                                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                         B6



From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Tuesday, June 5, 2012 11:18 AM
To:
Subject:                          FW: International Media Coverage of the Secretary's global health speech




From: Lorrie McHugh-Wytkind                                                                                                B6
Sent: Tuesday, June 05, 2012 6:21 AM
To: Smith, Jeannemarie E
Cc: Mills, Cheryl D; Quam, Lois E; Klein, Jennifer L; Goosby, Eric; Gavaghan, Ann; Daniel, Joshua J; Vogelstein, Rachel;
Jones, Kerri-Ann
Subject: Re: International Media Coverage of the Secretary's global health speech




A few thoughts:

* I know S isn't fond of repeating messages in speeches, but there are some points she hit on in the Norway
speech that will be really well received at IAS and we should consider reiterating them. We have a captive
media audience there and Eric and others could amplify at the daily press conference.
* Josh may kill me, but the global health vision piece would be a great article - it's all there, we'd just have to
edit it.
* The vision should be amplified in upcoming remarks by other State Department officials. Eric is planning on
doing so later this month. One thought is for us to put together a "quote sheet" from the speech to share within
the Department and with the stakeholder community. I know the stakeholders received the speech, but it may
have gotten lost on a Friday afternoon. I'm here at the Global Fund and they hadn't seen it. I asked them to read
it yesterday and they want to amplify the messages.




On Jun 4, 2012, at 5:04 PM, Smith, Jeannemarie E wrote:


Nice. Altho not much about the larger global health message frame - much more about maternal health initiative.

Jeanne Smith
Senior Advisor
Office of the Secretary
202-647-5095
202-716-7626 (bb)

 From: Mills, Cheryl D
 Sent: Monday, June 04, 2012 4:03 PM
 To: Quam, Lois E; Smith, Jeannemarie E; Klein, Jennifer L; Goosby, Eric; Gavaghan, Ann; Daniel, Joshua
 J; lorriemchugh               Vogelstein, Rachel; Jones, Kerri-Ann                                                        B6
 Subject: FW: International Media Coverage of the Secretary's global health speech

 Thank you all so much for your help and guidance in delivering this baby!

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790838 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790838 Date: 12/31/2015




See below.

cdm

From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Monday, June 04, 2012 12:43 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Laszczych, Joanne
Subject: International Media Coverage of the Secretary's global health speech

International Press Coverage

The Secretary's Global Health Initiative speech received worldwide coverage, including in Norway
(Aftenposten, Nordlys, iTromso, NRK, TV2, ) France, Bahrain News Agency, Israel's Jerusalem Post, Lebanon,
Japan, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, India, the UAE, Sovereign Broadcasters (Radio Netherlands), and
several international wires (AFP, NTB/ANB [Norway], Reuters, Xinhua).

Much of the reporting was based on a Reuters story (pasted below) about the bilateral pledge of $150 million
for a maternal health initiative. Many articles, provided detailed coverage of the initiative and its objective,
contextualizing its importance. For example, Singapore's Straits Times, reported "The US and Norway each
pledged to give in the range of US $75 million to help protect mothers during labor, delivery and the first 24
hours after birth. The money would go into the Saving Mothers, Giving Life initiative, a partnership financed
with public and private funds that seeks to reduce the death of mothers immediately before, during and soon
after they give birth."

India Times likewise reported that the Secretary explained the "US would provide $75 million to a private-
public effort to improve the health of mothers and their babies in developing countries."

The AFP and UAE's Gulf Today quoted you as saying, the initiative, "doesn't focus on a single intervention,
but on strengthening health systems to protect mothers when they're most at risk -- during labor, delivery and
the 24 hours after birth." Gulf Today also explained that the initiative was beginning with projects in Zambia
and Uganda, and would take the most effective lessons drawn from those experiences and apply them in other
countries."

Vancouver DESI provided specific examples, explaining, "Rather than focusing on a single step to reduce
maternal mortality, Clinton said the aim was to strengthen health systems more generally, saying the existence
of 24-hour clinics, the availability of skilled doctors, nurses and midwives and the reliability of transportation
networks all play a role." Malaysia's The Star and Israel'sJerusalem Post noted that you also emphasized that
"surviving childbirth and growing up healthy should not be a matter of luck or where you live or how much
money you have. It should be a fact for every woman everywhere."
Norwegian articles focused on the bilateral partnership. Norway News wrote, "The initiative, which was
launched by Secretary Clinton, is a partnership with the Government of Norway, Merck for Mothers, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and Every Mother Counts." Norway Buzz reported, "The
US and Norway are working to improve maternal and child health in Africa, Clinton explained." News in
English comments "the Norwegian funding matches the US funding for the program and gave Clinton another
reason to thank Norway during her visit."
Amplification Efforts
In the run-up to the event, our Office of Digital Engagement worked with our Office of Broadcast Service
(OBS) and Office of Web Management to facilitate a livestream of your speech. OBS contracted with
Norwegian Broadcasting to transmit broadcast quality video of both your speech and the joint press avail with
 the Norwegian Foreign Minister. We then disseminated the video to broadcasters across the globe via fiber and
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790838 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790838 Date: 12/31/2015




satellite and pulled country-specific video clips or the speech and distributed them directly to the PAOs in
Sierra Leone, Zambia, Botswana, Nepal, and India. The video clips were also distributed widely to
broadcasters and subscribers to State On Demand. Both events were posted on State.gov and YouTube.

ODE also drafted a one-page social media playbook for Posts in the field, offices in DC, and relevant partner
organizations. This provided instructions for using the livestream and Twitter, sample advertisement tweets, and
sample Facebook/Google+ posts to use. During the speech, we live-tweeted your remarks in English. Additional
amplification of your remarks went out on Twitter in Arabic, Turkish, and Spanish.

Our efforts resulted in eight top political tweets (identified by Twitter) on a wide range of topics from
political transition in Syria to our support for Europe's difficult decisions regarding the Eurozone,
climate pollutants and clean air awareness, and the importance of maternal health. Interestingly, we also
saw a large uptick in the number of local followers, with many Swedes and Norwegians re-tweeting our
messages, which will hopefully create a larger regular following in those countries.

For further amplification, our Africa Hub hosted a conference call today on global health featuring S/GHI Lois
Quam and Ambassador Eric Goosby. Nearly 20 journalists participated, including a BBC World Service Radio
correspondent, and our Embassies in Addis Abba, Kampala and Pretoria hosted watch parties. BBC plans to
run a story tomorrow on the World Update radio program.

Reuters Article

U.S., Norway pledge $150 million for maternal health
Saturday, June 2, 2012

OSLO (Reuters) - The United States and Norway each pledged on Friday to give in the range of $75 million to
help protect mothers during labor, delivery and the first 24 hours after birth.

The money would go into the "Saving Mothers, Giving Life," initiative, a partnership financed with public and
private funds that seeks to reduce the death of mothers immediately before, during and soon after they give
birth.

Recalling the 1980 birth of her daughter, Chelsea, U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton mused about how she
would have felt had she not had a healthcare facility with skilled doctors and nurses and the equipment and
expertise to handle emergencies.

"How fortunate I was. But surviving childbirth and growing up healthy should not be a matter of luck or where
you live or how much money you have. It should be a fact for every woman everywhere," Clinton said as she
announced the $75 million U.S. contribution at a health conference in Norway.

A U.S. official said $60 million had already been approved by the U.S. Congress, and the other $15 million was
part of the Obama administration's budget request for the year beginning October 1.

At the same conference, Norwegian Foreign Minister Jonas Gahr said Norway would devote up to about $80
million to the effort, whose partners include drug maker Merck & Co and nonprofit Every Mother Counts.

Norway's pledge is also subject to parliamentary approval.

Rather than focusing on a single step to reduce maternal mortality, Clinton said the aim was to strengthen health
systems more generally, saying the existence of 24-hour clinics, the availability of skilled doctors, nurses and
midwives and the reliability of transportation networks all play a role.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790838 Date: 12/31/2015
