      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788093 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL


From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Wednesday, February 8, 2012 9:23 PM
To:
Subject:                           FW: USAID story updates


See highlight

From: Feldman, Daniel F
Sent: Wednesday, February 08, 2012 6:58 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Nides, Thomas R; Carland, Raphael
Subject: FW: USAID story updates

Just flagging the negative USAID story expected in the WSJ Fri on its stabilization projects in Afg, alleging that they've
"failed." I've asked our comms folks to work with AID on their TPs as soon as they can get them.

From: Haq, Nayyera
Sent: Wednesday, February 08, 2012 4:41 PM
To: Feldman, Daniel F
Cc: Lucas, Laura D
Subject: USAID story updates

Dan -- Story updates from USAID. Looks like they've done what's possible to manage the storylines.



From: Edwards, Benjamin (LPA/AA) [ma i Ito: beedwards@ usa id .goy]
Sent: Wednesday, February 08, 2012 3:27 PM
To: Lucas, Laura D; Haq, Nayyera; Hayden, Caitlin
Cc: Anderson, Lars (LPA/AA)




Wall Street Journal reporter Dion Nissenbaum has indicated that the long-awaited story on USAID's
stabilization projects in Afghanistan will run on Friday, February 10. The negative story will likely allege that
USAID's stabilization effort in Afghanistan has failed. The narrative will focus on the strategic provincial
roads project and argue that numerous challenges — including wasteful spending — caused this project to fall
far short its goals. The reporter has interviewed numerous U.S. officials and partners, and USAID plans to
send a final statement to him today that speaks broadly about USAID 's stabilization program in
Afghanistan. We have talking points, so we can respond to the article quickly if necessary.

The WSJ story is the most. pressing story right now, but USAID has been involved in a few other forthcoming
press stories and outreach activities around Afghanistan and Pakistan, and I've summarized each of them below
as FYI. Of particular note, I want to make sure you are aware that USAID is working on annual reports that
highlight our spending and accomplishments in Afghanistan and Pakistan over the past year. More details
below.

AP story on the Afghan Public Protection Force
Associated Press reporter Heidi Vogt is writing a story on Afghanistan about the Afghan Public Protection
Force (APPF), the new Afghan security force that President Karzai's mandated to replace the private security
contractors currently used by donors, implementing partners, etc.... The story will likely paint a negative
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788093 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788093 Date: 12/31/2015




picture of the APPF's readiness to assume authority on March 20, 2012 and may include criticism from
implementing partners. The reporter inquired about how this might affect our work in Afghanistan, so the
embassy in Kabul provided a statement. The reporter is still tweaking the story, but she expects it to run very
soon. We have prepared talking points, so we will be ready to respond if necessary.

NYT story on human rights and children
New York Times reporter Alissa Rubin is writing a story about baad, the practice of trading young girls to settle
disputes among adults. The reporter interviewed Mark Wilson, the COTR of USAID's program to combat
baad, today about the prevalence of this practice in Afghanistan and USAID's program that educate Afghan's
that this is a legal and human rights violation. We expect this story to fairly portray USAID's efforts to combat
the practice of baad.

WSJ story on compound life in Afghanistan
Wall Street Journal reporter Dion Nissenbaum is writing a story on compound life in Afghanistan. He is
interested in a number of compounds where USAID contractors live, but he is particularly interested in talking
to USAID about one particular compound, run as a private business, where some of USAID's implementing
partners are housed. The reporter has heard that the U.S. Government has told our contractors that we won't pay
for them to stay there anymore, and he would like a response on background or off-the-record. We are waiting
for guidance on this before responding.

WSJ story on maternal health
Wall Street Journal reporter Maria Abi-Habib is in the early stages of writing a story on maternal health in
Afghanistan. She will interview Susan Brock, the head of USAID's heath office in Afghanistan, on Saturday
about our midwifery programs. The reporter may travel to Badakhshan in a few weeks if weather permits to see
a midwifery program outside of Kabul. We will monitor this story as it develops to determine the best way
forward.

Afghanistan annual report
USAID's annual report for Afghanistan is currently being edited by USAID/OAPA. The report will aim to
inform the Washington audience about our progress and spending in Afghanistan over the past year.

Pakistan annual report
USAID's annual report for Pakistan is currently being drafted by USAID/OAPA. The report will aim to inform
the Washington audience about our progress and spending in Pakistan over the past year.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788093 Date: 12/31/2015
