        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783195 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                                Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                                Tuesday, September 20, 2011 10:08 AM
To:                                  H
Subject:                             Fw: (WSJ- Letter to editor) The Obama Administration Is a Good Friend to Israel



Fyi



From: Nides, Thomas R
Sent: Tuesday, September 20, 2011 09:34 AM
To:                                                                     Burns, William J; Sullivan, Jacob 3
Subject: Re: (WSJ- Letter to editor) The Obama Administration Is a Good Friend to Israel

Nice.
                                                                                                                B6

From: Blinken, Antony J.
Sent: Tuesday, September 20, 2011 09:25 AM
To: Burns, William 3; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Nides, Thomas R
Subject: FW: (WSJ- Letter to editor) The Obama Administration Is a Good Friend to Israel

From today's WSJ. tony

Antony Blinken
Deputy Assistant to the President
National Security Advisor to the Vice President




The Wall Street Journal
September 20, 2011
The Obama Administration Is a Good Friend to Israel
Regarding Dan Senor's "Why Obama Is Losing the Jewish Vote" (op-ed, Sept. 14): For more than 60
years since Israel's founding—during periods of war and peace, calm and crisis—U.S. administrations
of all stripes have worked to safeguard Israel's security, a cornerstone of our foreign policy that
should be beyond the reach of partisan politics.

That is why commentary that has re-emerged in recent days is so troubling: misleading analyses and
outright falsehoods that have festered for far too long about the Obama administration's policy toward
one of our closest friends and allies.

These charges came just days after President Obama's personal intervention helped avert
catastrophe when a violent mob stormed the Israeli Embassy in Cairo. Afterward, Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said of the president:




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783195 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783195 Date: 12/31/2015




"I requested his assistance at a decisive—I would even say fateful—moment. He said he would do
everything possible, and this is what he did. He activated all of the United States' means and
influence—which are certainly considerable. I believe we owe him a special debt of gratitude."

That influence was only the most recent manifestation of our administration's iron-clad commitment to
Israel's security, a commitment that has led to a level of cooperation that Mr. Netanyahu himself has
rightly called "unprecedented." Simply put, no American administration has done as much as ours
with Israel and for Israel's security.

Our dedication to maintaining Israel's qualitative military edge is not talk; we are walking the walk.
Since coming to office, we have launched the most comprehensive and meaningful strategic and
operational consultations, across all levels of our governments, in the history of this relationship.
These interactions, from our heads-of-state on down, are what averted tragedy in Cairo—and they
only exist between the closest of allies.

In October 2009, our nations' armed forces conducted their largest ever joint military exercise, Juniper
Cobra. In 2010, nearly 200 senior-level Department of Defense officials visited Israel, and senior
Israeli officials visit the U.S. just as often.

And this year, despite tough fiscal times, President Obama fought for and secured full funding for
Israel in our 2011 budget, including $3 billion in military assistance—the most ever.

We secured an additional $205 million to help produce Iron Dome. This short-range rocket defense
system has been a godsend for besieged communities along Israel's border with Gaza, and it has
now been installed in the north, along the Lebanon border, as well. Already it has intercepted dozens
of rockets that might otherwise have struck homes, schools or hospitals, providing peace of mind for
people, like the residents of Sderot whom President Obama visited in 2008, living perpetually in the
line of fire.

To guard against more distant, but also more dangerous threats, we have worked with the Israelis on
the Arrow weapons system, to intercept medium-range ballistic missiles, and David's Sling, for
shorter-range missiles. And we have collaborated on a powerful radar system linked to U.S. early
warning satellites that could buy Israel valuable time in the event of a missile attack.

We know that Israel sees the threat posed by Iran as existential. And make no mistake: An Iran
armed with nuclear weapons on long-range missiles would pose a direct and serious threat to the
security of the U.S. as well.

That is why we are determined to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons. And we have backed
up that commitment by building an unprecedented coalition to impose the most far-reaching sanctions
Iran has ever faced. As a result, Iran finds itself increasingly isolated from the international
community. It finds it harder than ever to acquire materials for its nuclear and weapons programs and
to conduct transactions in dollars and euros. And it has struggled to buy refined petroleum and the
goods it needs to modernize its oil and gas sector.

Already close to $60 billion in Iranian energy-related projects have been put on hold or discontinued.
And world-leading companies are deciding to stop doing business there, including: Shell, Total, ENI,
Statoil, Repsol, Lukoil, Kia, Toyota, Siemens and foreign subsidiaries of U.S. firms such as GE,
Honeywell and Caterpillar, among many others.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783195 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783195 Date: 12/31/2015




Standing up for Israel's security also means remaining ever vigilant against attempts to delegitimize
Israel in the international arena. As President Obama has said, including in the speech he gave in
Cairo, the heart of the Arab world, Israel's legitimacy is not a matter for debate.

That is why we stood up strongly for Israel's right to defend itself after the Goldstone Report on the
2009 Gaza War was issued, and why we refuse to attend events that endorse or commemorate the
flawed 2001 World Conference Against Racism, which outrageously singled out Israel for criticism.

That is also why we are working literally around the clock and around the world to try to prevent steps
taken at this month's U.N. General Assembly meeting from further isolating Israel or undermining
efforts to reach a secure, negotiated peace with the Palestinians.

Our administration is justifiably proud of this record. And we are confident that none of our
predecessors has done more for Israel's security than we have.

That does not mean we will always see eye to eye on everything. Even the closest of allies disagree,
and when we do, we make our views clear. That is a sign of our mutual respect and of a relationship
robust and mature enough to overcome our differences.

What could actually harm U.S.-Israeli relations, and the security of the Jewish state, is subjecting
either to the vagaries of partisan politics or turning them into election-year talking points. For
generations, Israel has been a bastion of bipartisan consensus, an issue off-limits to those seeking to
score cheap points. The stakes are too high—for us, and for Israel—to let that change now.

Antony J. Blinken

Washington

Mr. Bliriken is deputy assistant to the president and national security adviser to the vice president.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783195 Date: 12/31/2015
