UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784093 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL



                                               July 18, 2011

     Dear Secretary Clinton:

     Again, congratulations are in order for Friday's recognition of the
     Transitional National Council in Istanbul. It is a pleasure to see the State
     Department again leading the administration on this. Syria, too, but that
     is a subject for another. day.

     I suspect that you have been pushing very hard within the
     administration on Libya. From the outside, the White House doesn't
     seem like it cares very much. In general, the NSC seems uncomfortable
     with creative applications of American power and influence. And we all
     know the military and the Pentagon resist limited military operations,
     especially airpower-only engagements. So, it must be you and your
     colleagues at State. Well done.

     Some weeks back, when the U.S. first committed to oppose Qaddafi
     militarily, I wrote a similar message and you suggested we should stay
     in touch. It has taken me a long time to take you up on your suggestion,
     for reasons I can explain in person someday.

     Hillary, Libya is the right issue for you as Secretary of State to take a
     leadership role. It may not seem that way on certain days, but I strongly
     believe it is. (I offer these observations without knowing your thinking
     or any of the details available to you, so please forgive me if I say the
     obvious, make technical errors, misread the internal dynamics, or you
     think this is off-base.)

     First and foremost, this is winnable. The killing of Bin Ladin aside, the
     administration really needs a solid, substantial success. It is only a
     matter of time before the combination of international airpower and
     rebel ground forces close in on Qaddafi. Although it may look like a
     stalemate from time to time, the equation is pretty steady: Qaddafi gets
     weaker, and the rebels get stronger. When Qaddafi falls or goes into
     exile, this will be a big success. And the larger the U.S. role, the greater it



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784093 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784093 Date: 12/31/2015




     will redound to our advantage. (Caveat: It could be very messy when
     the rebel movement takes over and you should condition people that a
     civil war like this will be bloody and chaotic when Qaddafi initially falls.
     As an aside, I think the exile option was killed by the human rights legal
     community who pushed an ICC process way too early.)

     Second, unlike in the Balkans or Afghanistan, Paris and London are fully
     committed, as are most Europeans, with the exception of Germany,
     which is a disgrace but not really relevant in the end. The Germans can
     easily come in to fund and assist in reconstruction and security
     arrangements for a post-Qaddafi Libya. Of course, the Europeans'
     military capabilities are limited, as they lack sufficient stocks of the right
     weaponry. But the Pentagon has and will continue to help. Historically,
     the harder issue has been their will to win and to reject half-baked
     compromises. So, in this case, it must be a pleasure to have effective
     partners in London and Paris.

     Third, beyond the moral component of preventing a slaughter, defeating
     Qaddafi is one of the few concrete and unique ways the West can
     contribute to the Arab Spring. With our popularity at an all time low in
     most of the Arab world, our persuasive power is not what it used to be.
     But cutting off Qaddafi from financing and supplies, and using airpower
     against his military forces, these are things that the West and only the
     West can do.

     Fourth, even a small success like the one that is coming in Libya will
     turn around the steady decline in American influence in the region and
     around the world. I suspect that you know this, but European elites,
     Gulf elites, East Europeans and many others regard the Administration
     as weak. Take for example recent data indicating majorities in Europe
     believe Chinese economic and political power exceeds or will exceed the
     United States. That is a disastrous indicator.

    You may see where I am going with this analysis. It is time for the U.S.
    to move from the back seat to the front seat of this operation. I know
    there is a lot of political and White House reluctance to take on another
    conflict in the Middle East. But not only is this a completely different
    situation than Iraq or Afghanistan, but we are already paying the
    political price at home and around the world, yet we will not get the



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784093 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784093 Date: 12/31/2015




     credit when success comes, and it will come. So long as this is largely a
     Euro-led mission, it will take far longer to achieve results than it should.
     Most important, unlike Iraq or Afghanistan, there is a path to clear-cut
     success, and it is a short path, not years, but months.

     There is a reason that NATO's nickname is "Needs America To Operate."
     We have the weaponry, the assets, and the arrangements necessary to
     step up the air campaign to accelerate Qaddafi's fall. We can have the
     Europeans do all the burden-sharing we want when it comes time to
     fund and support a post-Qaddafi peacekeeping and stability mission of
     some kind.

     What you need is a rationale for a new strategy and an internal
     argument for the Pentagon to change its position. If the Pentagon
     moves and a new rationale alters the politics on Capitol Hill, the White
     House will have to go along. Again, without knowing all the
     machinations and mini-coalitions inside the administration, I may be
     reading this wrong. But I would suggest the following strategy:

     First, without acknowledging that it was a mistake to let the British and
     French lead the operation to begin with, you can simply argue that
     circumstances have changed to the extent that leaving Qaddafi in power
     is now a national security risk. A mad "mad dictator" threatening
     Europe and America is a straightforward case to make. Just the way
     Qaddafi's threats against Benghazi were used to justify the original
     intervention, his recent threats to take the war to Europe should be
     regarded as a clear danger of terrorism against our European allies.

     Second, for civilians in the Pentagon and the military, you can simply
     state that the U.S. and NATO's deterrent power is now at risk. There is
     nothing the Pentagon hates more than a weakened NATO or weakened
     U.S. deterrent power. This type of credibility argument is not one that
     works publicly, because of the Vietnam era argument that Americans
     shouldn't die for credibility but Pentagon officials believe it matters.
     NATO cannot and should not fail to topple Qaddafi.

     Third, the threat of Qaddafi organizing terrorist threats against Europe
     and possibly the United States is an argument that most Republicans
     will be forced to accept. (At a private meeting with Tim Pawlenty, he


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784093 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784093 Date: 12/31/2015




     put forward the idea that framed as a threat from a former terrorist
     leader, most Republicans would change their view. ) McCain and
     Lindsey Graham are already there and with this new rationale it should
     be possible to win political support from Republicans that would not
     support the moral case alone.

     The politics on Capitol Hill are obviously not easy. But if the President
     decides that U.S. national security interests are now at risk, and he
     makes the case for U.S. leadership in NATO, it will be much, much
     harder for Democrats to desert him and Republicans to oppose him. It
     is the half-hearted effort we are making now that is so easy to pick
     apart.

     There is obviously much more to say, but the bottom line is that the war
     in Libya is now a bigger problem than just getting Qaddafi out. It will
     determine, in part, whether the United States is remembered as acting
     and leading the world's response at a crucial time in Middle East
     politics. At the same time, if we change our approach, success in Libya
     will restore diminished American leadership in Europe and the world.

      This moment reminds me a lot of when Jacques Chirac stuck the knife
     in with Washington when he told a group of European leaders early in
     1995 that there was no leader of the West. As I recall it, President
     Clinton perceived that with Bosnia collapsing fundamental attitudes
     towards the United States were at stake. We acted, we used NATO air
     power, we led the negotiations at Dayton, and everything about the first
     term in foreign affairs changed. The analogy is not precise but I think it
     is food for thought. I know how hard it would be to take the lead now,
     but I think it is worth the effort, and all the subsequent diplomacy and
     post-qaddafi planning would be much smoother with the U.S., backed by
     key U.S. allies, in the driver's seat.

        Your friend,

        Jamie




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784093 Date: 12/31/2015
