      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792942 Date: 12/31/2015


                                                                                            RELEASE IN PART B5,B6




From:                               Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                               Friday, May 11, 2012 7:35 PM
To:
Subject:                             FW: New People's Daily Article on US-China



Worth a read

    Original Message
From: Campbell, Kurt M
Sent: Thursday, May 10, 2012 08:56 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Burns, William J; Nuland, Victoria J
Subject: Fw: New People's Daily Article on US-China

A little inside baseball but I think Evan's assessment is accurate. Kurt

    Original Message
From: Medeiros, Evan S.
Sent: Thursday, May 10, 2012 07:17 PM
To: Russel, Daniel R.                                     ; Campbell, Kurt M
Cc: Moy, Kin W; Carlson, Aubrey A
Subject: New People's Daily Article on US-China

Danny and Kurt:




Cheers, Evan.

RMRB Article Examines PRC-US Relations; Stresses Mutual Trust, Understanding

CPP20120505722022 Beijing Renmin Ribao Online in Chinese 05 May 12 3

[0 International Forum0 article by Zhong Sheng: 0 Chart a Path Toward a New Type of Relationship Between China and
the United States as Major Powers° ]

The China-US relationship is one of the most important and complicated bilateral relationships in the present-day world.

China is the largest developing country and a fast-rising emerging power, whereasthe United States is the largest
developed country and the most powerful nation. China-US cooperation will present tremendous opportunities for the
two countries as well as the world at large, whereas confrontation between China and the United States will do great
harm to both countries and the world at large. How China and the United States can chart a path toward a new type of
relationship between China and the United States as major powers based on mutual respect and win-win cooperation is
a common major task for the governments of both countries.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792942 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792942 Date: 12/31/2015



Adopt Innovative Thinking and Advance With the Times

Clear guiding principles are needed in order to chart a path toward a new type of relationship between China and the
United States as major powers.

Only by adopting innovative thinking and keeping up with the trend of the times can we break free of the shackles of
"antiquated rules," maintain the direction of the China-US relationship from a strategic and long-term perspective, and
confidently plan the future of the China-US relationship.

A review of the course traversed in the 40 years since the door to the normalization of the China-US relationship was
opened shows that innovative thinking has been a salient feature. Seeking common ground while reserving differences
under the Shanghai Communique, more than 60 highly effective dialogue and consultation mechanisms, and
coordination and cooperation within the G20 and other multilateral frameworks...[ellipses as received] The China-US
relationship would not have been able to develop to today's level without such innovative thinking and practices.

Innovative thinking is a driving force that helps the China-US relationship get over hurdles and venture forth; it also
represents the clearheadedness that comes from the realization that one will fall behind if one does not move forward
as well as the wisdom that makes one advance with the times. Innovative thinking requires having an accurate grasp of
the main theme of the times featuring peaceful development and cooperation, firmly establishing the concept of win-
win cooperation, and having the courage to break free of various outdated notions.

Seek Common Development Through Mutual Trust

Basic preconditions are needed in order to chart a path toward a new type of relationship between China and the United
States as major powers.

Only by showing mutual trust and dealing with each other frankly and honestly can we eliminate various noises and
disruptions, take a broad-minded approach toward the other side's development, and promote mutually beneficial and
win-win cooperation between China and the United States.

A prominent issue concerning the China-US relationship, both at present and for some time to come, is how to enhance
strategic mutual trust. Some differences and sensitive issues exist between China and the United States due to their
different histories, cultures, social systems, and development levels.
But at the same time, we should also recognize the growing common interests between China and the United States, the
sustained expansion of mutually beneficial cooperation, and the increasingly pronounced strategic significance and
global impact of the China-US relationship.

Mutual trust requires that-both the Chinese and American sides work together to expand common ground, strengthen
coordination, and prudently and properly handle their differences. Mutual trust requires that both the Chinese and
American sides embrace the prevailing trend of dialogue and cooperation, use dialogue to understand and know each
other better, use communication to reduce misunderstandings and misgivings, use cooperation to promote
development and prosperity, and consolidate the foundation of common interests.

Harmony ben efits both China and the United States, whereas conflict hurts both. Greater strategic mutual trust requires
staying true to one's word and trying to meet each other halfway.

Act on the Basis of Equality and Mutual Understanding and See the Big Picture

A correct way to live together is needed in order to chart a path toward a new type of relationship between China and
the United States as major powers.

Only by acting on the basis of equality and mutual understanding and putting oneself in the other side's shoes can we
discard our bigotry and bias and not let the conflict and disagreement of the moment evolve into confrontation.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792942 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792942 Date: 12/31/2015




Equality and mutual understanding are the important underpinnings of the China-US relationship. The China-US
relationship is an equal relationship between two nations. This was true in the past and is true now, and it will remain
unchanged in the future. An essential condition for safeguarding the healthy and stable development of the China-US
relationship is to respect the choices made by the other side in terms of social systems and development paths as well as
the other side's sovereignty, territorial integrity, and development interests.

Equality and mutual understanding need to be embodied in bilateral affairs as well as in international and regional
affairs. Asia-Pacific affairs are a priority area for coordination and cooperation between China and the United States.
China respects America's rightful interests and welcomes the United States to play a constructive role; it also hopes that
the United States respects China's rightful interests and properly handles mutual interests and concerns in a joint effort
to promote peace, mutual trust, and cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region.

Equality and mutual understanding reflect a healthy mentality that is indispensable to the development of the China-US
relationship as well as a rational and pragmatic move.

Take Energetic ActionsTo Implement the Consensus

Tangible and actual results are needed in order to chart a path toward a new type of relationship between China and the
United States as major powers.

Only by taking energetic actions and constantly expanding the scope for cooperation can we breathe new life into the
development of the China-US relationship and further brighten the outlook for the China-US relationship.

China-US cooperation in various fields is developing at a deeper level in a wider range of areas and toward a higher
standard. Both quantity and quality figure in the cooperation agreements reached by the governments of the two
countries and their departments as well as by enterprises in the two countries.
Only by taking energetic actions to implement each point of consensus can the Chinese and American peoples as well as
the peoples of other countries around the world truly benefit from China-US cooperation.

New thinking, new actions, and a new atmosphere are needed to develop the China-US relationship. All of this can only
come from energetic actions and bold practices.

Cultivate Deep Friendship and Promote Exchanges

A deep foundation of public opinion is needed in order to chart a path toward a new type of relationship between China
and the United States as major powers.

Only by cultivating deep friendship and promoting exchanges and contact between various sectors of society in the two
countries can we eliminate misunderstandings, foster better understanding, and find more participants in and
supporters of friendly cooperation between China and the United States.

People-to-people exchanges are an important basis for the development of state-to-state relations. A good China-US
relationship is impossible without the understanding and support of the peoples of the two countries. A deeper
understanding of the importance of the China-US relationship among the Chinese and American peoples, especially in
the younger generation; better mutual understanding and friendship; and a more solid foundation for the China-U S
relationship in society and in terms of public opinion will provide an inexhaustible driving force for the development of
the China-US relationship.

 People-to-people exchanges play a unique role in promoting understanding among the people and in advancing the
 healthy development of the China-US relationship. Along with political mutual trust, economic cooperation, and trade,
 they form an important pillar of the China-US relationship.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792942 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792942 Date: 12/31/2015



The deeper the friendship between the Chinese and American peoples, the more solid the step will be toward
developing the China-US relationship.

China and the United States both shoulder the arduous task of promoting the well-being of their peoples, the historic
mission of safeguarding world peace, and the important duty of promoting sustainable global development. By seizing
opportunities, eliminating disruptions, and working together, China and the United States will surely be able to
constantly open up new vistas for the two countries' relationship and chart a path toward a new type of relationship
between major powers based on mutual respect and win-win cooperation that will reassure the peoples of the two
countries and give peace of mind to the peoples of countries around the world.

[Description of Source: Beijing Renmin Ribao Online in Chinese -- Online version of the daily newspaper (People's Daily)
of the CPC Central Committee.
URL: http://paper.people.com.cn]
Attachments:
(Attachment not included: CPP20120505722022001.pdf) rmrb0505a.pdf



To access this product and its attachment(s), please visit OpenSource.gov and search using the document ID of
CPP20120505722022.

This product may contain copyrighted material; authorized use is for national security purposes of the United States
Government only. Any reproduction, dissemination, or use is subject to the OSC usage policy and the original copyright.

Access OpenSource.gov from anywhere, anytime. All you need is the internet. Go to https://www.opensource.gov, or
contact our OSC Customer Center at OSCinfo@rccb.osis.gov.

UNCLASSIFIED




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792942 Date: 12/31/2015
