      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790023 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                     B6


From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Friday, March 30, 2012 2:25 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: Meeting with Cui Tiankai



Fyi

    Original Message
From: Martin Indyk
Sent: Friday, March 30, 2012 12:47 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob
Cc: Fuchs, Michael H; Strobe Talbott                              >; Kenneth Lieberthal                                 >;
Martin Indyk
Subject: Meeting with Cui Tiankai

Ken Lieberthal and I met with Vice-Foreign Minister Cui Tiankai for two hours at the Foreign Ministry in Beijing on
Tuesday, March 27. What follows are the highlights of an open and substantive exchange.

1. On Obama's "rebalancing" strategy: Cui thought that it was "sensible to do so." But he expressed skepticisM that the
U.S. would be able to shift its attention from the Middle East to Asia. He listed the following reasons:
-- the U.S. will still have a strategic interest in Israel and "if Israelis are worried you will be worried too."
-- the U.S. will still have an interest in stability to ensure the free flow of oil to its Asian and European allies.
-- to rebalance toward Asia would affect the calculations of America's key Arab allies -- would the U.S. be willing to lose
influence with them?
-- in Asia, when people see the U.S. shifting its attention and resources they may become suspicious of American
intentions.
-- there are so many uncertainties in the Greater Middle East -- Iran, Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan, Pakistan -- that it will be
difficult to avoid paying it attention.

2. On the attitude of other Asian powers to U.S.-China relations: "They want us close enough so that each of them is
comfortable and does not have to choose between us. If we are too far apart they will be torn. And if we are too close
together they will be squeezed."

3. On high level U.S.-China dialogue:
-- There have been more frequent meetings but he fears that the mutual understanding is decreasing.
-- Tom Donilon hasn't visited China for two years. He promised to come but he never made the trip. Instead he has
visited Saudi Arabia and Israel. "This shows that the Middle East is not more significant, but it is more urgent."
-- He hopes Secretary Clinton comes to Beijing again before the end of the year, noting that this would be her last
substantive discussion with Deng Baigguo before they both retire. He thought that she and Deng should call on both
sides to review the usefulness of the mechanisms they had put in place "and give us good advice on how to proceed in
the future."
-- Perhaps the strategic and economic dialogues should be separated. There should be smaller group discussions; we
should combine the formal with the informal.
-- We should discuss cybersecurity in the next round of the Strategic and Economic Dialogue and ensure that the military
have more time to engage.
-- the three rounds of discussions with Kurt Campbell on Asia/Pacific issues have been useful.

 4. On President Obama:


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790023 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790023 Date: 12/31/2015




-- "The President has the right mix of idealism and realism but I'm not sure he understands the complexity of China
today. It was easier before when we were all poor and we could agree to get rich together. Now we have strong
interest groups and it's much harder to get consensus on reforms. Some of the very rich are resistant."
-- VP Xi told President Obama that China will continue the path of reform and peaceful development and that China
wants the United States as a friend and a partner.
-- Reform and opening up will be the decisions of the Party Congress.
-- We need a better understanding from the President about our need to strike a balance within Chinese society.

Comment: This was my first meeting with Cui Tiankai. He's obviously super-intelligent, a quick study, and thinks
conceptually, flexibly, and with considerable subtlety. He seemed to have all the time in the world, perhaps occasioned
by the fact that his bosses were all in Seoul. He brought that up, noting that even though he had made all the
preparations, President Hu had wanted to keep the delegation small and he had not made the cut. He seemed quite
philosophical about his apparent loss of influence.

Martin

mindyk




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790023 Date: 12/31/2015
