       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775769 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                               RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                               B5,B6


From:                                H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                                Thursday, August 5, 2010 7:03 AM
To:                                  'sullivanjj@state.gov'
Subject:                             Re: IGNATIUS: Obama offers Iran an opening on engagement



Very interesting. I will call you at 7:30 am. Is that ok?

    Original Message
From: Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
To: H
Sent: Wed Aug 04 22:59:53 2010
Subject: Fw: IGNATIUS: Obama offers Iran an opening on engagement

Fyi.




From: Rhodes, Benjamin J.
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Sent: Wed Aug 04 22:42:28 2010
Subject: Fw: IGNATIUS: Obama offers Iran an opening on engagement




From: Vietor, Tommy
To: DL-NSC-Press & Speechwriting Office; DL-WHO-Press; DL-NSC-NENA <DL-NSC-NENA                             DL-NSC-Non-
Proliferation
Sent: Wed Aug 04 22:36:512010
Subject: IGNATIUS: Obama offers Iran an opening on engagement




Obama offers Iran an opening on engagement

By David Ignatius
Thursday, August 5, 2010; A17

President Obama put the issue of negotiating with Iran <http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
dyn/content/world/mideast/iran/index.html > firmly back on the table Wednesday in an unusual White House session
with journalists. His message was that even as U.N. sanctions squeeze Tehran, he is leaving open a "pathway" for a
peaceful settlement of the nuclear issue.

"It is very important to put before the Iranians a clear set of steps that we would consider sufficient to show that they
are not pursuing nuclear weapons," Obama said, adding: "They should know what they can say 'yes' to." As in the past,
he left open the possibility that the United States would accept a deal that allows Iran to maintain its civilian nuclear
program, so long as Iran provides "confidence-building measures" to verify that it is not building a bomb.

       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775769 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775769 Date: 12/31/2015




The renewed opening to Iran also included a proposal for talks on Afghanistan <http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
srvispecial/afghanistan-pakistanh . Obama said he favored a "separate track" for discussion of this issue, in which the
two sides have a "mutual interest" in fighting the Taliban. He urged that, as part of Afghan President Hamid Karzai's push
for "reintegration" with the Taliban, Iran should be included in regional talks about stability. "Iran should be a part of
that and could be a constructive partner," he said.

Why is Obama talking engagement with Iran when many analysts are debating the growing risks of a military
confrontation? Administration officials cite two factors: First, the sanctions against Iran are beginning to bite, making
Tehran potentially more interested in dialogue; and second, U.S. intelligence reports indicate that the Iranians have had
technical troubles in their nuclear-enrichment program -- which allows more time for diplomacy.

The White House chose an unusual way to send its signals to Tehran. A small group of journalists was invited to a
"background session" on Iran policy with "senior National Security Staff." The briefer turned out to be Obama. An official
said later that the president plans more of these unscripted, informal meetings.

Obama has tried to engage Iran before but has little to show for it. Last year, he sent two secret letters urging dialogue
to Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. This helped get the Iranians to the table in Geneva to discuss a plan for
enriching uranium outside their borders. But Khamenei backed out, even though Iran's hard-line president, Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad, initially supported the deal.

Obama said he hadn't had any direct contact with Khamenei or Ahmadinejad about renewing talks, but he said Iranian
officials have said they want to rejoin the Geneva negotiations with the group of leading nations known as the "P5-plus-
one," perhaps in September.

Obama's sense that the time is right for diplomacy is shaped in part by what he called "rumblings" from Tehran that the
sanctions are having a greater effect than the Iranians expected. Officials said these signs include the strike last month
by Tehran bazaar merchants who are unhappy about the battered economy, as well as recent signals through various
channels that the Iranians want to come back to negotiations.

A senior official who briefed the journalists after Obama left the room said sanctions are more effective now because
there are "better tools" to target the Iranians, "more cooperation" from U.S. allies -- and because the Iranians are "more
vulnerable." Another senior official stressed that "sanctions are not an end in themselves," but a way of influencing
Iran's cost-benefit analysis.

What came through in Obama's upbeat presentation was the administration's view that for all Tehran's bombast, the
United States and its allies have the upper hand.

One reason for this confidence is that Iran appears to be having serious technical problems with its enrichment process -
- due to bad design, bad luck or deliberate sabotage. A senior official said that only 3,800 centrifuges were now
operating at Natanz, at only about 60 percent of their design capacity, with another 4,000 in reserve to cope with
breakdowns.

U.S. officials also appear increasingly confident that because of Iran's setbacks and aggressive monitoring by U.S.
intelligence, it will be hard for Tehran over the next year or two to achieve either a "breakout," where it announces it
has a bomb, or a "sneak out," where it reaches that goal surreptitiously.

Obama's strengths were on display Wednesday in his strategic analysis and his command of detail. Skeptics in Israel and
elsewhere would question whether Iran subjects its nuclear policy to a cost-benefit analysis. But Obama, uncertain
about that issue himself, is at least proposing to put it to the test.

davidignatius@washpost.com



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775769 Date: 12/31/2015
