      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779932 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART B5



From:                         Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                         Saturday, February 26, 2011 2:45 PM
To:                           H
Subject:                      Latest



Do you think the last paragraph violates the owl/minerva rule?
                                             They are fine with the last paragraph;


STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON

Holding the Qaddafi Government Accountable

The United States strongly condemns the ongoing violence and human rights violations
committed by the government of Libya against its own people. As President Obama said, these
actions violate international norms and every standard of common decency. They must stop.

We are moving quickly on a series of steps to hold the Libyan government accountable for its
violation of human rights and to mobilize a strong response from the international community.

Last night the United States took action to limit the ability of senior officials of the
Qaddafi regime to travel. As Secretary of State, I signed an order directing the Department
to revoke U.S. visas held by these officials, others responsible for human rights violations
in Libya, and their immediate family members. As a matter of policy, new visa applications
will be denied.

This step followed President Obama's Executive Order freezing assets and imposing financial
sanctions on members of the regime responsible for abuses against their own people and the
suspension of the very limited defense trade we have had with Libya, including pending sales
of spare military parts and other licenses allowing private companies to sell military
equipment there.

The United States is also working with our friends and partners to mobilize a strong and
unified response from the international community to hold accountable the perpetrators of
these unacceptable violations of universal human rights. This afternoon I continued close
consultations with our European allies, including EU High Representative Catherine Ashton.
Negotiations are underway at the United Nations Security Council on a resolution that would
impose new sanctions and restrictions. On Monday, I will meet with a number of counterparts
in Geneva and address the UN Human Rights Council, which on Friday recommended suspending
Libya's membership. We are also working with partners to determine how to provide
humanitarian assistance to those in need. Consistent with the President's guidance, we will
continue to look at the full range of options to hold the Libyan government accountable and
support the Libyan people.

We have always said that the Qaddafi government's future is a matter for the Libyan people to
decide, and they have made themselves clear. When a leader's only means of staying in power
is to.use mass violence against his own people, he has lost the legitimacy to rule and needs
to do what is right for his country by leaving, and the sooner the better. Moammar Qaddafi
has lost the confidence of his people and he should go without further bloodshed and
violence. The Libyan people deserve a government that is responsive to their aspirations and
that protects their universally recognized human rights.

###

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779932 Date: 12/31/2015
