       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779011 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                     B6


From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Sunday, January 30, 2011 6:45 AM
To:                               H
Subject:                          Fw: LATEST Q&A



Fyi



From: Crowley, Philip
To: Sullivan, Jacob J; 'Dennis_B._Ross                                               Burns, William J; Steinbera.
James B; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Nides, Thomas R; 'Daniel B. Shapirc
'Denis_R._McDonough
<Antony_l_Blinken                    Smith, Dana S; McHale, Judith A; Thomas F. Vietor
                                     Thomas E. Donilor
'Michael_A._HammeI
Cc: 'Benjamin_J._Rhodes                                                   ; Mills, Cheryl D; Reines, Philippe I; Rand,
Dafna H
Sent: Sun Jan 30 06:08:41 2011
Subject: Re: LATEST Q&A

I believe the interviews will lean heavily on the authorized departure, the rumored Mubarak departure for Sharm, a
political matket that expects Mubarak to cede the presidency to Suleiman and with two shoes now dropped in the
region (three if one counts Lebanon), what's next? Coming back to the message of reform, drawing from her Doha
speech, will send the right message. These are decisions that will be made in the region, based on unique circumstances
country by country, but reform is vital.

PJ


From: Sullivan, Jacob J
Sent: Saturday, January 29, 2011 09:55 PM
To: 'Ross, Dennis B.'                                 Burns, William J; Steinberg, James B; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Nides,
Thomas R; Shapiro, Daniel B.                                     McDonough, Denis R.
                                     j Blinken, Antony J.                                     Crowley, Philip J; Smith,
Dana S; McHale, Judith A; Vietor, Tommy                                       'Donilon, Thomas E.'
                                     Hammer, Michael A.
Cc: Rhodes, Benjamin J.                                       Mills, Cheryl D; Reines, Philippe I; Rand, Dafna H
Subject: LATEST Q&A

All,

Pasted below are the latest Q&A, incorporating various comments. Tom, Denis, Ben, others, please pay close attention
to assistance question. There have been a number of changes, and this is hard stuff, so I ask everyone to look closely
again.


                                               Sunday Show Q&A

Home base

We continue to monitor the situation very closely. We are in frequent contact with our
Embassy and our Egyptian contacts, and we have met regularly as a national security team.
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779011 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779011 Date: 12/31/2015




We have been sending a consistent message with four basic pillars:

First, the Egyptian security forces must not use violence against peaceful protestors. At the
same time, of course, those who are protesting have a responsibility to do so peacefully, and the
looting must cease.

Second, we support the universal human rights of the Egyptian people, including the right to
freedom of expression, of association, and of assembly, as well as freedom of the press, to
access information, and to communicate. These are human rights and the United States stands
up for them everywhere.

Third, we believe that reform is absolutely critical to the well-being of Egypt.
Egypt has been an important partner of the United States on a range of regional issues. As a
partner, we strongly believe that the Egyptian Government needs to engage immediately in a
dialogue with the Egyptian people, and to take swift and concrete steps to implement needed
economic, political, and social reforms.

As the President and I said yesterday, these protests underscore that there are deep grievances
within Egyptian society, and the Egyptian Government needs to understand that suppression
will not make these grievances go away.

Fourth, this is about more than just Egypt. The people of the Middle East, like people
everywhere, are seeking a chance to contribute and to have a role in the decisions that will
shape their lives. As I said in Doha, and as the President has said in Cairo and elsewhere,
leaders need to engage with their people to respond to these aspirations and to help build a
better future for all.




Q/ Should Mubarak step aside? Why are you supporting him?

First of all, the future of Egypt will be determined by Egyptians — not the United States. And as
the President said the other night, when President Mubarak addressed the Egyptian people, he
pledged a better democracy and greater economic opportunity. Now the Egyptian government
must give meaning to those words, and take concrete steps that deliver on that promise.

The United States is prepared to be a partner in that process, just as we have been a close
partner of Egypt for decades.

Q/ Is it over for Mubarak?

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779011 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779011 Date: 12/31/2015




As a partner of Egypt, we have made clear that the Egyptian government needs to be responsive
to the Egyptian people. Naturally, how the government addresses the people's needs and
aspirations will ourse determine how things proceed in the days ahead.

Q/ So you're not confident he will survive?

This is an important moment for Egypt, both the people and the government. As we have said,
the Egyptian people have called for reform that responds to their needs and aspirations, and that
opportunity can't be missed.

Q/ What are we asking of Mubarak?

As the President said, we are asking the Egyptian government to take concrete steps to .
implement needed reforms — many of which his government has committed to.

Q/ When you talk about concrete steps for reform, what are you talking about?

As President Obama said, we want to see a meaningful dialogue between the government and
its citizens, and a path of political change that leads to a future of greater freedom and
opportunity for the Egyptian people.

In that respect, we have consistently called for an end to the emergency law, for respect for civil
society organizations, and for free and fair elections.



Q/ Is Egypt stable?

It is obviously a very volatile situation that we are monitoring very closely. Ultimately, Egypt
will be more stable if it pursues political reform. It is absolutely vital for Egypt to embrace
reform to ensure not just its stability but also the progress its people so richly deserve.

Q/ Mubarak's sons have left - does this signal that he's given up on the idea of installing
Gamal?

I don't want to speculate on that. Let me just reiterate that we want to partner with the Egyptian
people and their government to realize their aspirations to live in a democratic society that
respects basic human rights.

Q/ What is the US sense of the Egyptian military's position? As a key player, are they moving
to support the changes?



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779011 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779011 Date: 12/31/2015




I don't want to speculate on that. The army is a respected institution in Egypt and we have been
in touch with them to stress the need for restraint and for their support for a process of reform.

Q/ Why have the police have abandoned their duties - is this a tactic of the government to
promote chaos and lawlessness?

We know that the army has been deployed. The army is a respected institution in Egypt and we
have been in touch with them to stress the need for restraint and for their support for a process
of reform.

Q/ Are you going to cut off assistance to Egypt? Or, Robert Gibbs said you are reviewing your
aid to Egypt. What have you concluded?

We don't have any plans to cut off assistance right now. Of course, we are always reviewing
our assistance to other countries to make sure it is being used for the right purposes. But right
now, our focus is on urging restraint and on supporting a reform process that gets underway
immediately.

Q/ What would lead you to cut it off?

Our focus is on supporting a reform process that gets underway immediately. I'm not going to
get into hypotheticals.

Q/ What do you think of the appointment of Omar Soliman and General Shafik?

We have worked with General Soliman and with General Shafik, and we will convey to them
the same things that President Obama conveyed to President Mubarak, and that we have said
publicly. [Pivot to general messages.]

Q/ Do you agree with Vice President Biden that President Mubarak is not a dictator?

I would point out that Vice President Biden made clear that we support the universal aspirations
of the Egyptian people. And we have consistently raised with the Egyptian Government over
many years the need for greater openness and participation in order to provide a better life, a
better future, for the people.

We have also been clear when we believe the Egyptian Government has acted in ways that are
undemocratic — for instance, through our opposition to the Emergency Law, and our support for
free and fair elections.

What's important now is that President Mubarak and the Egyptian government move forward
with the kind of reforms that demonstrate a commitment to true democracy.

Q/ Are you engaging with the opposition?
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779011 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779011 Date: 12/31/2015




As a matter of course, we engage with both the Egyptian government and the Egyptian people -
to include civil society. We will continue to do so.

Q/ Do you think the Muslim Brotherhood is a legitimate part of the opposition? Do you think
they will take over the government?

I think what you've seen over the last few days is a broad range of opposition groups. What's
important here is not a particular group — it is a process that allows the Egyptian government
and Egyptian people for the aspirations of the Egyptian people to be met.




Q/ Are Americans in Egypt safe?

We are working to ensure the safety of all Americans in Egypt. As Secretary of State, I take
that responsibility very seriously. We have stood up a special task force at the State
Department headquarters and we are sending additional personnel to Cairo to help our citizens
arrange matters during this period.

We have said we will facilitate the voluntary departure of dependents and non-emergency
personnel at the Embassy. We will also facilitate the departure of American citizens who are
seeking to leave.

At the same time, we are urging people not to pursue non-essential travel to Egypt.

Q/ Were you caught off guard? Have you been slow to respond?

Absolutely not. Since the beginning of this Administration, we have raised directly with the
Egyptian government our support for political reform. The President spoke about the need for
democratic reform and respect for universal rights in his speech in Cairo. I spoke directly to this
issue in Doha.

We have also been very clear from the beginning of these protests — that we oppose violence;
that we support reform; and that we support the universal rights of the Egyptian people. What
we're focused on now is working with the Egyptian government and people to advance a more
democratic society that respects basic human rights.

Q/ Should the military put down the protests? Is lack of civil order a growing concern?

I'll just repeat that we do not want to see violence. That means the government should restrain
the Security Forces from using violence, and deal with the protests peacefully. And that means
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779011 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779011 Date: 12/31/2015




protesters should not pursue violence. And the looting needs to stop and has nothing to do with
legitimate protest.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779011 Date: 12/31/2015
