     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779901 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                     B6



From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Saturday, February 26, 2011 11:47 AM
To:
Subject:                          Re: H: Q's scuds, Seif's private strategy, more. Sid


Last night we discussed an extensive outreach campaign to new local cmtes. IC is leading effort to identify key people -
we are contributing.


From: H <HDR22@clintonemall.com>
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Sent: Sat Feb 26 11:42:16 2011
Subject: Fw: H: Q's scuds, Seifs private strategy, more. Sid

Pls read--esp about reaching out to the revolutionary committees.

From: sbwhoeo               [mailto:sbwhoeop
Sent: Friday, Febru ry , 011 01:59 PM
To: H
Subject: H: Q's scuds, Seifs private strategy, more. Sid




                                                   CONFIDENTIAL



                                                 February 25, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Qaddafi's Scuds and strategy for holding on



On the morning of February 25, a former official of the government of Muammar
Qaddafi stated in confidence that he and other former members of the Qaddafi regime are
concerned by the knowledge that the soldiers and officers assigned to the Libyan Army's
Scud Missile Battalions remain loyal to Qaddafi. While the issue remains open as to
whether or not the Libyan government maintains small quantities of mustard gas and
other Weapons of Mass Destruction, Qaddafi's forces can use these Scuds to carry

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779901 Date: 12/31/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779901 Date: 12/31/2015




conventional high explosives, and launch random, but destructive attacks
against Benghazi, Tobruk or other towns under the control of anti-government forces.
(Source Comment: These sources repeated their earlier warning that Qaddafi would not
hesitate to use all of the resources at his disposal to attack civilian, political, and economic
targets if he feels he is on the verge of being defeated by anti-government troops.)


During the afternoon of February 25, Qaddafi's son, Saif al-Islam stated in private that his
father is convinced he can hold power, if he can maintain control of portions of Tripoli for the
next ten (10) days. Saif al-Islam states that it is important to remember that his father is still the
Head of State in Libya, and that the UN and the major nations of the world are reluctant to
depose a sitting Head of State. (Source Comment: The United States invasions of Iraq and
Afghanistan sere as the examples that prove the rule in this case.) The Libyan diplomats
serving abroad who remain loyal to Qaddafi have been instructed to press this point with other
governments. These diplomats are particularly active in sub Saharan African, and at this point
Saif al-Islam is pleased with what he considers the rather mild reaction of these states to the
violence used by forces loyal to Qaddafi in suppressing anti-government activities in
Libya. Saif al-Islam believes that while the leaders of countries like Chad, Benin, and Burkina
Faso must call for an end to violence, they will continue to stop short of statements supporting
the demonstrators. By the same token the Organization of African Unity (OAU), after delaying
its response to the violence for several days, has limited its statements to an expression of
concern.
The current President of the OAU is Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, the President of
Equatorial Guinea, who, according to well placed sources, considers himself a friend and
supporter of Qaddafi. Mbasogo received support from Libya when he seized power in a violent
military coup d'etat in 1979, and he has remained loyal to Qaddafi over the years. Mbasogo
receives technical and business advice from Libyan experts, particularly in managing Equatorial
Guinea's substantial oil resources.
Since coming to power in 1969 Qaddafi has worked to establish strong relationships with the
Heads of State in many sub-Saharan African nations. This support has included technical and

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779901 Date: 12/31/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779901 Date: 12/31/2015




financial aid, military support, and private payments to the various Heads of State. According
to Saif al-Islam, Qaddfi believes these African states will now continue support him as he deals
with the rebellion in Libya. Well placed sources report that Mbasogo has received millions of
dollars in private payments from the Qaddafi regime.
Since 1969, Qaddafi has been one of the only Islamic leaders in North Africa to seek out cordial
relations with the nations of sub-Saharan Africa. According to a former official of the Kenyan
government, these African states feel that the Islamic nations of North Africa look down on
their southern neighbors and focus most their attention on relations with the Arab states of the
Middle East. Libya and Israel are the two countries of North Africa and the Middle East who
have invested substantial time, money and personnel resources in supporting these African
states. For its part, Kenya has a history of conflict with Libya rooted in the Cold War, however,
this individual notes that even these relations improved after the 2003-2004 Libyan agreement
with the Western powers regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction.
(Source Comment: The leaders of the OAU states also fear that the wave of anti-corruption
unrest that is sweeping North Africa will spread south. This is particularly true in the case of
dictators like Mbasogo and Zimbabwe's Robert Mugabe. However, even elected leaders like
South Africa's Jakob Zuma must be concerned because of the economic downturn in their
countries and the rampant corruption that exists across Africa. It is highly unlikely that these
African states will support any attempt by the UN, or NATO to organize some form of military
response to the Libyan situation, including the establishment of a no-fly zone over Libya.)
iiolence continues throughout Tripoli, with those military, and Para military units still loyal to
ddafi using deadly force against protesters. These forces are being supported by mercenaries
m the sub-Sahara Africa. The          various tribal, civic and political groups continue to form
olutionary committees in an effort to begin to organize the parts of the country under the
itrol of anti-government forces. According to a former government official, these
nmittees are hoping that the international community will          reach out to them and assist in
'Wishing a new government in Libya.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779901 Date: 12/31/2015
