      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784532 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                          RELEASE IN PART B5,B6




From:                              PVerveer
Sent:                              Thursday, November 24, 2011 8:58 AM                                                B6
To:
Subject:                           Burma, etc


I wanted to mention a few things to you as there is travel ahead and there won't be a chance.

Your trip to Burma, in addition to the promise of change and its historic aspects, will be a great opportunity for the women
of Burma. It will be a balancing act between the geo-political implications of the thaw and the on-going human rights
issues. There will be much attention on you and Aung San Suu Kyi. She for the symbol of democracy that she has been
and you for the human rights/women's rights symbol that you have been. As the keeper of your flame, I am only too aware
of all the times over the years that you have been a voice for ASSK. I remember your signing the Beijing poster to ASSK
for Albright to take to her right after the conference in 1995!

A few years back, you were on the stage at Vital Voices when we honored the Burmese women and ran the drum of over
100 names of women imprisoned there, and then last year VV honored ASSK. In the interview with her, she mentioned
you and what you have represented to her several times. Moreover, she agreed to the interview because of your
association with VV. So, it's no surprise for all of this, that I'm inundated with
messages from the Nobel women, offices of women Senators, Mrs. Bush to the myriad NGOs wishing you well on your
journey and urging you not to forget the women. Hopefully, when you're back we can do some kind of response based on
your experience.

The whole minorities issue is that much worse because rape has been used repeatedly as a tool
in the oppression and this point especially the Nobel women asked to be raised.

Also, you should know that our office has been funding a coalition of women's groups in Burma for leadership in civil
society building. They have already trained several hundred women and the work is continuing. The grant was for $100k
(a sizeable amount for Burma) and is being done through the embassy. I've told Kurt and company about the women and
I'm hoping that some will be included in your civil society meeting. Our belief has been that progress needs to happen and
women will be key.

Secondly, Bonn

In the last days we've had it confirmed that,in addition to 1/2 the civil society delegation, 32% of the official Afghan
delegation will be comprised of women, including some of the best and including an opposition parliamentarian. Moreover,
we also learned that the health results there are improving significantly, including a huge drop in maternal mortality!
Minister Dalil (whom you know) will be coming to Bonn. Since you have been instrumental in support to lower the
maternal mortality rates and made it an issue at the Kabul conference, I hope you will be able to do a side event at the
Bonn conference with Minister Dalil to spotlight the progress as well as a brief meeting with the Afghan women's
delegation.

Third, Women and Public Service (aka "Seven Sisters).

As you know, we've been partnering with Farah's office on this and June Shih has been dedicated to the project full time.
We now have some excellent deliverables so the event will have wind at its back to go forward. This includes a program
that will be done with Asia University for Women, so some of the young women in the region will be inspired to go into
public service. We are still hoping to pull in non- 7 Sisters schools to make commitments, like Scripps, Spellman, etc.
They are interested and we are working on that.
We also have a growing roster of impressive women coming, including a message yesterday frot the President of
Kosovo. (She would also like to have a bilat with you when she is here). I'm thrilled that Christine Lagarde has accepted
(she was fabulous at APEC/SF), and we are hoping that you will be able to work the schedule so you and she will be able
to share the stage.

Fourth, the National Action Plan

You had asked Anita on Monday where things stood with DOD and they are going forward (and thanks for raising with
Panetta).
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784532 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784532 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                      We all agree that if you could speak earlier in the day on the 16th in
addition to your ICG evening remarks, it would give the message its due and accommodate the broader community which
has a stake in this.

A happy Thanksgiving to all the Clintons. I will hope to see you fleetingly in Busan.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784532 Date: 12/31/2015
