      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778143 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                  B6


From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Saturday, January 29, 2011 1:00 PM
To:
Subject:                           FW: Cairo Update 1930 January 29



FYI


From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Saturday, January 29, 2011 12:53 PM
To: Cutrona, Aimee; Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A; 'Daniel_B._Shapiro
'Sergio_L._Aguirre                   Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Schlicher, Ronald L•; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip 3; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1; McHale, Judith A; Hensman,
Chris D; NEA-PD-DL
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,
Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S
Subject: Cairo Update 1930 January 29

Violence is escalating in Cairo. There is widespread looting and Embassy staff in Maadi, Mohandiseen and Giza report
gunfire. Press reported an attempt to break into the Central Bank Printing office was thwarted by the Egyptian
Army. Contacts and LES staff report that organized gangs of thugs roam the city and that they believe them to be
affiliated with the security services. Shops in most neighborhoods are closing. We have several reports that citizens are
forming committees to defend their neighborhoods. An Army general appeared on State TV asking Egyptians to defend
their homes and deal with looters "harshly." He also said the Army would fire on looters.

Protestors continue to arrive in Tahrir square and contacts tell us the atmosphere is peaceful and festive. One contact
told us the crowd is treating the military like "rock stars." Al Hurra TV showed one soldier with a bull horn telling
protestors you may protest as much as you like, but no violence. And, leave the looters to us.

As of 19:10 Egypt Air New York.Flight Manager Mr. Tarek Gabr advised that the airport is open and Egypt Air flights are
operational with minor delay.

While several of our contacts see Omar Suleiman as a popular figure with broad support, they see his appointment as
Vice President as too little too late. Contacts report crowds in Tahrir booed the announcement. Many in Tahrir
continue to shout "People and Army, one hand!," but others have shifted from "No Mubarak" to "No Suleiman" or
"Civilian not Military." Staff in Tahrir report some anti-U.S. sentiment, with protestors suggesting that the new Vice
President was hand-picked by the U.S.

Opposition and activist contacts tell us the Soliman announcement, as well as the naming of former military officer and
Civil Aviation Minister Ahmed Shafik as Prime Minister, is "not enough" to satisfy protestors. Some suggest an
immediate end to the Emergency Law or an announcement of the dissolution of parliament and new elections as
needed additional steps. Others say that only Mubarak's departure would be enough to calm the crowds. One contact
told us protestors are now also chanting "Trial for Mubarak." A leader from Baradei's National Association for Change
(NAC) told us that this appointment is "is more of the same," the Mubarak regime with "new faces" and not the change
we are looking for.




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778143 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778143 Date: 12/31/2015




From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Saturday, January 29, 2011 5:28 PM
To: Tueller, Matthew H; Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A; 'Daniel_B._Shapiro
'Sergio_l__Agu*                      Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip 3; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Pelton, Erin; TaskForce-1
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,
Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew S; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore 3; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S
Subject: Cairo Update 1700 January 29

At approximately 1715 Egyptian TV announced EGIS director Omar Suleiman as Vice President. This was following the
mid-day announcement that that the government had formally resigned and later reports in the afternoon that
President Mubarak was meeting with his new cabinet. Mubarak is expected to make an announcement "shortly."

People continue to flow into Tahrir square. As of 1300, crowds are again swelling in the Maadi and Tahrir Square
areas. Military units have taken up positions throughout the area, many staffed by M60 tanks and a variety of other
types of armored personnel carriers.

We have been able to resume contact with a wide range of activist contacts. All of them tell us that they still believe
protests must continue and that President Mubarak should step down. Several senior activist contacts report that they
are participating in protests. One activist contact told us that he had been shot with a rubber bullet by security outside
the Ministry of the Interior building a block behind the parliament. Protestors have been attempting to reach the MOI
all day.

At 1330 local time the military announced an expanded curfew which began at 1600 and will end one hour later at
0800. We are watching closely the military's interaction with. protestors. Al Jazeera has issued a series reports that
appear contradictory, and suggest a disagreement between the military and the presidency on how to deal with
protestors. NDP SYG Safwat Sherif announced that party organizational secretary Ahmed Ezz, charged with organizing
recent elections, had submitted his resignation. He did not elaborate on the reasons behind the resignation. An NDP
contact told us he believes the police will return to the street "shortly."

Demonstrations continued through the evening of January 28 in Cairo. Finally wearing down in the early morning hours,
only small bands of demonstrators roamed throughout the area of the Embassy by 0600. The Army's Republican Guard
took up positions around the Embassy perimeter beginning at approx 2300. The Colonel who was tasked with our
security was also given the unenviable job of coordinating with the local police. Police were exhausted and demoralized
after having been on duty since Monday.

The battles throughout the day were devastating and the police appeared leaderless and without motivation. The police
have established weak checkpoints adjacent to the bollard lined perimeter of the streets surrounding the US and British
Embassies. The police are not equipped for less than lethal force, carrying sniper rifles, RPGs, machine guns, and AK-
47s. We have varying reports on the numbers of casualties resulting from clashes yesterday between police and
protestors. The highest estimate we've seen is 150.

We have accounted for 18 of the 23 vehicles taken from our "Polish Parking Lot", approximately 100 meters north of the
embassy. According to local security sources one of the armored vehicles was involved in an accident in which between
3-6 police officers were killed. While attempting to recover the diplomatic plates from one of the vehicles which was
found on the Corniche, approximately 2 miles south of the embassy, one of the ARSOs was chased by a sword and knife
wielding crowd who appeared to be waiting for someone to stop at the vehicle.

Police in Maadi, a residential area, were involved in numerous live fire gun fights throughout the night, adjacent to the
embassy residential compound known as 11/11. The embassy continues to advertise the stand fast instruction via the
radio network and the mission phone tree.
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778143 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778143 Date: 12/31/2015




Member of El Baradei's National Association for Change (NAC) affirmed to us at 1345 that Baradei had never been under
house arrest, but had remained at his home overnight. Contacts told us the NAC had understood Baradei would go out
today but that he changed his plans this morning and will remain at home. NAC members said they had planned to
protest today but needed to consider the new curfew. The NAC, which includes several opposition parties and protest
movements as well as some members of the MB met this afternoon issued a set of demands that includes replacing
Mubarak, establishing an interim government, drafting anew constitution, an end to the Emergency Law, release of
political prisoners, and a series of economic demands (full text attached). The NAC has also called for the formation of
local popular committees to secure neighborhoods. Egyptian TV is reporting that the Muslim Brotherhood is also
forming its own neighborhood committees. We have been told that the parallel parliament will meet tomorrow to issue
its own statement.

Activist and opposition contacts report that they are disappointed with President Mubarak's speech. They are looking
for more and believe that protests must continue in order to demonstrate that they are serious about change. Several
expected the new Prime Minister would be from the military. Contacts with close contact with the Muslim Brotherhood
affirm the MB played a role in yesterday's protests but believes them "very cautious," suggesting they were never more
than 20 percent of the crowd.

Many newsstands closed today, but newspapers did get published late and were out in some places. Pro Government
papers (Al Ahram, Akhbar, and Gomhouria) all ran similar front page stories re
"Mubarak asks Govt to resign and warns against plots to shake stability & violate legitimacy." Independent and
opposition papers Al Wafd, AMAY, and Al Shorouk were all on the newsstands.




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Tueller, Matthew H
Sent: Saturday, January 29, 2011 12:51 AM
To: Wailes, Jacob, Biome, Donald A; Cutrona, Aimee; 'Daniel_B._Shapirc
'Sergio_L_Aguir l                    Shampaine, Nicole D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes,
Tamara C; Allen, atherine E; FeIrnan, Jeffrey D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley,
Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan, Jacob J; Pelton, Erin
Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Berns, David B; Shea, Peter T; Kennedy, David JR; Colton,
 Elizabeth 0; Rosenstock, Matthew 5; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore J; Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S
Subject: Cairo Update midnight Friday

All personnel at the Embassy compound are accounted for and will remain through the night in safe haven
area. Egyptian military have established checkpoints outside the compound perimeter. In coordination with
RSO, DATT, and Ministry of Interior officials the military units appear to be making progress on restoring
control of the roads adjacent to the Embassy. Preliminary assessment is that 23 USG vehicles have been taken
from the Polish parking. We are unable to assess other physical damage to facilities. One Embassy vehicle can
be seen on its side burning on a side street. Guard booth at the north parking lot has been gutted by fire, booth
at one drop arm has been damaged. There are a number of burned police vehicles in the area. Police remaining
around the Embassy are demoralized and extremely tired. Some appear to be under pursuit by protestors.

 The number of protestors moving into the main square of the city is increasing notwithstanding the curfew and
 deployment of military forces. Sound of gunfire is ongoing.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778143 Date: 12/31/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778143 Date: 12/31/2015




We have been able to contact and account for all but 9 U.S. Direct Hire employees via landline phone calls or
checking on residences. Efforts to ascertain the whereabouts of those we have been unable to contact are
ongoing.

RSO reports seeing protestors armed with AK-47's and there is gunfire being exchanged between military and
protestors. We also have credible reports of gunfire from Embassy residents in Maadi. Looters have been
observed in Maadi as well as burning of stores and vehicles. Earlier in the evening a large group of protestors
were trying to get to the Israeli Ambassador's residence near the. main Maadi police station.

Senior Mission staff in our residential neighborhoods spent time before nightfall contacting families and
checking on mood which appears to run the gamut. Many are understandably jittery giving sound of gunfire
and sighting from balconies of fires and looters. As circumstances permit on Saturday we will explore other
ways of convening mission employeeS and family members to convey information and assess morale.

One consular officer at the Embassy and seven from their homes are fielding calls from concerned U.S.
citizens. We are advising U.S. citizens to remain safely in their homes or hotels. Most U.S. citizen concerns
center around lack of internet access and potential airport closures. We are not aware yet of any Amcits injured
in today's events.

Five private Amcits have taken refuge on the Embassy compound and are in the safe haven area.

Due to communication limitations we are unable to provide any reaction to President Mubarak's speech. Once
mobile phone and intemet access is restored, post will make every effort to reach out to wide range of contacts
for an assessment.




Matthew H. Tueller
Deputy Chief of Mission
U.S. Embassy Cairo
Office Tel: +202-2-797-2307


SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778143 Date: 12/31/2015
