      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784022 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Saturday, July 16, 2011 3:18 PM
To:                               H
Subject:                          Fw: Amb Zhang-A/S Campbell call summary




From: Campbell, Kurt M
Sent: Saturday, July 16, 2011 02:27 PM
To:
                                                                                      >; Sullivan, Jacob 3;
                   •                                                                                                  B6
Subject: Fw: Amb Zhang-A/S Campbell call summary

Having been on the receiving end of many of these, this one was generally quite mild. Zhang first asked after my family
and plans for the weekend before proceeding into his text. He also was a bit apologetic at the end. All points similar to
what we got from VFM Cui. Given several factors -- no mention of canceling upcoming meetings, a tone quite different
from the content of the message, some small talk, no ask for an in person meeting, and no request for higher level calls -
- I would judge that China is trying to respond quite carefully and deliberately. Let's see if it holds. Best Kurt


From: Moy, Kin W
Sent: Saturday, July 16, 2011 01:55 PM
To: Patel, Nirav 5;                                                                 r>                                B6
Cc: Campbell, Kurt M; Klein, William H; Rosenberger, Laura M; Wang, Robert S (Beijing); Zaiser, Jeffrey M (Beijing)
Subject: Amb Zhang-A/S Campbell call summary

Amb. Zhang spoke to A/S Campbell by phone this afternoon to register China's strong opposition to the President's
meeting with the Dalai Lama.

In a dispassionate tone, Zhang indicated China was "greatly upset" by the meeting. He made four points:

    1. China firmly opposes any meetings regardless of the form between foreign leaders and the Dalai Lama.
    2. Dalai Lama is not simply a religious figure, but a political exile bent on splitting China and undermining ethnic
       unity. His "middle way" is a disguise for Tibetan independence and separating one-fourth of China's
       territory. The President has met with DL twice in the past two years, making the Chinese people ask why the
       U.S. wants to harm its interests time and again.
    3. Last year, the meeting damaged the relationship and it took great efforts to put it back on track. We now have
       good momentum starting from President Hu's visit. The meeting with DL gravely interferes with China's internal
       affairs, hurts the feelings of the Chinese people, undermines China's core interests, and harms U.S.- China
       relations. The U.S. side should not ask China to cooperate while undermining China's interests. This meeting
       does not conform to the two Presidents' agreement on cooperative relations based on mutual respect and
       benefits.
    4. China urges the United States to declare publicly that it recognizes Tibet is a part of China and that it does not
       support Tibetan independence.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784022 Date: 12/31/2015
