     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775736 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Monday, August 2, 2010 2:23 PM
To:                                'JilotyLC@state.gov.
Subject:                           Fw: Printing too



Pis print.

    Original Message
From: Huma Abedin
To: H
Sent: Fri Jul 30 12:04:01 2010
Subject: Printing too

The first part is the Arab League letter to POTUS. The second part is an Omani "accompanying" document. According
to NEA, the letter is the key, more official outcome document of the summit.

President Barack Obama
President of the United States of America

On behalf of the Arab ministers, members of the Arab Peace Initiative Committee, and on behalf of myself, I would like
to present to you our utmost gratitude for the efforts that you are exerting on behalf of the United States to push
forward peace efforts in the Middle East to establish a just and permanent peace for the Arab Israeli conflict.

And in light of the continuous consultations conducted by your envoy Mr. George Mitchell to narrow the viewpoints of
the Palestinian and Israeli sides, and your desire to move from indirect to direct negotiations, I am pleased to inform you
that the Arab Peace Initiative Committee held its meeting on 29 July 2010 on the ministerial level with the participation
of H.E. Palestinian President and the committee decided to present the enclosed message to your Excellency and which
states the Arab position in this regards.

Sheikh Hamad Bin Jassem Bin Jabr Al Thani Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of the State of Qatar Chairman
of the Arab Peace Initiative Committee




Mr. President

First and foremost, the Arab Peace Initiative Committee values your commitment and dedication to reach a final
solution for the Arab Israeli conflict by establishing two states — Palestine and Israel — living side by side in peace and
security, and settling the conflict between Israel and Syria as well as Israel and Lebanon. This conflict has exhausted the
region's economies, and obstructed the efforts for development in the Arab world, which led to countless loss of life on
both sides and creating an environment for violence and terrorism that prevented the realization of security and
stability in the region.

We also praise your constant efforts to create the suitable circumstances to resume final negotiations by calling on Israel
to freeze the construction of the settlements and to lift the siege imposed on the Gaza Strip, as well as assist the
Palestinians to bear the responsibility of governing their territories and provide security for their citizens in context of a
fully sovereign state. These steps are necessary to regain the trust and security for the purpose of resuming fruitful
peace negotiations. And we think that the reconciliation efforts between the Palestinian factions and the permanent



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775736 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775736 Date: 12/31/2015



cease fire between Israel and the Palestinians and the responsible movement by all the sides will increase the chances of
achieving this goal.

And regarding the steps towards normalization with Israel which you proposed that Arab countries promise to do, the
Arab Peace Initiative for the year 2002 proposes to Israel conditions for the end of the conflict, and consequently
moving towards establishing normal relations with Israel and the 22 Arab states.

The means to achieve the goal of permanent peace between Israel and its Arab neighbors was addressed in Security
Council resolutions numbers 242 and 338, and previous peace plans and understandings, and the principle of land for
peace, including our peace initiative, and the principles of a permanent agreement proposed by former president of the
United States Bill Clinton at the end of the year 2000 and the results of the Taba negotiations. These documents clarify
the principal issues that should be resolved through direct negotiations to achieve a two-state solution and the
establishment of a Palestinian state based on the lines of 4 June 1967 with minor adjustments accepted by both sides,
and East Jerusalem to be the capital of the state of Palestine, and reaching a just solution to the refugee issue in
accordance with the United Nations General Assembly resolution number 194, and agreement on the security
arrangements that will achieve security for citizens of both states.

The other fundamental element for the success of any meaningful peace effort is represented in the commitment of the
American leadership to present its ideas and proposals and its encouragement to narrow the gap between the two sides
for the purpose of moving forward in negotiations.

In context of the United States demand to resume direct talks, we are ready to undertake our responsibilities on the
basis of our commitment to peace as stated in the Arab Peace Initiative, and to intensify the diplomatic, economic and
security participation as necessary, in order to ensure the rapid achievement of peace within a defined timeframe.

And we realize the need for an agreement from both sides to resume direct final negotiations and giving priority to the
issues of borders and security which we support. And to be able to contribute to the comprehensive security
arrangements for the two states and the region, we believe that the discussion about negotiations in regards to borders
must be based on ending the occupation that began in 1967 and must include the future of the settlements, in order to
preserve the safety of the Palestinian territories and their ties, and the demographic and geographic change to which
they are exposed including Eastern Jerusalem the issues of water and refugees, and we recall in this regards your speech
in front of the United Nations General Assembly in September 2009.

And we trust that you spoke with the Israeli side regarding what you said in your letter to the Palestinian President
Mahmoud Abbas dated 16 July 2010 where we consider your letters to the Palestinian President and especially this
letter as basis for direct negotiations and an assurance of its seriousness.

And to guarantee that each of the two sides is prepared to deal the potential issues related to borders and security and
avoiding escalations which occurred in previous negotiations and to negotiate in good faith, we urge you to assist in
preparing a suitable environment and presenting proposals to bridge the gap between Israel and the Palestinians and
serious work on a complete freeze of the settlements including East Jerusalem. If no progress is achieved, in this context
we kindly request that the United States understand our decision to present the issue to the Security Council.

Mr. President, we look forward to working with you to achieve permanent peace in the region for the sake of this
generation and the generations to come.




Proposals Regarding the Direct Serious Final Negotiations Between the Palestinian Liberation Organization and the
Israeli Government

         The goal of the negotiations: establishment of the Palestinian State and its East Jerusalem as its capitol, based
on the two-state solution, and defining the borders between them based on the lines of 4 June 1967, and the

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775736 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775736 Date: 12/31/2015



international references, and the related Security Council resolutions, and the Arab Peace Initiative, and the Road Map,
and the principle of land for peace, and in order for the negotiations to be fruitful it has to, occur in an environment that
allows for the desired progress. Based on that, there must be a halt to settlement activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, and end to the siege on Gaza.
The road towards the negotiations:

1-These negotiations will be called: The final negotiations between the Palestinian Liberation Organization and the
Israeli government.
2-The negotiations will move from the Middle East to one of the international capitals and it is suggested to be London.
3-The period of the negotiations will be three (3) weeks from beginning to end as a first phase on and end before the
beginning of the 65th session of the United Nations General Assembly with agreement on references, agenda,
negotiation mechanisms, and the time frame to complete it.
4-Each side will present a media briefing to the public on the progress of negotiations.
5-In the case of progress in negotiations to announce the Palestinian state, the sponsor country — the United States of
America — will present a report agreed on by the Palestinian and Israeli sides to the Security Council, that will include the
timing of the start for the second phase of detailed negotiations based on all elements agreed upon in the first round of
negotiations and on limiting the period of the second round to 3 months.
6-The sponsor country will present to the Security Council a report on what was agreed upon and what was not agreed
upon in the second phase of the negotiations.
7-In the absence of agreement with respect to the final status issues, international consultations will be conducted over
a period of 3 months to narrow the gap between the points of view of the two sides including proposals from the
Security Council based on the two-state solution, and the Arab Peace Initiative, and the Road Map and it must be
accepted by both sides in accordance with a resolution from the Security Council.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775736 Date: 12/31/2015
