UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                      Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29                       RELEASE IN
                                                                                        FULL
 PRESS

 • The New York Times, In Crisis Over Dissident, U.S. Sends Official to Beijing (4/29)
 http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/30/world/asia/us-official-in-beijing-to-discuss-chen-
 guangcheng.html

 The Obama administration scrambled on Sunday to contain a growing diplomatic crisis between
 the United States and China, sending a senior diplomat to Beijing to discuss the fate of a blind
 dissident who fled house arrest last week.

 Amid intense secrecy, including a nearly blanket refusal to comment, the administration sought
 to negotiate over the safety of the dissident, Chen Guangcheng, who is said to be in American
 hands in Beijing — though it remained unclear late Sunday whether he was in the embassy, in a
 diplomatic residence or somewhere else.

 The senior diplomat, Kurt M. Campbell, an assistant secretary of state, arrived Sunday to meet
 with Chinese officials concerning Mr. Chen's case, and to try to keep the matter from
 undermining the administration's longstanding effort to improve economic and security relations
 with China, senior officials and diplomats in Washington and Beijing said.

 A senior American official said that China's leadership met Sunday to work out their response to
 Mr. Chen's escape before scheduled meetings this week with Secretary of State Hillary Rodham
 Clinton and Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner. Mrs. Clinton is scheduled to leave
 Washington for China on Monday night, assuming the trip proceeds.

 "They're trying to figure out what they're going to tell Hillary Clinton," the official said of the
 Chinese leaders, speaking on condition of anonymity because of the diplomatic sensitivity
 surrounding the case. "We'd like to know as much as we can before she leaves."


 The administration's only public comment so far on Mr. Chen's case came Sunday from an
 unexpected quarter: Mr. Obama's top counterterrorism adviser, John 0. Brennan.

 Asked about the matter on "Fox News Sunday," Mr. Brennan declined to discuss Mr. Chen's
 whereabouts in any detail, but he acknowledged that "we are working very closely with the
 individuals involved in this."

 He went on to say that the administration sought "an appropriate balance" when advocating for
 human rights in strategically important countries like China.

 "I think, in all instances, the president tries to balance our commitment to human rights, making
 sure that the people throughout the world have the ability to express themselves freely and
 openly," he said, "but also that we can continue to carry out our relationships with key countries
 overseas."




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                     Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29

 In the only comment by a Chinese official so far, Vice Foreign Minister Cui Tiankai said
 Saturday that he did not believe the Chen case would "occupy much time" at the talks.


 Other advocates who have spoken to him since he fled say he does not want asylum that would
 force him to leave China.

 That could create an opening for resolving a standoff with the United States, the officials said.
 "The federal government doesn't have to take this as a threat," the senior American official said
 Sunday, noting that Mr. Chen had not escaped from official detention, but rather from
 harassment at the hands of the local authorities.


 It was possible, however, that Mr. Chen was not in the fortresslike embassy itself, but in an
 apartment or some other building, and thus still vulnerable to arrest, diplomats in Beijing said.
 That could explain the administration's refusal to discuss his case or his precise whereabouts.

 Officials in Washington and Beijing refused Sunday to talk about Mr. Campbell's mission or any
 negotiations he may be conducting. The senior American official said that much remained
 unclear, including China's response to what has become a major embarrassment to Beijing. "It's
 not something that's going to be resolved quickly," the official said.

 • The Washington Post, Obama wants to strike 'appropriate balance' on Chinese
    dissident, official says (4/29)
 http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/obama-wants-to-strike-appropriate-
 balance-on-chinese-dissident-official-says/2012/04/29/gIQABzthpT_story.html?hpid=z2

 A senior White House official said Sunday that President Obama wants to strike the "appropriate
 balance" in dealing with a Chinese dissident who fled house arrest last Sunday and reportedly is
 under American protection inside the U.S. Embassy in Beijing.

 Comments by John 0. Brennan, Obama's top counterterrorism adviser, were the closest the
 administration has come to confirming the whereabouts of dissident lawyer Chen Guangcheng,
 and the difficulty it poses for U.S. policymakers.

 The president tries to "balance our committment to human rights" while continuing "to carry out
 our relationships with key countries overseas," Brennan said on "Fox News Sunday." "We're
 going to make sure that we do this in the appropriate way and that appropriate balance is struck."
 Obama "has faced similar situations in the past in terms of this balancing requirement," Brennan
 said, and "will do whatever he thinks is in the best interest of the United States as well as the
 individuals involved."


 Brennan made the rounds of three Sunday talk shows to mark the first anniversary of the U.S.
 Navy SEAL raid in Pakistan that killed al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                     Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29

 • The Washington Post, Dissident drama recalls story of Fang Lizhi (4/28)
 http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia___pacific/di ssi dent-dram a-recall s-story-of-fang-
  zhi/2012/04/28/gIQ A3W S eoT_story. html

 "When somebody comes to ask for asylum, you have to make sure they have really thought
 through what they are undertaking," said the former diplomat, who spoke on the condition of
 anonymity. "You run through a checklist of things to discourage them."


 Chen, the blind legal activist, is a far less contentious figure than. Fang, against whom Deng,
 China's paramount leader until his death in 1997, bore a deep personal animus. China's quarrel
 with Chen, by contrast, involves mostly low-ranking officials in Shandong province.

 Fang, denounced as a "black hand" behind the Tiananmen protests and pilloried as a dangerous
 criminal by party--controlled media, faced a formal Chinese arrest warrant. Chen has been
 technically free — though closely monitored — since his release from prison in 2010. This, said
 John Kamm, a longtime campaigner on behalf of Chinese political prisoners, "means there
 should be no legal impediment for him to leave the country."

 Nonetheless, any U.S. role in protecting Chen will likely set up an acrimonious and possibly long
 tug of war between Washington and Beijing. A foreign dissident seeking refuge, added the
 former U.S. diplomat who was involved in Fang's case, is "something enormously unwelcome.
 It creates huge problems politically and, also, logistically."


 Chen, the blind lawyer, is the "real McCoy," said Princeton's Link, and "is a completely
 different case" from the former police chief, who presided over a brutal crackdown on alleged
 gangsters, trampled due process and deployed torture to force people to confess.

 "The U.S. was right not to get involved with Wang Lijun," Link said. If Washington rebuffs
 Chen, however, "I'll be the first to write an op-ed article denouncing the decision."

 • The Washington Post, In China, Chen Guangcheng case poses test for Premier Wen
    Jiabao's reform talk (4/29)
 http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asiapacific/in-china-chen-guangcheng-case-poses-test-
 for-premier-wen-jiabaos-reform-talk/2012/04/29/gIQANMTdpT_story.html

 Chen's case also poses an immediate quandary for Premier Wen halm), who has repeatedly
 advocated putting China under the rule of law and making this authoritarian Communist regime
 more accountable to the people.


 By appealing personally to Wen, Chen was deftly avoiding the accusation, often used against
 dissidents in China, that he was "subverting state authority." To the contrary, Chen was pointing
 the finger at abusive, corrupt local officials and calling on the premier — a self-styled reformist




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                      Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29

  — to assert the power of the state over the local government and over a security apparatus that
  many critics feel has run amok.


  Since March 14, when Wen appeared at a lengthy news conference at the close of the national
  legislature, the premier has been forcefully advocating a reform agenda, including the
  importance of establishing a law-based society in China.


  "The rule of law is the foundation of the governance of the CPC and critical for realizing long-
  term stability," the People's Daily, the Communist Party's main mouthpiece, wrote in an
  editorial that was widely reprinted in all the state media. "Anyone who breaks the law shall be
  convicted and punished."

  Now Chen, through his escape and in the videotape, is directly using that same argument in
  appealing for Wen and the central government to take action against those who abused him and
  his family members and illegally held him captive for 19 months.

  • The Washington Post (Opinion – China Aid's Bob Fu), With the Chen case, U.S.
     credibility is on the line (4/29)
  http ://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/saving-chen-
  guangcheng/2012/04/29/gIQAHUwtpT_story.html

  Chen is my hero and friend. He is under the protection of the U.S. Embassy in Beijing. His status
  and safety present a pivotal test for freedom in China and for U.S. credibility as a defender of
  freedom.


  One netizen, He "Pearl" Peirong, provided logistic support for Chen's escape, picking him up in
  Shandong province — where Chen and I both hail from — and taking him to Beijing.

  I am awed by the courage of those who helped Chen escape. Pearl told me she is willing to die
  with Chen because he is such a "pure-hearted courageous person."


  Chen is often described as a "dissident," but that is a misnomer. Despite years of brutal treatment
  for seeking to bring attention to those victimized by China's "one-child" policy, he has never
  established a political party or organization. He has never advocated overthrowing the
  Communist Party. In the video he posted online after his escape, he says that the injustices his
  family experienced "hurt the image of our Party." And the first thing he did after escaping was
  tell me that he wanted the outside the world to know that he was not going to leave China but to
  "fight to the end for the freedom of my family. . I want to live a normal life as a Chinese
  citizen with my family."




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                     Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VT — April 29

 This is a pivotal moment for U.S. human rights diplomacy. The United States must stand firmly
 with this broadly popular individual or risk losing credibility as a defender of freedom and the
 rule of law. There is a reason Chinese dissidents revere this country.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                      Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29

 PRESS

 The New York Times
 April 29, 2012
 In Crisis Over Dissident, U.S. Sends Official to Beijing

 By STEVEN LEE MYERS and JANE PERLEZ

 WASHINGTON — The Obarria administration scrambled on Sunday to contain a growing
 diplomatic crisis between the-United States and China, sending a senior diplomat to Beijing to
 discuss the fate of a blind dissident who fled house arrest liSt Week.

 Amid intense secrecy, including'.a nearly blanket refiisal to comment, the administration sought
 to negotiate over the safety of the disSident, Chen Guangcheng,, who is said to be in American
 hands in Beijing -- though it remained unclear late Sunday whether he was in the embassy, in a
 diplomatic residence or somewhere else.

 The senior diplomat, Kurt M. Campbell, an assistant secretary of state, arrived Sunday to meet
 with Chinese officials concerning Mr: Chen's case; and to try to keep the matter from
 undermining the administration's, longstanding effort to iMprdve economic and security relations
 with China, senior officials and diplomats in Washington and Beijing said.

 A senior American official said that China's leadership met Simday to work out their response to
 Mr. Chen's escape before scheduled meetings this week With:Secretary of State Hillary Rodham
 Clinton and Treasury Secretary Timothyp. Geithner. Mrs, Clintonis scheduled tosleave
 Washington for China on Monday night, assuming the trip proceeds.

 "They're trying to figure out what they're going to tell Hillary Clinton," the official said of the
 Chinese leaders; speaking on condition of anonymity beCause of the diplOmatic sensitivity
 surrounding the case. "We'd like to know as much as we_can before she leaves:"

 The administration's effort to contain the crisis — the State Department declined to confirm that
 Mr. Campbell was in China even though he was photographed in a Marriott hotel in Beijing -
 underscored the fraught political challenge facing President Obama, at home and abroad.

 "This is the greatest test in bilateral relations in years, probably going back to '89," said
 Christopher K. Johnson, until recently a senior China analyst at the Central Intelligence Agency,
 referring to the year of the brutal crackdown on student protests in Tiananmen Square.

 Mitt Romney, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, called Sunday for the
 administration to "take every measure" to protect Mr. Chen and his family. While he did not
 address the handling of the case so far, he said the matter demonstrated the need for unflinching
 American support for human rights in China.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                      Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29

 "Any serious U.S. policy toward China must confront the facts of the Chinese government's
 denial of political liberties, its one-child policy and other violation of human rights," Mr.
 Romney said in a statement on Sunday, his first remarks on the issue since Mr. Chen's escape
 was reported Friday.

 Mr. Chen, 40, became famous because of his strong opposition to forced abortions and
 sterilizations conducted as part of China's policy of limiting families to one child per couple.
 "Our country must play a strong role in urging reform in China and supporting those fighting for
 the freedoms we enjoy," Mr. Romney said.

 The adrninistration'S only public comment far on,Mr., Chen!s'case came Sunday from an
 unexpected quarter: Mr. Obama's top counterterrorism adviser, John O. Brennan.

 Asked about the matter on "Fox .News Sunday, Mr.Brennan declined to disCUss Mr. Chen's
 whereabouts in any detail, but he acknowledged that "we 'are working veryclosely with the
 individuals involved in this."

 He went on to say that the adMinistration sought' "an appropriate. balance" when advocating for
 human rights in strategically important countries like:China.

 "I think, in all instances, the president tries to balance our commitment to human' rights, making
 sure that the people throughout the:world have the ability to express themselves:freely and
 openly," he said, "but also that we can continue to carry out our relationships with key countries
 overseas."

 The two-days annual round of talks to be held in Beijing this week — known as the Strategic and
 Economic Dialogue — has been a key element of the administration's policy to manage
 America's increasingly complex relations with China by regularly discussing a wide spectrum of
 issues. In recent months, administration officials say they have seen this policy bear fruit, with
 signs of greater Chinese cooperation on security issues involving Iran, Syria and North Korea
 and on economic concerns like China's exchange rate.

 Mr. Chen's daring escape, which took American officials by surprise, will surely overshadow
 this week's negotiations, though both sides suggested that the talks would go ahead. In the only
 comment by a Chinese official so far, Vice Foreign Minister Cui Tiankai said Saturday`that he
 did not believe the Chen case would "occupy much time" 'at the talks.

 His statement did not preclude the possibility that a senior Chinese leader would hold a meeting
 with Mrs. Clinton separately from the planned sessions and deliver a sharp message about
 American involvement in Mr. Chen's case, or a broader condemnation of American support for
 dissidents in China.

 The Chinese government regards foreign criticism of its human rights policies and practices as
 undue interference in its internal affairs, and it will almost certainly use the occasion of the talks



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                     Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29

 to drive that point home, diplomats in Beijing said. In fact, the Chinese might go forward with
 the planned talks specifically to have the chance to confront Mrs. Clinton about it.

 Mr. Chen's case is the second in recent months that has drawn the Obama administration into the
 affairs of the Chinese government without any intention on Washington's part. In February a
 provincial official showed up in the American Consulate in Chengdu, seeking protection from a
 powerful party leader, Bo Xilai. The State Department instead arranged for him to be transferred
 to the national authorities in Beijing. Evidence that the provincial official claimed to have
 apparently caused Mr. Bo's political downfall and prompted an investigation of Mr. Bo'S wife
 for the murder of a British businessman.

 Mr. Chen's case is different. A self-taught lawyer, he has called attention to human rights abuses
 against the disabled and women who have been forcibly sterilized. In 2006 he was sentenced to
 51 months in prison on charges of destroying property and assembling a crowd to disrupt traffic,
 charges his supporters say were trumped up.

 After he was released from prison, the local authorities held him under an extralegal form of
 house arrest, with cordons of police officers surrounding his family's farmhouse. In an audacious
 video released Friday, Mr. Chen did not call for a change of government, but rather appealed to
 Prime Minister Wen Jiabao to investigate and halt the abuse of his family. Other advocates who
 have spoken to him since he fled say he does not want asylum that would force him to leave
 China.

 That could create an opening for resolving a standoff with the United States; the officials said.
 "The federal government doesn't have to take this as a threat;” the senior American official said
 Sunday, noting that Mr. Chen hadnot escaped from 'official detention, but rather from
 harassment at the hands of the local authorities.

 Mr. Chen's supporters and Chinese officials have said that he is now in the American Embassy.
 More than the usual number of security vehicles, containing men in uniform and plain clothes
 patrolled the area near the embassy over the weekend, but there was no sign of a major security
 presence at the gates or entrances to the compound.

 It was possible, however, that Mr. Chen was not in the fortresslike embassy itself, but in an
 apartment or some other building; and thus still vulnerable to arrest, diplomats in Beijing said
 That could explain the administration's refusal to diScuss his case or his precise whereabouts.
                                                                               . _
 Officials in Washington and Beijing refused Sunday to talk about Mr. Campbell's mission or any
 negotiations he may be conducting The senior American official said that much remained
 unclear, including China's response to what has become a major embarrassment to Beijing. "It's
 not something that'S going to be resolVed'qUickly," the official said.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                     Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29

 The Washington Post
 Updated: Sunday, April 29, 2:05 PM
 Obama wants to strike 'appropriate balance' on Chinese dissident, official says

 By Karen DeYoung

 A senior White House official said SUnday.th4t President Obama wants to, strike the"apptopriate
 balance" in dealing with a Chinese dissident who fled house arrest last Sunday and reportedly is
 under American protection inside the U.S Embassy in Beijing:

 Comments by John 0. Brennan, Obania'S top _counterterrorism adviser, werethe closest the
 administration has come to confirming the Whereabouts. of disSident lawyer Chen Guangcheng,
 and the difficulty it pOses for U.S: policymakers.

 The president tries to "balance our committment to human rights" while continuing "to carry out
 our relationships with key countries overseas," Brennan said on "Fox News Sunday." "We're
 going to make sure that we do this in the appropriate way and that appr4riate balance is struck."

 Obama "has faced similar situations in the past in terms of this balanding requirement," Brennan
 said, and "will do whatever he thinks is in the best interest of the United States as well as the
 individuals involved."

 Both the U.S. and Chinese governments have studiously avoided confirming Chen's
 whereabouts, adhering to uniform "no information" comments.

 Mitt Romney, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, said in a statement Sunday that
 he hoped that the United States "will take every measure to ensure that Chen and his family
 members are protected from further persecution." He said U.S. policy toward China must address
 human rights violations: "Our country must play a strong role in urging reform in China and
 supporting those fighting for the freedoms we enjoy."

 The incident comes at a particularly dicey time for U.S.-China relations, on the heels of the
 appearance of a senior Chinese law enforcement official at the U.S. consulate in Chengdu with
 information that brought down a senior Communist Party boss, and on the eve of this week's
 visit to Beijing by Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and Treasury Secretary Timothy F.
 Geithner for high-level economic and strategy talks.

 Brennan made the rounds of three Sunday talk shOWs to mark the first anniversary of the U.S.
 Navy SEAL raid in Pakistan that killed al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden.

 Although the administration had indicated U.S. security was on heightened vigilance against a
 terrorist attack to mark the date, "at this time, we don't See any active plot that is underway,"
 Brennan said on ABC's "This Week."




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                     Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29

 Bin Laden's death "made a tremendous difference," he said. "It's taken away the founding leader
 of that organization who was . .. a symbol of al-Qaeda's sort of murderous agenda worldwide."
 But although that and other numerous gains have been made against the organization, he said, "I
 don't look at it as a victory. I think . . . we have to destroy the organization. We have to take all
 of their operatives, their leaders, their training camps, take away their safe havens. And we're not
 going to rest."

 Hosts on ABC, Fox and CNN's "State of the Union" tried to get Brennan to respond to an
 Obama campaign video suggesting that bin Laden might be alive today had Romney been
 president. Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.), a Romney backer, called the ad "a shameless end zone
 dance to help [Obama] get reelected."

 Brennan repeatedly refused the bait. "I don't do politics," he told ABC. "I don't do the
 campaign. I am not a Democrat or Republican. I'm a counterterrorism adviser to the president.
 All I know is that the president made the decision when he was given the opportunity to take a
 gutsy decision. . .. We're safer today as a result."




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                     Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29

 The Washington Post
 April 28, 2012
 Dissident drama recalls story of Fang Lizhi

 By Andrew Higgins

 After the high drama of a 400-mile dash to freedom across northern China, Chen Guangcheng, a
 blind legal activist now reportedly under the protection of U.S. diplomats in Beijing, confronts
 more mundane challenges: filling in forms, listening to warnings about potential peril ahead, and
 waiting while U.S. and Chinese officials haggle over his fate.

 That, at least, is what happened back in the summer of 1989 when Fang Lizhi, a dissident
 Chinese astrophysicist, entered the U.S. mission in Beijing a day after the June 4 Tiananmen
 Square massacre and asked diplomats there for protection.

 The diplomats "were mildly discouraging but didn't rule out helping," recalled Perry Link, a
 Princeton University China scholar who accompanied Fang. They explained that Fang would
 need to get to American soil before he could request political asylum.

 To get the ball rolling, Fang filled in a visa application, the first step in what he hoped would be
 a swift journey to safety. It was more than a year before he got to the United States, ostensibly
 for medical treatment.

 Worried that taking refuge with American diplomats would allow China's Communist Party to
 portray the Tiananmen protest as a U.S.--orchestrated conspiracy, Fang decided after his first
 meeting at the embassy that he didn't want U.S. help after all. He left the embassy with his wife,
 Li Shuxian, to spend the night at a nearby Beijing hotel in the room of an absent Washington
 Post journalist.

 "We didn't turn him away. We just talked him into giving things some more thought," said a
 U.S. diplomat who was involved in the discussions.

 They told Fang, for example, about the case of Hungary's Cardinal Jozsef Mindszenty, an
 outspoken foe of communism who spent almost 15 years stuck in the U.S. Embassy in Budapest
 after Soviet troops crushed the 1956 Hungarian uprising.

 "When somebody comes to ask for asylum, you have to make sure they have really thought
 through what they are undertaking," said the &wirier diplomat, who spoke on the condition of
 anonymity. "You run through a checklist'of thingS to discourage them."

 Fang later returned to the embassy in the middle of the night after U.S. diplomats sent word that
 President George H.W. Bush had personally approved giving him, his wife and son, Fang De,
 sanctuary.

 Fang, with his wife, then spent nearly 13 months holed up in a windowless room that had
 previously served as an embassy clinic while senior U.S. officials and others, including former



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                     Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29

 secretary of state Henry Kis-singer, trooped to Beijing to beg Chinese leaders to let the dissident
 leave China unmolested. The son, fed up with being confined to the embassy, left after just a few
 days and returned to his university studies without trouble.

 The presence of Fang and his wife was cloaked in such deep secrecy that "only about six people
 in the embassy" knew of their whereabouts, James R. Lilley, the ambassador at the time, recalled
 in his memoir, "China Hands: Nine Decades of Adventure, Espionage, and Diplomacy in Asia."
 Lilley's wife found out when she stumbled on a high wall of books shielding Fang's sleeping
 quarters.

 A contentious figure

 Deng Xiaoping, who blamed Fang for seven weeks of tumultuous student-led protests at
 Tiananmen, demanded that the scientist write a confession before he leave China. Lilley,
 meanwhile, became a "pariah for shielding Fang Lizhi," the ambassador wrote in his book. The
 whole episode, noted Lilley, badly "complicated" relations already battered by the military
 assault on Tiananmen.

 Getting Chinese leaders to agree to let Fang go took so long that the scientist managed to
 complete a scientific paper on "the periodicity of redshift distribution." He used an aged Apple
 computer provided by the embassy and listed the U.S. Beijing mission as his "temporary mailing
 address" when he submitted the article to the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory for
 publication.

 Fang continued his scientific work after he left China, ending his career as a professor of physics
 at the University of Arizona. He died this month at his home in Tucson. He was 76.

 Chen, the blind legal activist, is a far less contentious figure than Fang, against whom. Deng,
 China's paramount leader until his death in 1997, bore a deep perkmal animus. China's quarrel
 with Chen, by contrast, involves mostly low-ranking officials in Shandong province.

 Fang, denounced as a "black hand" behind the Tiananmen profests'and pilloried as a dangerous
 criminal by party,-controlled media, faced a fortnal Chinese arrest warrant. Chen has been
 technically free — though closely monitored —= since his release from prison in 2010. This, said
 John Kamm, a longtime campaigner on behalf of Chinese political prisoner's, "means there
 should be no legal impediment for him to leave the country."

  Nonetheless, any U.S. role in protecting Chen will likely set up an acrimonious and possibly long
  tug of war between Washington and Beijing. A foreign dissident seeking refuge, added the
  former U.S. diplomat who was involved in Fang's case, is "something enormously unwelcome.
  It creates huge problems politically and, also, logistically."

  The 'real McCoy'

  China Aid, a Christian group based in Texas that helped facilitate Chen's escape from de facto
  house arrest in Shandong, said in a statement issued early Saturday that Chen "is under U.S.



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                     Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29

 protection and high level talks are currently underway between U.S. and Chinese officials
 regarding Chen's status."

 Bob Fu, the group's president, described it as "a pivotal moment for U.S. human rights
 diplomacy" and urged that Chen be "handled like Professor Fang Lizhi" and not like Wang
 Lijun, a former Chongqing police chief who fled to the U.S. consulate in Chengdu in early
 February, triggering a political earthquake whose aftershocks are still shaking the party.

 Wang spent 30 hours in the consulate and, when he left after failing to secure an offer of
 protection, was quickly hustled to Beijing by state-security officials. He has not been seen or
 heard from since. His former boss, Bo Xilai, has since been purged in China's biggest political
 crisis since Tiananmen.

 Chen, the blind lawyer,. is the "real McCoy;" said Princeton's Link, and "is a completely
 different case" from the fonther police chief, who presided over a bnital 'crackdown on alleged
 gangsters, trampled due process and deployed torture to force people to confess.

 "The U.S. was right not to get involved with Wang Lijun;" Link said If Washington rebUffS
 Chen, however, "I'll be the first to write an op-ed article denouncirigthe decision,"




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                       Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29

  The Washington Post
  Sunday, April 29, 11:48 AM
  In China, Chen Guangcheng case poses test for Premier Wen Jiabao's reform talk

  By Keith B. Richburg

  BEIJING — The dramatic escape of the blind activist lawyer Chen Guangcheng, and his
  apparent decision to seek protection from U.S. diplomats in Beijing, has cast a spotlight on the
  Chinese government's growing use of unlawful home detentions, disappearances, "black jails,"
  and other, often brutal, extra-judicial methods to try to silence its internal critics and stamp out
  dissent.

  Chen 's case also poses an itnmediate qUandarY for PreMier Wen Jiabao, whO has repeatkily
  advocated putting China under the rule of law,and'inaking this authoritarian COrrimunist regime
  more accountable to the people.

  Chen escaped on a moonless night last weekend from 19 months under a de facto form of house
  arrest, with his farmhouse in Dongshigu village surrounded by gangs of armed thugs with no
  legal authority to keep him there. Chen had already served more than four years in prison on
  charges — largely considered bogus — of "obstructing traffic."

  The thugs who kept Chen contained in his farmhouse, who beat him and his wife, and who
  harassed journalists and activists trying to see him were operating as an extrajudicial force, with
  no official standing. But they were clearly doing the bidding of local party bosses who wanted to
  keep Chen silenced and isolated.

  When Chen finally escaped, climbing over a high wall and walking hours alone at night to evade
  detection, the blind activist had not committed any crime. And members of the activist network
  who assisted Chen — driving him to Beijing, shuttling him around to avoid capture — also were
  not committing crimes, since Chen was not charged with anything. Yet police have been
  rounding them all up.

  Chen made a video that was broadcast on YouTube, directly appealing to Wen to take action
  against those who abused him and his family, to protect his family and to investigate corruption
  in Linyi city, where his village is.

  By appealing personally to Wen, Chen was deftly avoiding the accusation, often used against
  dissidents in China, that he was "subverting state authority." To the contrary, Chen was p6inting
  the finger at abusive, corrupt local officials and calling on the premier — a self-styled reformist
  — to assert the power of the state over.the local government and over a security apparatus that
  many critics feel has nin amok.

  "Chen Guangcheng's escape is really the most visceral example of the lack of rule of law in
  China and the really out-of-control abuses of the security agencies," said Phelim Kine, senior
  Asia researcher for the group Human Rights Watch. "Chen Guangcheng's case is going to




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                     Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29

 definitely reveal the reality of Wen Jiabao and his longtime advocacy for protection of the poor,
 the marginalized and the abused, and the application of the rule of law."

 Since March 14, when. Wen appeared at a lengthy news conferenCe at the close of the national
 legislature, the premier has been forcefully advocating a reform agenda, including the
 importance of establishing& law7based society in China.

 That news conference was followed by the sudden ouster of once-rising star Bo Xilai from his
 job as the Communist Party chief in Chongqing, and then by Bo's removal from the Party
 Central Committee and the Politburo. Bo is being investigated for "severe violations" of the
 party's disciplinary rules, and his wife, Gu Kailai, is suspected, along with a Bo household aide,
 in the slaying of a British businessman.

 As the Bo scandal has unfolded, China's state-run media have repeatedly picked up Wen's
 mantra, eager to show that Bo was not the subject of a political purge or personal vendetta. The
 Chongqing case showed that China was developing into a country where the law was paramount,
 according to the official refrain, and even a powerful figure such as Bo was subject to it.

 "The rule of law is the foundation: of the governance of the .CPC and critical for realizing long-
 term stability," the People's Daily, the CcimmuniSt Party's main mouthpiece, wrote in an
 editorial that was widely reprinted in all the state medi& "Anyone who breaks the law shall be
 convicted and punished."

 Now Chen, through his escape and in:the videotape, is directly using that same argument in
 appealing for Wen and the central government to take action against those who abused him and
 his family memberS and illegally held him-captive for 19 months.

 "The money of our ordinary people and the taxpayers should not be used by some local officials
 who break the law to hurt people or hurt the image of our party," Chen says in his videotaped
 message. "Many people don't understand whether all of these illegal acts are just law-breaking
 by the local party officials or whether it was ordered by the Central Committee. I think you
 should give a clear answer to people before long."

  While Chen was in hiding last week between various safe houses in Beijing, Michael H. Posner,
  the U.S. assistant secretary of state for democracy, human rights and labor, was also in the
  Chinese capital, leading the American delegation to a meeting on legal issues with Chinese
  officials, including senior judges. Posner said afterward that the meeting touched on U.S.
  concerns about problems of extrajudicial punishments like house arrest and residential
  surveillance.

  Such techniques have expanded greatly in recent years, with extrajudicial means increasingly
  used as the security apparatus has expanded its power and reach, and as the country's
  Communist rulers have reacted nervously to the Arab uprisings that have challenged entrenched
  authoritarian regimes in the Middle East.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                     Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29

 For example, Liu Xia, the wife of Liu Xiaobo, the imprisoned 2010 Nobel Peace Prize winner
 Liu Xiaobo, was herself put under house arrest and prohibited from communicating with the
 outside world, even though she was not accused or convicted of any crime, and although there is
 no such thing as "house arrest" under Chinese law.

 The dissident artist Ai Weiwei was arrested last April and held for more than two months
 without charges, also in violation of Chinese law. He was later charged with evading taxes on a
 company he controls, but his supporters believe he was detained for his increasing anti-
 government statements and posts on Twitter. His house is now regularly monitored by
 surveillance cameras.

 The prominent human rights lawyer and activist Gao Zhisheng — who has also not been charged
 with any crime — repeatedly "disappeared" for lengthy periods in the hands of the security
 services, which admitted only in December that Gao was officially in custody.

 In March, China's rubber-stamp legislature approved changes to the country's criminal code that
 will allow poliCe to legally hold government critics for six months in secret detention centers, or
 "black jails." The change essentially codified what was already a widespread practice and will
 apply to anyone accused of threatening "state security," a catch-all term used to snare anyone
 advocating more democracy or an end to Communist Party rule.

 Posner, speaking April 25 at the U.S. Embassy after the U.S.-China legal dialogue, said some on
 the Chinese side seem to be moving toward the view that the country needs a credible,
 transparent legal system and a criminal process that is open and fair.

 "It's a recognition that to compete in the modern world, there needs to be a rules-based
 foundation," Posner said. "I think there's a demand internally, from the Chinese people. The
 government is undoubtedly hearing that and responding to it."

 "In the long term, I feel a sense of optimism that the trend globally . .. for a law-based, rights-
 based structure is going to prevail here as well," Posner said.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                     Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29

 The Washington Post (Opinion)
 April 29, 2012, 2:55 PM
 With the Chen case, U.S. credibility is on the line

 By Bob Fu

 The blind lawyer Chen Guangcheng climbed over the back wall of his home April 22 — and
 escaped nearly six years of torture, malnutrition and isolation. During his detention, Chen
 became a global star, his dark glasses emblematic of the embattled movement of human rights
 defenders in China. Chen is my, hero and friend. He is under the protection of the US. Embassy
 in Beijing. His status and safety:present a pivotal test for freedom in China and for U.S.
 credibility as a defender of freedom.

 Chen's escape was planned carefully for many months. The actor Christian Bale was the most
 prominent person who tried to visit Chen during his years of house detention, but hundreds of
 Chinese citizens sought a similar audience and were forcibly turned away by police. Chen's most
 passionate supporters were the Chinese netizen community. One netizen, He "Pearl" Peirong,
 provided logistic support for Chen's escape, picking him up in Shandong province — where
 Chen and I both hail from — and taking him to Beijing.

 I am awed by the courage of those who helped Chen escape. Pearl told me she is willing to die
 with Chen because he is such a "pure-hearted courageous person." I was talking to her when she
 said "guo bao lai le," that state security had arrived. Now, she is under arrest at an undisclosed
 location and her blog has been erased.

  Chen is often described as a "dissident," but that is a misnomer. Despite years of brutal treatment
  for seeking to bring attention to those victimized by China's "one-child" policy, he has never
  established a political party or organization. He has never advocated overthrowing the
  Communist Party. In the video he posted online after his escape, he says that the injustices his
  family experienced "hurt the image of our Party." And the first thing he did after escaping was
  tell me that he wanted the outside the world to know that he was not going to leave China but to
  "fight to the end for the freedom of my family.. I want to live a normal life as a Chinese
  citizen with my family."

  Chen's escape prompted a predictable brutal response. After police in Shandong realized, four
  days after Chen got away, that he was gone, they took Chen's older brother and his nephew,
  Chen Guangfu and Chen Kegui, into custody. Media reports indicate that Chen's mother, wife
  and 6-year-old daughter are tightly guarded by Chinese security forces.

  This is a pivotal moment for U.S human rights diplomacy: The United States must stand firmly
  with this broadly popular individual or risk losing credibility as a defender of freedom and the
  rule of law. There is a reason Chinese dissidents revere this country. President Obama promised
  in his inauguration address: " to those who cling to power through corruption and deceit and the
  silencing of dissent, know that you are on the wrong side of history; but that we will extend a
  hand if you are willing to unclench your fist."




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015




                     Chen Guangcheng Media Roundup VI — April 29

 This blind lawyer whose first name, "Guang Cheng," means "light" and "integrity" has been
 silenced for almost six years because the Chinese government views his assistance to the
 vulnerable as a threat. Chen's desire for justice and freedom should put him firmly on the "right
 side" of history.

 By extending the United States's hand to Chen, the Obama administration can help the dictators
 of Beijing unclench their fist..Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has spoken out for Chen in the
 past and advocated his release. Her visit to Beijing this week is a chance to connect words and
 deeds. I hope that Clinton will press China to guarantee the safety of Chen and his family.

 China's future will be built by those who act with Chen's integrity and work to ensure the light
 of justice, equality and freedom for all Chinese citizens. China will move toward the "right side
 of history" only when it recognizes that people like Chen are its strength, not its enemy.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792824 Date: 12/31/2015
