     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762950 Date: 12/31/2015


                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                             B5,B6



From:                            Neera Tanden <
Sent:                            Thursday, April 30, 2009 11:55 PM
To:                              H
Subject:                         Health Care and other things



Not much was super decided because literally right before the meeting, we heard CBO scored a relatively
generous benefit package with 150% into Medicaid at $1 trillion over ten, but the score had an odd phase-in so
we don't really know the annual cost. (They didn't resolve the tax issue.) The CBO scored plan has a mandate,
but they say a mandate covers 37 million people (must have a hardship waiver with undocumented not
covered). So that kind of threw things off.


                                  I wouldn't say that was written in stone, but it was the gist.

                                                                     Thanks for your push the other night. At the
very least, we're not arguing the Congress down.

I hope it's ok to send you an idea. Our conversation the other night got me thinking. You might consider doing
a speech on renewing America's values around July 4th. You will have been at State almost 6 months, traveled
to numerous countries with dramatically different cultures. But everywhere you have been, there has been a
tremendous response to America's new leadership. That response is not due to America's military power, or, in
these times of hardship, necessarily our economic might. Instead, it is a response to a sense of restoration of
America's ideals and core principles - our values. The world is responding to our country's commitment to, not
intolerance of, listening and learning from others. Peoples around the world welcome a genuine commitment to
democracy and alliances - and reliance. And driving this is an appreciation for a pretty basic concept - respect -
the fact that we are respecting other countries and their differences. But these are not new values - they are
timeless American values. Because America and its lived experience with diversity has meant that at our best,
we have had a great respect for difference, appreciated tolerance, and welcomed a commitment to ideals and
norms over race, region, tribe. So America's new foreign policy approach is really a restoration of America's
core values. And how it is the power of our example that animates so much of our power throughout the world.

Hope it's not too indulgent to send you this thought. Forgive me if it's too basic.

Thanks again for your time the other night.

Neera




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762950 Date: 12/31/2015
