     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775755 Date: 12/31/2015


                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                              B6




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Wednesday, September 1, 2010 11:56 AM
To:                                'JilotyLC@state.gov'; 'Laurenjiloty
Subject:                           Fw: H: fyi. more on mid-term strategy... Sid
Attachments:                       image001jpg; image001jpg



PIs print.

    Original Message
From: sbwhoeop
To: H
Sent: Wed Sep 01 11:46:40 2010
Subject: H: fyi. more on mid-term strategy... Sid

Since you are on this tack: This is a cri de coeur from the guy who wrote "The Political Brain" and was a major Obama
supporter, Drew Westen. I'll write you another memo very soon... Sid




AlterNet <http://www.alternet.org> / By Drew Westen <http://www.alternet.org/authors/8450/>
24 COMMENTS
<http://www.alternet.org/story/148045/what_created_the_populist_explosion_and_how_democrats_can_avoid_the_s
hrapnel_in_november?page=entire#disqus_thread>

What Created the Populist Explosion and How Democrats Can Avoid the Shrapnel in November

To say that the American people are angry is an understatement. The only question at this point is how to mitigate the
damage when the bomb detonates in November.
September 1, 2010 I



LIKE THIS ARTICLE ?
Join our mailing list:

Sign up to stay up to date on the latest headlines via email.




Petitions <http://www.change.org/petitions> by Change.org I Get Widget
<http://www.alternet.org/story/148045/what_created_the_populist_explosion_and_how_democrats_can_avoid_the_s
hrapnel_in_november?page=entire> I Start a Petition <http://www.change.org/start_a_petition>

To say that the American people are angry is an understatement. The political brain of Americans today reflects a
volatile mixture of fear and fury, and when you mix those together, you get an explosion. The only question at this point
is how to mitigate the damage when the bomb detonates in November.
The bad news is that it's too late for Democrats to do what would have been both good policy and good politics (and
what the House actually did do), namely to pass a major jobs bill when it was clear that the private sector couldn't keep
Americans employed. The "Obama Doctrine" should have been that Americans who want to work and have the ability to

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775755 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775755 Date: 12/31/2015




contribute to our productivity as a nation should have the right to work, and that if the private sector can't meet the
demand for jobs, we have plenty of roads and bridges to fix, new energy sources to develop and manufacture, and
schools to build and renovate so our kids and workers returning for training can compete in the 21st century global
economy. From having spent much of the last four years testing messages on a range of issues, from immigration to
taxes and deficits, I can say with some certainty that nothing John Boehner or Eric Cantor could say could come within
30 points of generating the enthusiasm -- particularly among swing voters -- of a message that began, "We don't have a
shortage of work ethic in this country, we have a shortage of work." That message resonates across the political
spectrum. And it isn't even the strongest message we've tested in the last weeks or months that beats back the toughest
deficit-cutting language the other side can muster.
But it's too late for that. The administration opted for an alternative doctrine, which Larry Summers enunciated on This
Week several months ago: that unemployment is going to remain high for the foreseeable future and eventually come
down -- as if there's nothing we can do about it -- and that they will push here and there for small symbolic measures
whose symbolism tends to escape people who are out of work. It's hard to be excited by symbolism when your children
are hungry or the bank is repossessing your home -- although you didn't do anything to deserve it -- while the people
who did are once again making out like bandits.
Although the situation looks bleak for Democrats in November, it ain't over 'til it's over. Republicans are shooting
themselves in the foot all over the country, running Tea Party candidates who are so far to the right you can't see Middle
America from their porch. And some endangered Democrats will likely see victory in November from theirs if they
understand the public mood and speak to it.
What is that public mood? It can be characterized by a single phrase -- populist anger -- and it cuts across partisan lines.
On the right, it is alloyed with racial anxiety and prejudice. On the left, it is alloyed with tremendous disappointment at
what could have been if we had the kind of bold leadership for which times like these cry out. And among people in the
vast political center, populist anger is alloyed with anxiety and uncertainty -- about their jobs, their homes, and their
children's future.
How to Create a Populist Explosion: A Tragedy in Two Acts So how did we get here? The story can be told as a tragedy in
two acts.
Act I: The GOP Sets the Country on a Course of Economic Destruction and the President Calls for Truth and
Reconciliation without the Truth Part

*     A strong economic downturn devolves into a Great Recession, as the stock market crashes and major banks fail. By
October 2008, upper middle class moderate Republicans in the suburbs are so frightened by what's happening to their
assets that they're willing to give Democrats a chance.
*     A Republican administration that believes in neither government nor regulation creates a 700 billion bank bailout
with no accountability. Unlike Republicans, who would say "no" in a situation like this and let a Great Recession turn into
a Great Depression, Democrats do the right thing, but they don't make it clear from the start that these are Bush
Bailouts and remind Americans, over and over, that the cause of all the bankruptcies is the bankruptcy of Republican
ideology.
*     A charismatic young president raises people's hopes and expectations, as he uniquely can. Americans are
frightened, but they are willing and waiting to hear an alternative narrative to "government is the problem, not the
solution" and a path back to economic recovery and security.
*     The White House refuses to tell the American people three stories they desperately need to hear.
*     The first is why the economy has gone into the ditch, and who did it. The president is steadfast in his position that
we should "look forward, not backward," even as the GOP is blocking his every initiative to clean up its mess. As
conservative attacks on him and Democrats increase, he refuses to indict the Republicans in Congress or President Bush
for having destroyed our economy and putting one in eight Americans out of work and one in five either behind on their
mortgage or in the process of having their homes foreclosed by the same bankers who gambled them away. Why did he
need to tell the American people who was responsible for their misery -- and to repeat it again and again? Because
otherwise, if the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression didn't subside within a year and half, voters would
start to associate it with him and his party. This is Neuroscience 101 -- it's how mental associations are formed. But the
president never even uttered George W. Bush's name in his first year in office, and the first time he did mention Bush
was to appoint him, along with former President Clinton, to co-lead American relief efforts in Haiti. The president
doesn't like putting antagonists in any of his stories, but if forced to, he would cite unnamed "naysayers," "Washington
politics as usual," or "Congress," which was counterproductive given that Congress was held by his party. The guiding

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775755 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775755 Date: 12/31/2015




belief at the White House implicit in this messaging strategy was that Americans have a good grasp on economics and
good memories.
*     The second story the American people needed to hear from the president was why deficit spending is essential
when the economy is spiraling downward. It's not a hard story to tell, even in a sound bite. But one of the best
educators to occupy the Oval Office in decades chose not to educate -- he actually did it once, with prodding, but never
repeated what was a superb explanation --- nor did he remind voters every time his opponents attacked him for deficit
spending that they had left him with a 1.2 trillion dollar deficit on the day he walked into office because of their unpaid-
for tax cuts to millionaires and unpaid-for war on Iraq that called on no one to sacrifice except our soldiers and their
families (and our kids and grandkids, who will be paying off this war for generations). A year later, with Democrats on
the ropes, the president started to tell that story. It was the right move, but appeared defensive because it hadn't been
part of his guiding narrative from the start.
*     The third story the president needed to offer was an alternative narrative on government. The president and his
party were about to offer effective government as a solution to multiple problems after 30 years of solid branding by
conservatives since Ronald Reagan about how government is the problem. But the narrative never came.
*     The White House and Democratic Congress pass what virtually all economists outside the Goldman Sachs-to-
Washington pipeline consider a half-stimulus that they predict will likely produce half-results. It fulfilled its promise. But
the equally predictable political result was a discrediting of the concept of government intervention to stimulate the
economy in the eyes of the public -- enough to scare off Democratic lawmakers from doing what they learned about
Keynesian economics in intro economics for the indefinite future. Instead of blasting the Republicans for having hurled
the country toward an abyss that would now take drastic measures to avert and warning the American people that this
could easily be the first of two or three trillion-dollar packages that might be needed to get Americans back to work and
to get the gears of the economy grinding again before we could start returning to the kinds of surpluses Bill Clinton had
left the last time a Democrat was in the White House, the president chose to compromise with a party that was so
unpopular when he took office that only 20 percent of voters at that point would even admit to a pollster that they
considered themselves Republicans -- the lowest point for the GOP since the rise of public opinion polling 50 years
earlier.
*     The economy continues its free-fall, shedding 700,000 jobs a month. Meanwhile, Democrats don't take the kind of
dramatic steps necessary to stop the bleeding. Americans are becoming desperate, but they remain hopeful that this
new president will turn things around, and that perhaps the jobs provisions of the new "stimulus" act will do cauterize
the wound. Meanwhile, the stimulus is being portrayed by Republicans as a mixture of pork and fat, and no one is
effectively answering the charges, creating increasingly negative associations to an act that was never adequately
crafted or sold.
*     The logical follow-up to a bill designed to pull the economy out of a ditch is to make such a bill unnecessary in the
future, by attacking Wall Street for having thrown us into crisis and passing strong legislation to rein in the excesses that
created the economic meltdown. This would have sealed the American people's loyalty to the new president and
Congress. (Heading into November, this is, in fact, the most popular piece of legislation the Democrats have passed, but
it took them nearly a year and a half to get there, and by then, neither the president nor the Democratic Congress
enjoyed the good will of the average American.) Instead, the same banks that received bailouts are foreclosing in record
 rates on the homeowners whose payroll taxes funded the bailouts but don't seem to get the same kind of attention to
their needs from the federal government. Adding insult to injury, the banks double and triple credit card interest rates
to as high as 30 percent, including on people's existing credit card debt -- while continuing to receive no-interest loans
from the federal government.
 *     Despite talk of accountability, no one is fired (except one auto executive), virtually no one is prosecuted or even
 investigated as far as anyone knows, and banks that received bailouts flaunt record bonuses.

Act II: An Anemic Economy Meets an Anemic Health Care Plan

*    The public has been clamoring for health care reform. Over 40 million people don't have health insurance at all,
and the 85 percent of voters who do have health care have seen their costs double during the Bush years at the same
time as real income has declined. Effective narratives on health care are widely available that win by a 2:1 margin
against the toughest Harry-and-Louise anti-reform language from the other side. The opposition knows it, as evident in a
leaked memo by Republican wordsmith Frank Luntz, who warns that this will be an uphill climb for opponents of reform,
who would do well to accept some major elements of it.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775755 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775755 Date: 12/31/2015




*      But instead of using any of the well-tested narratives that were highly effective during the campaign or devising any
new ones of its own, the administration decides to try to "sell" health care without a narrative. (I wrote about this in
detail a year ago and will not repeat that history here, except in telegraphic form.) The president refuses to state where
he stands on any of the substantive debates about health reform for a year, such as whether we should have a "public
option" (a term so ill-conceived it's hard to believe the public supported it anyway; imagine the support it might have
received if it had been called instead "the one health care plan the health insurance companies don't get to control").
Instead, the White House uses phrases such as "bending the cost curve" while conservatives flood the airwaves with
evocative phrases such as "government takeover," "a bureaucrat between you and your doctor," and "death panels."
*      Instead of using Big Pharma and the health insurance industry as the villains of the health care story, which would
explain why we need an overhaul rather than a Band-Aid, the White House once again offers a story without
protagonists or antagonists, and cuts secret deals with both industries that become public.
*     Over interminable months of trying to get the votes of the same Republicans who fought against Medicare for
seniors for 30 years until the program was just too popular to keep attacking it and who are still trying to gut Social
Security despite its popularity, the public then watches what George Will describes as the "serial bribery" of Republican
and Democratic Senators alike, as each gets to take his or her turn as the 60th vote.
*      At the 11th hour, as a compromise plan is finally going to pass, the president nixes the idea of a Medicare-like
alternative Americans can choose over a health-insurance industry plan if they so desire, despite 60 percent of even
swing voters wanting it included in the bill.
*      Instead of being the signature bill that demonstrates both that Democrats can govern effectively and that
government can be a force for good for working and middle class Americans (who have just been told that the better
plans they've negotiated or been offered for years by their employers are "Cadillacs" that are going to be taxed out of
existence), the entire process proves to the average American that government can't do anything right and scares
moderate Democrats away from voting for any other bill that would ever put them on the record supporting
government or spending.
*      "Government" hits an all-time low in the polls, matching the popularity of big corporations, CEOs, and bailouts.
*      Populist anger emerges as the primary emotion across the political spectrum, and the president's job approval with
swing voters drops into the high thirties.
*      Following the conventional wisdom, Democrats return to their all-too-familiar defensive crouch, and conclude that
when in trouble, tack right. On health care, the president and his Cabinet fan out all over television to "reassure" the
public on health care that abortion won't be covered (thanks for the reassurance, but most of us didn't find that
reassuring), that domestic partners won't be covered, and that immigrants won't be covered. None of these issues
needed to be conceded. (I know this because I tested messages on them, and well- messaged progressive positions on
them would have boosted the popularity of the bill with swing voters.)
*      The White House starts adopting failed conservative policies and talking points that leave the public utterly
confused about where the president, and by extension, his party, stands on the central issues of the day. The president
talks about cutting deficits and increasing spending in the same breath, using the metaphor of families tightening their
 belt in tough times, which only strengthens resolve against stimulating a faltering economy; pledges support for
 massively expanding offshore drilling and "clean coal" (which doesn't exist, by the way) in a speech on climate change;
and sends in 1200 additional National Guards to Arizona as an apparent reward for passing "No Latino Left Behind,"
 while publicly objecting to the legislation.
 *     The underlying psychological assumption of these moves is that if you mix policies from the right and left in equal
 parts, you win the center. In fact, no one has ever won the center that way. It appears weak, opportunistic, and
 incoherent to the average swing voter, which is particularly problematic at a time when people in the center desperately
 want to know that their leaders have a vision and a coherent plan for what to do (which is why both FDR and Ronald
 Reagan were so effective in moving voters in the center). It doesn't win any votes on the right. But it does have one
 predictable effect: It sucks the motivation out of your base, who feel demoralized and betrayed (if they're part of the
 "professional left") or less likely to vote (if they're average voters who don't follow politics carefully but just don't feel
 very enthusiastic anymore, even if they don't really know why).
 *      Capping it all off, the BP disaster occurs two weeks after the president has adopted the "drill here, drill now," "all of
 the above" position of the Republican Party and the oil companies. This could have been the perfect opportunity to go
 on the offensive, contrast what Democrats stand for (common sense, protection of our safety, the land we leave our
 children, and key American industries and jobs, and sticking up for ordinary Americans against big businesses and their
 lobbyists) with what Republicans stand for; and connect the dots between what happened on Wall Street (with
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775755 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775755 Date: 12/31/2015




regulators owned and operated by the companies they were supposed to regulate) and what happened in the Gulf
(where precisely the same thing happened). Instead, the administration finds itself on the defensive, increasingly
sounding like a subsidiary of BP, allowing BP to call the shots and control information for weeks, defending increasingly
hard-to-believe statistics, and issuing press releases that appear indistinguishable from those issued by BP but are
inconsistent with assessments of independent scientists.

Where Do We Go from Here?
So that is where we find ourselves today: a Democratic Party and Democratic base that is demoralized and unlikely to
vote in high numbers in November; a Republican Party that is selling replanted Bushes with tremendous enthusiasm;
and a vast political center filled with voters who are utterly confused and unsure who to turn to but certain that things
aren't going well.
In January 2009 no one could have predicted that Democrats would be in this predicament today. Perhaps Democrats
might lose a few seats lost in an off-year election, but certainly no more than that. We had just seen -- and the American
public knew we had just seen -- the most disastrous performance by a president and party in living history, and the
American people had elected a tremendously charismatic young president with enormous Democratic majorities in both
houses of Congress. They had given the president and Congress a strong mandate for whatever kind of change was
necessary to get us out of economic free-fall and to put Americans back to work.
But there were red flags already by the end of Obama's first week in office that led me to offer the following advice to
the new administration: Tell the story of how we got in this mess or you'll own it. Tell a coherent story about deficit
spending. Re-brand government because there's only one story out there now (Reagan's), and it's not one that supports
a progressive agenda. Never let attacks go unanswered, because doing so only emboldens your opposition and leads the
public to believe that you have no answers to them. And if you throw a bipartisan party and no one comes, don't throw
another one. All of what followed has been as predictable as it has been unfortunate. A year and a half later, the White
House hasn't consistently done any of these things, although the President is now intermittently doing some of them,
and when he does, he does them well.
The question today is whether Democrats can channel the populist anger we are seeing around the country this late in
the game. The answer is that we'd better try. Having recently tested messages on economics and jobs, including how to
talk about deficits and taxes -- widely assumed to be Democrats' Achilles Heel, particularly now -- there is little question
that if Democrats and progressives from center to left simply say what they believe in ways that are evocative, values-
driven, and speak to people's worries and anger, many stand a good chance of surviving November, particularly when
their opponents have nothing to say other than warmed-over rhetoric about cutting taxes to millionaires and
multinationals and fiscal restraint except where it cuts into profits of their campaign contributors. Even the most
evocative boilerplate conservative messages fall flat against honest messages that speak to the need to get Americans
working again. And on issue after issue, no message is more resonant right now than one that sides with working and
 middle class Americans and small business owners against special interests, big business, and their lobbyists.
 But actions speak louder than words, and Americans want to see action. It may be too late for the kind of jobs bill we
should have seen a year and a half ago, but it isn't too late for Democrats to go on the offensive against the Republicans
-- virtually all of them -- who opposed extending unemployment insurance to millions of Americans who were thrown
 out of work by the Republicans' corporate sponsors. It isn't too late for Democrats to contrast their support for the
 highly popular aid to state and local governments that just saved the jobs of hundreds of thousands of teachers,
 firefighters, and police all over the country with Republicans' desire to throw them out onto the street. It isn't too late to
 make a voting issue out of the bill the Republicans are stalling that would give small businesses a fighting chance in an
 economy stacked against them, and to make clear that one party stands for small businesses, which create 75 percent of
 the new jobs in this country, and the other party stands for big businesses that outsource American jobs and offshore
 their profits to avoid paying their fair share of American taxes. It's not too late to pass a bill that would limit credit card
 interest rates to a reasonable percent above the rate at which credit is made available to credit card companies. It's not
 too late to pass the first badly need "fix" to the health care reform act to demonstrate to Americans that Democrats
 mean it when they say this was just the first step, namely a law that stops insurance companies from increasing their
 premiums by 40 percent while cutting the size of their networks by 50-75 percent, which violates the principles of
 affordability and choice that were so essential to efforts to sell health care reform to the public. It's not too late to vow
 to change the rules of the Senate to prevent the use of the filibuster to give every special interest veto power over every
 important piece of legislation. It's not too late to introduce legislation that's been on hold in both the House and Senate


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775755 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775755 Date: 12/31/2015




to guarantee fair elections, so that the voice of everyday Americans is heard over the voice of the special interests that
finance political campaigns.
On every one of these issues, a strong populist message trounces anything the other side can say. But Democrats need
to play offense. They need to take up-or-down votes on bill after bill, including those they expect the other side to block,
knowing that every one of those votes has the leverage of a campaign ad behind it. They need to change the narrative
from what sounds to the average American like a whiny and impotent one -- "the Republicans won't let us do it" -- to a
narrative of strength in numbers shared with their constituents. And they need to make every election a choice between
two well-articulated approaches to governance -- and to offer their articulation of both sides' positions and values.
That leads to a final point. What Democrats have needed to offer the American people is a clear narrative about what
and who led our country to the mess in which we find ourselves today and a clear vision of what and who will lead us
out. That narrative would have laid a roadmap for our elected officials and voters alike, rather than making each
legislative issue a seemingly discrete turn onto a dirt road. That narrative might have included -- and should include
today -- some key elements: that if the economy is tumbling, it's the role of leadership and government to stop the free-
fall; that if Wall Street is gambling with our financial security, our homes, and our jobs, true leaders do not sit back
helplessly and wax eloquent about the free market, they take away the dice; that if the private sector can't create jobs
for people who want to work, then we'll put Americans back to work rebuilding our roads, bridges, and schools; that if
Big Oil is preventing us from competing with China's wind and solar energy programs, then we'll eliminate the tax breaks
that lead to dysfunctional investments in 19th century fuels and have a public-private partnership with companies that
will create the clean, safe fuels of the 21st century and the millions of good American jobs that will follow.
That's what Democrats stand for. It's time they said it.

Drew Westen, Ph.D., is Professor of Psychology and Psychiatry at Emory University, founder of Westen Strategies, and
author of The Political Brain: The Role of Emotion in Deciding the Fate of the Nation.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775755 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775755 Date: 12/31/2015




recent dust-up over the Deputy NSA Froman email regarding Dow Chemicals did not help, making the government more
sensitive than ever to opposition accusations that India is advancing NLL at our urging.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775755 Date: 12/31/2015
