        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785317 Date: 12/31/2015


                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                   B5


From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Tuesday, May 10, 2011 7:58 PM
To:
Subject:                           FW: (SBU) Meeting with Hina and Bashir 5/10/2011


Interesting.

From: Munter, Cameron P
Sent: Tuesday, May 10, 2011 2:35 PM
To: Grossman, Marc I
Cc: Feldman, Daniel F; Ruggiero, Frank 3; Singh, Vikram 3; Lenderking, Timothy A; Nepal, Rohit S; Hoagland, Richard E;
Pratt, Jonathan G; Harris, Brian F; Rosner, Jeremy D
Subject: (SBU) Meeting with Hina and Bashir 5/10/2011

Marc,

Jonathan and I met at 10pm with Hina (Bashir and Sohail were there):

    •    She had been asked by the PM to make sure the Secretary's visit was on track. Therefore, when I asked your
         question — were they signaling through the press that they didn't want the Secretary to visit — they were taken
         aback: quite the opposite. Clearly, they would be devastated if the Secretary did not visit. Over and over, they
         said this visit is "crucial."
    •    I mentioned the need for absolute operational security — they must not/not mention the date (and reminded
         them that the visit was not yet announced). They were fully on board.
    •    She then asked about trust: what will it take, Hina said, for you to trust us enough that we can never have
         another unilateral action by the U.S.? She clearly agrees with Kayani that another such action would be
         catastrophic. She wants to know, specifically, how we can avoid it. — the implication was that it would be best if
         such actions were joint.
    •    She insisted that Z, Gilani, K, Pasha, and the Foreign Ministry were all on the same page: there's no other option
         than to improve our mutual relations. We expressed some skepticism, -- what about the rather forward leaning
         MFA statement of 5/2, the toughening line in Islamabad since then, and Kayani's statement this last weekend
         that the elected government hadn't explained itself well in the immediate aftermath of the raid. Hina and
         Bashir tried to assure us: all five listed above were in the room when the 5/2 statement was crafted; all
         elements of the government (civil and military) were on the same page, that that page was the PM's speech
         yesterday.
    •    Then: messaging: we haven't said anything embarrassing about you, why do you embarrass us (reference to
         Panetta in Time)? We agreed we'd all work on messaging, with the target dates of the Kerry visit (now in the
         press here, they knew all about it) and the Secretary's visit.

Atmosphere: they were really trying hard to convince us that there's unity on their side, and that their side wants to
make things better.
                                                                                                  Hina is off to Moscow
and returns the 18th. For now, we'll continue to engage with Bashir.

Cameron




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785317 Date: 12/31/2015
