UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787452 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL
                                THE IRAN PROJECT



   Thomas E. Donilon
   National Security Advisor
   The White House
   Washington DC

                                                         December 19, 2011
   Dear Mr. Donilon

   We have been working together for the past decade to support direct United States
   and Iran official relations to end their potential proliferation and improve relations
   over Iraq and Afghanistan. Our objective has been to help each side agree to work
   toward a new relationship, including more transparency of and clearer limits on
   Iran's nuclear program. From our ongoing contacts with current and former Iranian
   officials we now believe there is an opening for the US and the P5+1 to achieve an
   important breakthrough in our long frustrating efforts with the Iranians about their
   nuclear program.

   We see this as an opportunity to end Iran's enrichment at the 20% level, reduce or
   eliminate its stockpile of 20% material to zero, and impose a cap that would limit
   enrichment to 5%. Such an agreement would establish principles that would
   constrain Iranian behavior while strengthening America's international position
   should Iran seek to transgress those lines in the future.

   The moment to accomplish this goal has developed quite recently because
   sanctions have weakened Iran's position and the Tehran Research Reactor will
   soon run out of fuel. Iranian officials seem to lack confidence that their 20%
   enriched uranium will be of sufficiently high quality or that the fuel rods they build
   will be technically adequate to operate the reactor. These and other factors may
   have motivated President Ahmadinejad to propose publicly last September that
   Iran would cease production of 20% enriched uranium, if it could buy the fuel rods
   on the international market.

   We have been told by people we consider reliable that the Supreme National
   Security Council has formally approved the offer to cap the enrichment. Despite
   past disputes over the TRR and the US, this proposal stands in place and has not
   become the subject of public controversy in Iran which we take as another sign of
   official approval at the top.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787452 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787452 Date: 12/31/2015




   The US objective is to get Iran's agreement to end its accumulation of an even
   larger stock of 20% enriched uranium that could later be further enriched to bomb-
   grade material. The US would still be left with at least two valid concerns: (1) the
   suspicion that Iran could renew clandestinely 20% enrichment, and (2) the concern
   that the Iranians would be left with a large reserve of 20% enriched uranium that
   could be further enriched to weapons grade should they decline to go along with
   efforts to transfer it for use in the program to provide fuel rods. We believe that the
   advantage of getting a cap on Iran's enrichment program would be so significant
   that the USG should agree to discuss how this cap would be implemented as the
   basic proposition. The US and its partners could also try to negotiate safeguards
   and the 20% stockpile issue, but since the Iranians are offering this deal, it is
   clearly in the US advantage to accept the cap.

   We recommend that the P5+1 accept the Iranian proposal in principle and subject
   to negotiated understandings. This approach would enable the Iranians to claim a
   diplomatic victory for their proposal in their own constituencies, while the US
   defines the most important aspects of the content of the agreement and achieves an
   important objective

   We hope this will be helpful. We would be pleased to provide you a more detailed
   analysis of the advantages and how to overcome the disadvantages based on our
   thinking on this important matter.

   Sincerely,



   Stephen B. Heintz                           William H. Luers



   a/ dal:a 6-VeW 11( A                                   .CIAJavtl
   William G. Miller                            Thomas R. Pickering


          4)11
   James Walsh                                  Frank G. Wisner




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787452 Date: 12/31/2015
