      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788725 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Saturday, September 10, 2011 4:37 PM
To:                                'J I oty LC@state.g ov'
Subject:                           Fw: A few things



Pls print.

    Original Message
From: Verveer, Melanne S [mailto:VerveerMS@state.gov]
Sent: Thursday, September 08, 2011 03:49 PM
To: H
Subject: A few things

I'm heading back from the Netherlands and wanted you to know that I had a very good meeting with FM Rosenthal. He
has made women a security and economic empowerment issue (our messaging is having impact). He kept telling me,
"we can't just say women should have the right to political participation, they need to share in the POWER!" He's quite
articulate on the subject and quoted from you extensively in his speech at the conference..

The Dutch have taken the Joint statement that you and Rosenthal announced at your DC meeting very seriously and are
bringing resources to the table in Egypt and Tunisia and want to help in Libya.
We have established a good relationship with them.

Rosenthal also said they'd be interested in working on a microcredit initiative on cookstoves so I'll follow up with Kris on
how we might go forward on that.

The conference focused significantly on afghan women's role in agriculture. In preparing, I realized what a very small
percentage of Afghan AID ag funds are directed to women. And now we even have a major FAO report stating how vital
women are to the ag sector. It's so hard to change ways but we'll keep trying.

On the Silk road vision and regional economic integration, I talked to Grossman before I left on ways we can address
women's economic role and he thought it made sense. Excellent Afghan reps participated in the conference. I had
dinner with them last night and they made my head spin. You can always get an honest read from the people doing the
hard work on the ground. The challenges are truly daunting. If we could crack the corruption and inept leadership
problem, it would be a new day.

Lastly, this is Amb Fay Hartog-Levin's last week in the job. She is stepping down for family reasons.
                                                                       She has done a really good job in my view and is
respected both by the govt and the people.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788725 Date: 12/31/2015
