     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786597 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                         B5,B6


From:                              Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS@state.gov>
Sent:                              Wednesday, October 26, 2011 7:21 PM
To:



                                                                      , and I know firsthand the tremendous affection for       B6
you around the world.

I'm heading back from Bosnia and Croatia and, I must say I found it sobering to be back in the Balkans. The paralysis
among the politicians in Bosnia continues to inhibit progress as they also continue to accentate their grievances instead
of working for a better future. The government --cantons, entities, national structure --is so complicated that it makes
getting anything done difficult.There is very little harmonization of regs and laws and there is a great deal of segregation.

 I met with govt leaders, journalists, NG0s, businnesswomen and students and they were in one of two camps: the
complainers (what you used to call                                   or the roll-up-your-sleeves work hard group, despite       B5
everything. The media and politicians were more into the blame game and devoid of any optimism, even though, in
some ways, they had more power. I'm going to see what we can do to help spark more cross sectoral and cross ethnic
work among the women leaders. Once again, I feel like I'm in pre- Hillary/vital voices Northern Ireland. Fortunately, Pat
Moon gets it and his wife is a dynamo. He went to every single meeting with me from early morning til night and said he
learned a lot. I'm going to see what we can cobble together to help the women make some more progress there despite
the difficulties. By the way, many remembered with gratitude your trips to Tuzla and Sarajevo in the really tough days.
The nice thing is that the US is still appreciated there.

We held the women's entrepreneurship
summit for the Balkans in Zagreb for some 200 small businesswomen from across the region. They were an impressive
group and we had staff from all the relevant embassies who will continue to work with them on follow up. I really
believe if economies can grow and women can do their part, it will be enormously beneficial to the region. We gave
everyone a copy of your APEC speech so they can be armed with the best evidence-based arguments to promote
women's entrepreneurship with policymakers. Once again, your video captured the local headlines (even though we
merely reused the one you recorded for the Turkey entrep conf earlier this year).

The PM and Pres. of Croatia came and spoke, as well as the Kosovar President. They all send their best. I had a long talk
with the Croatian Pres who is really working to improve relations with Serbia. With Croatia heading to the EU and if
Serbia makes progress on EU demands, it could be the best hope for Bosnia and Kosovo.

I had an even longer meeting with the Kosovar president who is trying so hard. She has made fighting corruption her top
priority (not an easy issue there). She's made some gutsy judicial appts and is striving to foster unity. She is immensely
popular with women in Kosovo and maybe she can parlay some of that goodwill. She is planning to hold an international
women's conf in Kosovo in October next year and desperately wants you to come. The Kosovars feel like they're still
pariahs and she's struggling to better their image.
She and the Croatian president both spoke about the rule of law and ending corruption as critical to economic progress.
We had no walkout by the Serbs, either from the conference or when the K pres spoke. Everyone spoke to the need to
put grievances behind and to work for a better future.

In short, a small step forward with hopes that more will follow.

                                  and thanks for all you do.                                                                    B6




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786597 Date: 12/31/2015
