        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786201 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                 B5,B6


From:                              H <hrod17©clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Friday, April 22, 2011 4:58 AM
To:                                'JilotyLC@state.gov.
Cc:                                'Burnsw.@state.• ov'; 'sullivanjj@state.gov'; 'feltmanjd@state.gov'; 'millscd@state.gov';
                                   'rsha                'verveerms@state.gov'
Subject                            Fw: Egypt readout




    Original Message
From: Verveer, Melanne S [mailto:VerveerMS@state.gov]
Sent: Thursday, April 21, 2011 07:27 PM
To: H
Subject: Egypt readout

I had 3 days of extensive mtgs with a broad section of egyptian officials, NG0s,and business leaders. Here's brief
assessment -- will expand when I return.

STOP LOSS OF FORWARD MOVEMENT FOR WOMEN in Egypt

Women's NGOs need funding and technical assistance to form broad-based coalitions to organize a COORDINATED
campaign around priorities, such as getting key issues raised during campaign, candidates training, election ed and rights
awareness with poor women in villages, advocacy with decisionmakers on upcoming elections (eg, proportional
representation with women on lists, women's participation in drafting constitution, restoring women's machinery in
government etc).

There is little time, and women need support now. Amb Scobey went w me to most of the mtgs I had and fully
understands the need to get resources to effective and locally credible entities like UN Women's Egypt office or to the
larger women's NGOs who have a good plan which they can immediately begin to implement. USAID is planning on
making grants in area of 900k. This amount can't be absorbed by small NGOs and it won't be utilized properly. If a
basket fund were created with UNWomen or others, it could be used to hire technical staff and make grants to smaller
NGOs,

Women have been marginalized by the military. There is no resolution on retention of quotas for women for Parliament,
no involvement in drafting election rules, no guarantee they will be significantly represented in drafting of constitution
after Parliamentary election. The Ministry for women was dismantled (with no notice) and Council of women (once a
powerhouse office) has been marginalized. The PM called in 6 women for a meeting on women's issues, incl 2 young
bloggers. Only 1 of the 6 had any background on the issues, however.

The youth groups are disorganized and still dealing with their celebrity. They don't have a clue about the importance of
the laws on child marriage, trafficking, nationality, family law, etc. Although many worked over many years for the laws,
Mrs. Mubarek was instrumental in their adoption. As a result, they are being viewed by some, including some of the
youth leaders, as illegitimate. The Muslim Brotherhood has picked up on this --having originally opposed all of these
measures --and are using this association to justify need to repeal laws. The MB is far better organized and seem
determined to push back.

I met with some of the poor women who have benefited from these laws as well as the NGOs who work with them and
they told me they feared losing the laws that helped them.
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786201 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786201 Date: 12/31/2015




The women leaders also urged that our govt raise women's participation in any meetings with the military.

The women leaders made 2 additional requests; that our govt raise women's issues and participation in official mtgs we
have with the military leaders and that we organize a letter to the military on behalf of Egyptian women and have it
signed by influential leaders from around the world.

WOMEN NEED TO BE INCLUDED IN POLICIES AND PROGRAMS TO ADDRESS ECONOMIC CHALLENGES

As you know, the economy is in a downward spiral-- from tourism to production, strikes, exports, etc Moreover, there
doesn't seem to be any wise group or anyone with expertise in govt making thoughtful economic decisions. They clearly
need a forward-looking plan for economic growth. A complicating factor is that "business" has become a dirty word
since so many businessmen are in prison, under suspicion, overseas or being interrogated.

Many things need to happen but one thing that's very important is to stimulate SME's, especially those run by women.
One component of the protest on Tahrir was about jobs. SME's have high elasticity and are growth accelerators. They
create jobs. The major barrier is access to finance. There need to be loan guarantees and other innovative ways to make
access to capital possible. Women-run businesses need to be part of any economic strategy. As one economist said, "If
this is gender neutral, there will be discrimination against women."

There's a lot at stake for women and for Egypt's future.

I have a head of experiences to unpack from the West Bank and Israel. Will provide later. Hani's center in Nablus is doing
incredible work.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786201 Date: 12/31/2015
