      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770143 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                           B6




From:                                Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                                Thursday, May 6, 2010 8:27 PM
To:
Subject                              FW: D(L) Digest - May 6, 2010



See highlighted areas


From: Hyde, Dana
Sent: Thursday, May 06, 2010 7:00 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Fw: D(L) Digest - May 6, 2010



FYI -- coverage of psd and raj's speech -D



From: Holm, Peter
To: D(L); Lew, Jacob J
Sent: Thu May 06 18:38:24 2010
Subject: D(L) Digest - May 6, 2010

                                                    D(L) DIGEST - MAY 6, 2010

AfPak Channel News Roundup — May 6
Included today: growing evidence of Tehrik-i-Taliban connection to Times Square bombing attempt; DHS instructs airlines to
make faster checks of no-fly lists; CIA has permission to strike a broader range of targets with drones in northwest Pakistan,
based on "pattern of life" analysis (LAT); GAO report finds more than 21,000 "enemy-initiated attacks" recorded in
Afghanistan in 2009, a 75% increase over 2008, attributes the Taliban's "resilience" to several factors, including ineffective
governance, a porous border, and funding from the narcotics trade (McClatchy); more.

REPORT: Leverage: Designing a Political Campaign for Afghanistan (PDF)
 CNAS — Andrew Exum — May 6
 This report notes that America's counterinsurgency strategy in Afghanistan has focused more on waging war at the
 operational and tactical levels at the expense of the strategic and political levels. "In the end, by having so vocally and
 materially committed to the Karzai regime, the United States and its allies are tied to its successes and failures. The goal, then,
 should be to maximize the former and minimize the latter through focused application of U.S. leverage." Andrew Exum is a
fellow at CNAS and served on General McChrystal's Afghanistan strategy review team in 2009.

Shah doles out tough love for USAID in policy speech
The Cable — Josh Rogin — May 5
At a town-hall meeting on the campus of the George Washington University this afternoon, USAID Administrator Rajiv Shah
will lay out a broad plan for reforming the organization, which has seen years of depleted resources and diminished morale.

MFAN Statement: Shah Speech Touches on Important Elements of Reform
Modernizing Foreign Assistance Network — May 6
MFAN congratulates U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) Administrator Rajiv Shah for his visionary speech
yesterday to supporters of the U.S. Global Leadership Coalition. In the speech, Administrator Shah strongly endorsed
elevating development as a cornerstone of U.S. foreign policy and empowering it as a distinct discipline that requires unique
resources and authority. Citing the fact that global hunger and extreme poverty have increased in recent years,
Administrator Shah issued a call for reform of his Agency and America's development apparatus overall, in order to drive more
tangible results for recipients, implementers, and taxpayers.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770143 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770143 Date: 12/31/2015




Patrick Cronin on How to Rebuild USAID
Modernizing Foreign Assistance Network— May 6
Patrick Cronin, Senior Advisor and Senior Director of the Asia-Pacific Security Program at the Center for a New American
Security (CNAS), published an op-ed in the Daily Caller in response to Monday's leaked Presidential Study Directive (PSD-7)
draft, "A New Way Forward on Global Development." Cronin acknowledges the many positive reforms in the draft, but points
to the challenges that lie in implementation. See excepts from his piece below and read the full oped here.

A Breakthrough in the Tortured Foreign Aid Debate?
German Marshall Fund — James Kunder — May 5
In the language of PSD 7, one senses— despite President Obama's strong statements in support of international development
— continued uncertainty about whether the United States government really wants a center of excellence, strong and vocal, in
international development. Rather, a careful reading of the draft document suggests continued bureaucratic tussles are the
order of the day, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) remains a pawn in these interagency "turf'
wars. James Kunder is a Senior Resident Fellow at the German Marshall Fund of the United States. Previously, he served in
multiple positions at USAID, including Acting Deputy Administrator.

MFAN Principals Weigh in on Leaked PSD Draft
Modernizing Foreign Assistance Network— May 6
Since Josh Rogin reported on the leaked National Security Council draft of the Presidential Study Directive on Global
Development Policy (PSD-7), the development community has been abuzz weighing in on the specific recommendations and
the debate for where authority over U.S. development efforts should be housed. Two MFAN Principals —Jim Kolbe, Senior
Transatlantic Fellow, German Marshall Fund, and Carol Peasley, President, Center for Population & Development Activities —
put out their thoughts on the heated policy debate and what it will take to keep reform moving forward.

SFRC to authorize $3.5 bn for Haiti
Politico — Laura Rozen — May 5
The legislation, co-sponsored by Sen. John Kerry (D-Mass.) and Sen. Bob Corker (R-Tenn.), directs USAID to develop a
comprehensive rebuilding and development strategy for Haiti, proposes a a policy framework to address critical priorities, and
calls for a Senior Haiti Policy Coordinator, responsible for advising, overseeing, and coordinating U.S. policy towards
Haiti. Laura Rozen is foreign policy reporter for Politico.

Section 1206 and FMF: A Global View
Budget Insight — Rebecca Williams — May 5
Comparing Section 1206 and FMF is important, however, because the difference between FMF and Section 1206 is not always
clear. Critics of Section 1206 note that the process has become longer-term and more institutional, making it more like
FMF. Moreover, the equipment that has been provided is similar to that provided under FMF, prompting additional questions
as to the "urgency" in some cases. Others question DOD's ability and/or legitimacy in influencing foreign policy in this way
because broader may be missed from a military perspective. Rebecca Williams is a Research Associate at the Henry L. Stimson
Center's Budgeting for Foreign Affairs and Defense program.

Drip Irrigation farming in Africa
Poverty News Blog — May 6
While another drought grips a part of Africa, we find this story of a technology that can help food harvests. Drip irrigation is an
Israeli farming method that is being introduced to a few in Africa. Instead of continuously providing food to the starving year
after year, donors are looking at farming methods such as drip irrigation to instead improve agriculture. But getting the
African farmers to think more like businessmen who want to improve yields not only for themselves but for their own self-
interest will take years of changing mindsets.

Ambassadors: Jeffrey to Baghdad
Ambassador shuffle: Riccardione to Ankara
Politico — Laura Rozen — May 6
Reports on several diplomatic moves with respect to Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Indonesia, Turkey, Israel, and the EUR
bureau. Laura Rozen is foreign policy reporter for Politico.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770143 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770143 Date: 12/31/2015




The D(L) Digest is a daily sampling of items from various external sources on topics of interest to the D(L) staff. It is
uncoordinated and intended for internal office use to bring in outside perspectives and stimulate discussion. It does not
represent the views of D(L) or the Department of State.

NOTE: The D(L) Digest will be on hiatus next week while I am out of the office and will return on May 17.



Peter M. Holm, Ph.D.
Special Assistant
Office of Deputy Secretary of State Jacob J. Lew
holmp@state(.sgov).gov
Ph: (202) 647-1934
B B:




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770143 Date: 12/31/2015
