      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778308 Date: 12/31/2015


                                                                                            RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             Shah, Rajiv (AID/A) <rshah@usaid.gov>
Sent                              Tuesday, January 25, 2011 3:33 PM
To:
Cc:                               Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:                          Thanks re CGD speech guidance



Secretary Clinton,

Thank you for your guidance on the CGD speech last week.

I used the national security framing and the obligation to achieve excellence in how we conduct the development work
as major themes, and we used the speech as an action forcing event to complete and implement our new evaluation
policy and roll out some of the tougher reforms on reigning in contractors. While very well received in our target
communities (the hill, the military communities, and certain key NGO constituency communities), it has caused some
friction within USAID and with some implementing partners. But that's what we were aiming to do.

As you suggested, we have been aggressive (with help from Philippe and others) in pushing the message out -
particularly in a focused way with an eye to the hill. We've seen very good pieces in the Guardian, Congressional
Quarterly, and by Walter Pincus in today's Washington Post. We are also trying to get more clear conservative and
Republican support.

SACFO Clerk Tim Rieser who has been quite vocal in his critique of USAID culture and operations praised the speech,
noted that in all of his years in the Senate, he had never seen such an honest and hard-hitting address by a USAID
person. Others, including Senate Leadership staff and our strongest supporters on SFRC and HFAC, acknowledged that
USAID, has "a good story to tell" for a change, having gotten ahead of many of the critiques regarding contracting,
inefficiencies, and waste. (That will be a constant battle of course, and the fact that we have to focus on our operating
budget will make it harder but I am confident.)

We will keep focusing on managing the reforms of USAID Forward and the QDDR aggressively — and in my next meeting
with you I would appreciate the chance to provide an update on that front. For now, I just wanted to say thank you.

Raj




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778308 Date: 12/31/2015
