        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786870 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                             B6



From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                             Wednesday, July 13, 2011 8:27 PM
To:                               'millscd©state.gov'
Subject:                          Re: Advancing Women's Rights Is Progressive Foreign Policy (GHI, FTF, QDDR, 1325, etc
                                  ref)


That's great!


From: Mills, Cheryl D [mailto:MillsCD©state.gov]
Sent: Wednesday, July 13, 2011 11:04 AM
To: H; williamsbarrett           <williamsbarrett
Subject: FW: Advancing ►omen's Rights Is Progressive Foreign Policy (GHI, FTF, QDDR, 1325, etc ref)




From: Huang, Cindy Y
Sent: Wednesday, July 13, 2011 10:20 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: FW: Advancing Women's Rights Is Progressive Foreign Policy (GHI, FTF, QDDR, 1325, etc ref)

Just FYI ... Great photo from Tanzania!


From: Flowers, Kimberly (BFS) [mailto
Sent: Wednesday, June 29, 2011 11:4 AM
To: Huang, Cindy Y; Franko, Kathryn L; Cabus, Sylvia; Coursen, Wendy (BFS); Burns, Christopher (EGAT/WID); Williams,
Anne (BFS)
Cc: Frederickson, Karen (BFS)
Subject: FW: Advancing Women's Rights Is Progressive Foreign Policy (GHI, FTF, QDDR, 1325, etc ref)

Thought this would interest you. — Kimberly

Center for American Progress


Advancing Women's Rights Is Progressive Foreign Policy
Empowering Women Must Continue Past Secretary Clinton's Term




                                              OURCE: AP/Susan Walsh

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786870 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786870 Date: 12/31/2015




U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton meets with the farmers in the Upendo Women's Cooperative
group in Mlandizi, Tanzania.

By Peter Juul 1June 29, 2011

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is spearheading a quiet revolution in progressive foreign policy by making the
empowerment of women and advancement of their rights a cornerstone of U.S. foreign policy. While
overshadowed by other foreign policy issues—the global financial crisis; wars in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Libya;
nuclear programs in Iran and North Korea; terrorism; and the Arab Spring to name a few—the Obama
administration has embarked on the most concerted effort to advance women's rights in the history of U.S.
foreign policy.

Secretary Clinton has been the main mover behind this agenda, and her well-known personal interest in
empowering women internationally has propelled it forward. For instance, Saudi women activists called on
Secretary Clinton to support their right-to-drive campaign due to her intense personal interest in women's
rights.

But the fate of the Obama administration's new focus on international women's rights and empowerment is
uncertain without a high-level champion like Secretary Clinton, who has said she will leave the administration
at the end of President Obama's current term in office. Progressives should ensure that Secretary Clinton's
focus on women's rights and empowerment survives beyond her tenure at Foggy Bottom and becomes a central,
definitional component of what it means to have a progressive foreign policy.

Over the last two and a half years, the Obama administration and the State Department in particular have racked
up an impressive record on women's rights and empowerment. In her confirmation hearing, Clinton signaled
her prioritization of women's rights, saying, "The United States must be an unequivocal and unwavering voice
in support of women's rights in every country on every continent."

Action was swift: On his third day in office, President Obama rescinded the "Global Gag Rule" and restored
U.S. funding to international family planning organizations that fund abortion. Less than two months later, the
Obama administration restored U.S. funding to the U.N. Population Fund after a seven-year hiatus. What's
more, the administration created the Office of Global Women's Issues in the State Department, reporting
directly to Secretary Clinton, and appointed Melanne Verveer as the first ambassador-at-large for global
women's issues.

The administration has incorporated women into its two major development initiatives: the Feed the Future
Initiative and the Global Health Initiative. The $3.5 billion Food Security Initiative acknowledges that women
produce between 60 percent and 80 percent of the, food in developing countries and estimates that providing
women with agricultural "inputs" such as land, fertilizer, and seed varieties equal to those, of men increases
economic output by 10 percent in developing countries. Accordingly, the Feed the Future Initiative will target
interventions such as access to financial services, agricultural inputs, and extension services at women, as well
as focusing on legal reforms that will allow women farmers to own the land they work.

Similarly, the Global Health Initiative lists improving health outcomes for women and girls as a "core
objective" "both for its own sake and because of the centrality of women to the health of their families and
communities." Part and parcel of GHI' s focus on women and girls is support for "long-term systemic changes
that promote gender equality," removal of "barriers to quality health service for women," and providing "access
to a basic package of essential health services." In addition, Gill focuses on building the capacity of women and
girls "as health care providers, caregivers, decision-makers, and participants in and civil society organizations."

Furthermore, the State Department's first Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review took steps toward
institutionalizing Secretary Clinton's focus on women's rights and empowerment. "Women and girls," the
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786870 Date: 12/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786870 Date: 12/31/2015




QDDR declared, "should be integral to all of our diplomatic efforts." Women and girls are to be integrated into
"all State policies and programs," and programs will be created focusing on women. New gender integration
guidelines for State Department and USAID program planning, budgeting, and evaluation are to be adopted.

Finally, the State Department has engaged in a plethora of smaller initiatives—often in cooperation with
nongovernmental organizations and the private sector—aimed at promoting women's rights and empowerment,
including:

   •    Establishing the Secretary's International Fund for Women and Girls to channel private funds for "flexible, rapid,
        targeted, and high-impact grants" for nongovernmental organizations
   •    Establishing the Secretary's Innovation Award for the Empowerment of Women and Girls "to find and bring to
        scale the most pioneering approaches to the political, economic and social empowerment of women and girls
        around the globe"
   •    Launching a Small Grants Initiative through the Office of Global Women's Issues to fund women's political,
        social, and economic empowerment in countries around the world
   •    Launching a number of programs promoting women's involvement in business in Pakistan, Kuwait, Africa, Latin
        America, and the Asia-Pacific region
   •    Launching the Global Partnership on Maternal and Child Health with the Norwegian government, the World
        Bank, the Gates Foundation, and a Canadian NGO
   •    Launching the Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves public-private initiative, with a five-year, $50 million U.S.
        contribution
   •    Launching TechWomen, a public-private initiative to bring 38 women from the Middle East and North Africa
        working in the technology sector to Silicon Valley for a mentoring program in the summer of 2011
   •    Launching the mWomen Initiative to provide women with access to mobile phones, a public-private initiative
        with the Cherie Blair Foundation for Women and the mobile service industry

On the diplomatic side, there have been a number of achievements. In a session chaired by Secretary Clinton,
the U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 1888, establishing a special representative of the secretary
general for sexual violence in conflict and creating a rapid-response team of experts to help provide
accountability for sexual violence during conflict in "situations of particular concern."

The Obama administration has also pledged money to reduce gender-based violence in war, including $17
million to the Democratic Republic of Congo and almost $44 million toward a National Action Plan to
implement U.N. Security Council Resolution 1325 on the role of women in conflict resolution. Finally, the
United States worked toward the creation of a unified U.N. agency—U.N. Women—dedicated to women's
rights and empowerment.

There are more instances of the Obama administration's focus on women's rights and empowerment—such as a
three-year, $26.3 million program of small grants to women-run NGOs in Afghanistan announced in 2009—but
progressives cannot rest on these laurels.

Secretary Clinton's historic prioritization of women's rights and empowerment cannot begin and end with her
personal commitment to the issue. It must become a defining commitment of a progressive foreign policy, even
if it does not rise to the level of terrorism or political change in the public consciousness. It should be expected
and required that the next progressive secretary of state show the baseline dedication to advancing women's
rights and empowering women as Secretary Clinton.

Advancing women's rights should be a key progressive foreign policy value—as Secretary Clinton has said,
empowering women is "about making sure that every woman and girl everywhere has the opportunities that she
deserves to fulfill her potential, a potential as a mother, as a worker, as a human being." '

What is more progressive than that?
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786870 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786870 Date: 12/31/2015




Peter Juul is a Policy Analyst at American Progress.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786870 Date: 12/31/2015
