UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773781 Date: 12/31/2015




                                       MEMORANDUM                          RELEASE IN PART
                                                                           B5
                                        June 22, 2012



 TO:           THE SECRETARY

 FROM:         Cheryl Mills
               Jeanne Smith

 SUBJECT: Government to Government Funding: Policy Guidance



 In February, Secretary Sebelius reached out to you regarding




                                                                                You and
 Secretary Sebelius delegated to Bill Corr, Deputy Secretary for Health and Human Services
 (HHS) and me the responsibility to return with a recommendation for the most efficient process
 for USAID as it went forward with G2G activity.

 This memorandum outlines our conclusions and recommendations for next steps based upon
 extensive engagement over the past several months with officials from HHS, USAID, CDC and
 PEPFAR. I have also spent significant time discussing the key issues with Bill Corr, Eric
 Goosby and Raj Shah. Should you agree with this memorandum, we need to take steps to
 follow-up individually and institutionally with all affected parties.

 PEPFAR G2G activity: The Current State of Affairs

 The PEPFAR program operates as a funding agent, if you will, with two USG implementing
 partners — USAID and CDC. Both agencies share the value of and seek to implement best
 practices in growing the capacity of host government agencies to receive, monitor and manage
 USG funds in implementing programs funded by PEPFAR. Yet, while both entities share the
 long-term goal of G2G programming as the best practice objective, they have fundamentally
 different perspectives as to how best to achieve this outcome and navigate the road in the
 interim.




                                                                                                  1
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773781 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773781 Date: 12/31/2015




 CDC has established G2G mechanisms in 62 countries that provide implementation capacity to
 MOHs for PEPFAR funded programming, and in some cases non-PEPFAR funded health
 programming. Due in large part to the absence of existing internal capacity in.M0Hs when CDC
 mechanisms were established, CDC's mechanisms operate as direct-funded planning and
 implementation units, and are intended over time to develop the technical and absorptive
 capacity of respective MOHs. These units are technically, financially and operationally
 supported by CDC, typically with a mix of USG direct hires and Foreign Service National (FSN)
 employees working in collaboration with MOH personnel. In many instances, these mechanisms
 have been in place for more than a decade; in no instance has CDC transitioned any of these
 mechanisms from being CDC-supported units to units that are part of the regular and internal
 operations of MOHs — despite the fact that in all cases that is CDC's long term objective.

 Over the past two years, USAID has embraced a much more aggressive G2G strategy as part of
 its procurement reform practices. This strategy calls on Missions to shift a percentage of their
 existing resource portfolio from large-scale international contractors to local entities and
 contractors — including building up host country MOHs and other Ministry capacities using G2G
 mechanisms and practices. Unlike the existing CDC model, USAID is seeking to have host
 countries establish, supervise and operate their own regular internal planning, programming, and
 procurement implementation offices from the first instance. While USAID's execution of their
 G2G policy in health programs is nascent — having started with risk assessments of a first set of
 countries that take 18 months — they soon will begin to identify the building steps necessary to
 assist a host country achieve a sufficiently stable, transparent and corruption-free set of
 government structures through which USG funds can be provided directly to appropriate
 Ministries, including MOHs.

 There is a considerable gap between the `aspirational' goal that USAID has set for itself and the
 actual pace of groundwork to get ready to execute an action plan to build host country capacities
 in-country. Now that we appreciate the reality of this gap, there is no urgent operational
 imperative to define the broad policy on how/who can execute G2G mechanisms in-country for
 PEPFAR programs as this issue was first presented. However, there is considerable political and
 emotional pressure and tension around this issue, which is creating          and absorbing
 considerable CDC, USAID and PEPFAR staff resources — making it urgent and prudent to
 resolve policy and operational conflicts in this area now for long-term efficiency and
 effectiveness.

 Proposed G2G Policy Guidance

 Consistent with the President's Policy Directive on Development (PPD) and best practices,
 PEPFAR, CDC, USAID share the end goal of host governments growing and gaining their own
 capacity to plan, program and manage USG funds as well as plan and execute their own country

                                                                                                 2
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773781 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773781 Date: 12/31/2015




 health programs. To achieve this goal, all USG actors in the global health space will need to be
 directed, with explicit guidance, to embrace the importance of the dual mandate of: 1) saving
 more lives, 2) while building sustainable capacity and host country ownership/responsibility.
 Otherwise, there is a risk that we will not make progress on the long-term path to success.

 Explicit policy and technical guidance is needed to adapt the processes and procedures to
 accommodate both CDC and USAID, each of whom seek either to expand or shift G2G funding
 capacity. This guidance, in more lay language, can be summed up as follows:

    •   CDC will present a multi-year plan that identifies the specific steps and timeline for
        transitioning each of it 62 direct funding mechanisms to regular internal MOH program,
        planning and implementation operations, while ensuring no diminution in PEPFAR
        services or impact while host country government capacity building and transition is
        underway.

    •   USAID will likewise present a multi-year plan that identifies the specific steps and
        timeline for how USAID will reach its overarching G2G procurement reform goal within
        the 30% target for Missions to move assistance to local mechanisms and contractors,
        and that includes the evidence base for how USAID will build host government capacity
        and how it will determine when that capacity is ready for increased G2G activities, while
        ensuring no diminution in PEPFAR services or impact while host country government
        capacity building is underway;

    •   Moving forward, PEPFAR will require a common set of protocols and processes that
        abides by all audit, compliance and IG standards and requirements for the central
        elements in any G2G mechanisms implemented by CDC and USAID. This common
        approach requirement will ensure host country governments are not burdened by multiple
        and differing requirements for PEPFAR funding and programming.

    •   Should USAID seek to execute PEPFAR programming activities using direct-funding
        planning and implementation units, USAID will be directed to use available existing
        CDC direct-funding mechanisms; if CDC has no such mechanism in place in the relevant
        country, USAID may establish a PEPFAR-approved alternative process or mechanism.

            • Where USAID uses an existing CDC mechanism, the existing CDC-MOH
              agreement will be refashioned to provide for USA1D' s lead role in all aspects of
              oversight, technical assistance for the funded activity and, if necessary, growth of
              the capacity of the CDC in-country mechanism to accommodate the incremental
              flow of funds and programming activity.



                                                                                                    3
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773781 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773781 Date: 12/31/2015




            •   Where USAID uses an existing CDC mechanism, CDC is a collaborator with, but
                not interlocutor on behalf of, USAID; this means that USAID will engage directly
                on its own behalf with MOHs, with CDC and USAID accountable to each other
                for transparency regarding their respective programming and activities to leverage
                the greatest USG results.

     •   And, in countries where USAID seeks to engage for the first time in G2G funding with
         non-PEPFAR health funds, USAID may use an existing, PEPFAR-approved regular
         internal host country governmental structure, or employ CDC's or its own PEPFAR-
         approved direct-funding mechanism.


 To be very transparent, the guidance above will make each entity — PEPFAR, CDC and USAID
 — unhappy for differing reasons. PEPFAR because it properly is worried about maintaining its
 obligation to save more lives while these best practices are being implemented by USAID for the
 first time; USAID obviously does not yet have a track record of deploying PEPFAR funds in this
 fashion. USAID because it has deep-seeded distrust that CDC will act as an ecumenical partner
 should it use CDC mechanisms and therefore USAID will likely seek to implement their first
 programs in non-CDC countries or using non-PEPFAR funds. And CDC, because the root of
 their concern (and HFIS' concern) is becoming less relevant in-country once USAID begins
 engaging in direct funding with MOHs because the volume of USAID resources will dwarf theirs
 and therefore potentially signal to MOHs that USAID is the only relevant USG partner in health.

 To be honest, I have considerable skepticism as to how and if we can overturn a pervasive lack
 of trust borne from the history of competition between the two PEPFAR implementing agencies,
 to achieve a future that depends upon the collaborative approach called for in this policy
 guidance. The most substantive measure we have taken in this regard, which is more transparent
 in the technical guidance, is to position PEPFAR in a stronger leadership role for examining,
 evaluating, deciding how fast or slow the evolution of current or new G2G funding practices are
 paced with the preparedness of host government systems. And, placing them in this role may
 trigger the need for PEPFAR to build up or rely on other internal State Department technical
 expertise to feel they can adequately perform these new tasks.

 We look forward to discussing these recommendations and next steps with you.




                                                                                                 4

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773781 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773781 Date: 12/31/2015




                                      APPENDIX
                    Government to Government Funding: Policy Guidance
                      22 June 2012 Memorandum to Secretary Clinton

  Proposed Technical G2G Policy Guidance

  Explicit policy and technical guidance is needed to adapt the processes/procedures to
  accommodate both of PEPFAR's agency implementers (CDC and USAID) who seek to either
  expand or shift G2G funding capacity. This guidance requires:



     1. PEPFAR to establish an annual process (ideally as a discrete part of an existing planning
        process such as Country Operating Plan (COP) planning, GHI planning, annual budget
        planning/execution) whereby PEPFAR solicits information and grants approval of shifts
        of PEPFAR funding for program activities to and from G2G mechanisms. The process
        requires:

                CDC/HHS undertakes and presents a multi-year plan that assesses in each of the
                countries that CDC has PEPFAR direct-funding mechanisms the level of
                resources flowing in-country, current country capacity, mix of interventions
                necessary to increase country capacity without risk of diminution in PEPFAR
                services, and timeline for seeking/achieving measurable shifts from current direct
                funding mechanisms to regular internal program, planning and implementation
                units in each respective MOH.

                USAID undertakes and presents a similar multi-year plan that provides the steps
                for how USAID will reach its overarching G2G procurement reform goal within
                the five-year 30% assistance target for Missions, providing specific
                documentation and data of host country government capacity for countries where
                risk assessments indicate the possibility of increased G2G activities, USAID
                actions planned or underway to build host country governmental capacity,
                timelines, and risk mitigation interventions or requirements to ensure no
                diminution of PEPFAR services.

      2. PEPFAR to require a common, standardized approach that abide by all audit and
         compliance standards and IG requirements for certain key elements in all G2G
         mechanisms implementing PEPFAR programs. This is meant as an internal USG
         discipline-forcing measure that serves to reduce the complexity of USG G2G
         mechanisms so that host country governments are not burdened by multiple and differing
         requirements for PEPFAR funding and programming procedures. This approach is

                                                                                                     5
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773781 Date: 12/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773781 Date: 12/31/2015




        intended to apply to all new mechanisms as well as the periodic renewal or amendment of
        existing CDC mechanisms (e.g., cooperative agreements, grant awards, direct cost
        agreements, fixed reimbursable agreements, etc). At least the following elements will
        have a common standard in all PEPFAR G2G mechanism agreements:

               • Bank account/banking mechanism;
               • Single standard for USG required banking/accounting procedures;
               • Single standard for U.S. legislated audit and compliance procedures; and,
               • Single standard for impact, metrics & financial reporting.

    3. As USAID works to assess and build regular internal Ministry capacity to enable a larger
        share of USG programs to use regular, internal host government structures, should
        USAID determine their capacity building interventions for PEPFAR-approved funding
        require the use of direct-funding planning and implementation units, USAID will be
        directed to use available existing CDC direct-funding mechanisms; if CDC has no such
        mechanism in place in the relevant country, USAID may establish a PEPFAR-approved
        alternative process or mechanism.

           •   Where USAID uses an existing CDC mechanism, the existing CDC-MOH
               agreement will be refashioned to provide for USAID's lead role in all aspects of
               oversight, technical assistance for the funded activity and, if necessary, growth of
               the capacity of the CDC in-country mechanism to accommodate the incremental
               flow of funds and programming activity.

           •   Where USAID uses an existing CDC mechanism, CDC is a collaborator with, but
               not interlocutor on behalf of, USAID; this means that USAID will engage directly
               on its own behalf with MOHs, with CDC and USAID accountable to each other
               for transparency regarding their respective programming and activities to leverage
               the greatest USG results.

    4. Finally, in countries where USAID seeks to engage for the first time in G2G funding with
        non-PEPFAR health funds, USAID may use an existing, PEPFAR-approved regular
        internal host country governmental structure, or employ CDC's or its own PEPFAR-
        approved direct-funding mechanism.




                                                                                                  6
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773781 Date: 12/31/2015
