     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789971 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                                       RELEASE IN
                                                                                                       FULL


From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov >
Sent:                             Thursday, May 3, 2012 7:06 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Chen Guangcheng says China not honoring agreement, wants to meet U.S.
                                  diplomats




From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Thursday, May 03, 2012 06:54 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: RE: Chen Guangcheng says China not honoring agreement, wants to meet U.S. diplomats

CBS ran it as their lead story: Scott Pelley anchor: lead in: Today we have a clearer picture of how Chen ended up at the
Embassy setting off a "diplomatic crisis."
Chen's "fate is confused." Gave details of how the US rescued him and then gave him up. Called this case straight out of
Hollywood with a race to Embassy with Chinese secret police in pursuit. Used significant footage of the Locke interview
including his recounting of the operation to bring him into the Embassy, which he called a Mission Impossible movement
(evading police and Embassy guards). Story then reported how Chen was returned to Chinese authorities yesterday after
they promised he would be safe.
Today, Chen asked the Secretary to take him out of China on his plane. Chen was patched though to the congressional
hearing.
Locke made clear that during the 6 days of negotiations, Chen did not want to go to US. He reiterated that after he
spoke with his wife he made the decision on his own to leave EmbassyLocke insists no one forced him to leave. For now
Chinese have. Chen and US not allowed to see him.

Report then turned to Holly Williams of Sky News who interviewed Chen by phone:

Chen reported that he could not make calls, but people could call him. She said he sounded worried, tired, and anxious
for safety of family, but warm and friendly. When asked why he changed his mind, Chen said at the time he decided to
stay he didn't have all the information. Now he has it and senses certain things so he changed my mind. Chen claims
local officials broke into his home armed with sticks and installed surveillance cameras. He did not blame US officials
for not doing more.

Chen said if he could speak to the President and the Secretary he would ask them to take concrete action to protect his
family.
Concluded with: The Chinese government has not made comment, is embarrassed, angry, and sees this as unwanted
American interference.

Note - Will include this in our next media summary



From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Thursday, May 03, 2012 6:38 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: RE: Chen Guangcheng says China not honoring agreement, wants to meet U.S. diplomats

ABC ran it as the second story: Hillary's Choice, will Chen get to leave with the Secretary. All eyes on Secretary Clinton a
champion of human rights. What will she do? Secretary has said nothing since Chen changed his mind and wants to

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789971 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789971 Date: 12/31/2015



leave. Chen a symbol of Hrs abuses in China. Chen re-united with family at a hospital but today kept away from US
officials . Bob Fu interviewed — Chen in danger. Chen did not know his wife was threatened. Chen called Hearing saying
he wanted to leave China. Interview with Locke: we want to sit down with him sot discuss what he wants to do. ABC
closed with: Should the U.S have turned him over to Chinese in first place and what can US do now?

Nothing on being "abandoned." Monitoring other network news. I'll be sending the next media summary, including all
the networks' news and any other coverage at 8 pm tonight.


From: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Thursday, May 03, 2012 6:30 PM
To: Hammer, Michael A
Subject: Re: Chen Guangcheng says China not honoring agreement, wants to meet U.S. diplomats

Thank you


From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Thursday, May 03, 2012 06:23 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: RE: Chen Guangcheng says China not honoring agreement, wants to meet U.S. diplomats

Yup — connected with Andrea Mitchell, we're good with her, she is doing a piece. Focused on Locke interview and
Chen's desire to leave China. Will say it is up to Chinese to let him go. Also reached Martha Raddatz, ABC. Doing more
calls.


From: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Thursday, May 03, 2012 5:46 PM
To: Hammer, Michael A
Subject: FW: Chen Guangcheng says China not honoring agreement, wants to meet U.S. diplomats

Mike

I assume you are adding this to the push out for the evening news too ?
cdm
From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Thursday, May 03, 2012 05:03 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Chen Guangcheng says China not honoring agreement, wants to meet U.S. diplomats




tbe                                    00

Chen Guangcheng says China not honoring
agreement, wants to meet U.S. diplomats
By Keith B. Richburg, Thursday, May 3, 3:17 PM

 BEIJING — Blind activist Chen Guangcheng, in a telephone interview early Friday, said he voluntarily left the
 U.S. Embassy in Beijing to see his family and get treatment at a nearby hospital, but he said the Chinese
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789971 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789971 Date: 12/31/2015




government so far is not honoring an agreement to fully restore his freedom and allow American diplomats in to
see him.

"I left the U.S. Embassy on my own free will," Chen told a Washington Post news assistant who reached him
by telephone shortly after midnight. "I wasn't tricked into leaving. If I didn't want to leave, I could have stayed,
and no one would have forced me to leave."

Chen said he left the embassy to be reunited with his wife and children at the hospital. "The U.S. Embassy
helped me a lot," Chen said. "I really appreciate their help. They did a good job. But I don't think the Chinese
side is obeying the agreement well."

"My biggest wish right now is that the agreement concerning me is fulfilled well," Chen told the Post. "The
agreement includes more than three points, including the U.S. side being able to visit me regularly, and China
should guarantee my rights as a citizen."

"I didn't have a chance to see the U.S. officials today," Chen said, referring to Thursday. "We had phone
conversations, but they were quite short. We didn't discuss real issues on the phone." U.S. officials on Thursday
expressed frustration that American diplomats, along with an American doctor, had been prevented from
visiting Chen in the hospital.

Chen also expressed concern for his extended family members left behind in Linyi city, in eastern Shandong
province. He said armed thugs have now taken over his farmhouse in Dongshigu village, and he was concerned
about his mother and brother, with whom he has not been able to speak.

"The situation in my home is still really terrible," Chen said. "So I don't think the agreement is being fulfilled
well by the Chinese side."

Chen said he was visited at the hospital by a Chinese official with the last name who said he was a
representative from the Communist Party central committee. "He asked me the situation in my hometown and
clearly expressed that they are going to investigate," Chen said. "I want to believe him. But at the same time, I
need to observe what they do in the end." He added, "I can't judge yet."

The conversation lasted about 15 minutes, and Chen sounded relaxed, cheerful and full of energy — a sharp
contrast to earlier interviews on Thursday when he was reported to have sounded frightened. He said he was
being treated well at Chaoyang hospital and that he and his family received three meals, all on time. He said he,
his wife and two children were together in one room and that no one was there watching over them.

Chen said he is still recovering from a cracked bone he suffered from climbing over a wall during his dramatic
escape from house arrest on April 22. He also said he received a colonoscopy and a biopsy Thursday and was
awaiting the results. He said he hoped that his wife, Yuan Weijing, can also get a full medical exam because she
received scars from brutal beatings at the hands of local thugs in their home village.

Chen said he would like to travel to the United States, but only temporarily, to rest and perhaps study. But he
said he did not want to remain in the United States permanently — and he chastised journalists who he said had
misinterpreted his words. "Many reporters misquoted me, and even wrote things I never said," Chen told The
Post.

"It's not a one-time-only decision," Chen said of his desire to leave China for the United States. "It doesn't
mean I won't come back. As a free person, I believe I am endowed with the right to leave China when I want to
and come back anytime I want."


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789971 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789971 Date: 12/31/2015




"In the past seven years, I didn't have a real weekend," Chen said. "I was very stressed. I want to relax. I want
to rest more. Maybe I will study something there because in the past seven years, I didn't have chance to enrich
my knowledge."

He said he also wanted to continue "to promote social progress and judiciary system improvement in China."

"The society must become more and more fair in the future," Chen said. "It's just a matter of time. It depends
on how many people make efforts, and how big the efforts we make."

Washington Post researcher Zhang Jie in Beijing contributed to this report.

© The Washington Post Company



Nora Toiv
Office of the Secretary
202-647-8633




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789971 Date: 12/31/2015
