     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785087 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, September 29, 2011 8:25 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: QDDR Implementation Update/Action Request


Steve is so good

From: Mull, Stephen D
Sent: Thursday, September 29, 2011 03:14 PM
To: Powell, Nancy 3; Whiteside, Ruth A; Pascual, Carlos; Fernandez, Jose W; Brownfield, William R; Hormats, Robert D;
Benjamin, Daniel S; Sullivan, Jacob .3; Harrell, Peter E; Stock, Ann; Ross, Alec J; Kennedy, Patrick F; Goldberg, Philip S;
Retzlaff, Barbara A; Otero, Maria; Schwartz, Eric P; VonHippel, Karin L
Cc: Nides, Thomas R; Mills, Cheryl D; Klevorick, Caitlin B; Toiv, Nora F; Sullivan, Stephanie S; Noyes, Julieta Valls;
Allegra, Theodore X; Quanrud, Pamela G; Libby, Mark W; Kidwell, Michael R; Tiantawach, Y Dew; Browning, Steve A;
Jacobson, Tracey A; Smitham, Thomas D; McCarthy, Deborah A; Godec, Robert F; Whitaker, Elizabeth A; Scott, Ben;
Waxman, Sharon L; Robinson, David M; Barton, Rick (USUN); Loftis, Robert G S/CRS; Macmanus, Joseph E
Subject: QDDR Implementation Update/Action Request


Dear QDDR Implementation Leaders:

Here's an update (and action request) on various QDDR Implementation issues:

State-USAID Collaboration

Next week Tom Nides and Cheryl Mills will host a meeting with USAID counterparts to review State-USAID
cooperation on QDDR implementation. As you may remember, early in the QDDR process there was a
decision that each agency would manage its own implementation process, while cooperating appropriately
between agencies as required. The purpose of our meeting next week will be to assess (and address) any
issues that are affecting that cooperation. At a minimum, we plan to address these topics:

•           Switching representation at regional development Banks from State to USAID

•           IT Consolidation

•           IORF (and Eric, we look forward to discussing that in detail at our meeting next Wednesday)

•           State-USAID roles in crisis management task forces

Please let me know if there are any other issues from your workstream that you would like the meeting to
address — ideally by COB Friday, September 30 to allow sufficient time to assemble relevant briefing materials.

Completed Workstream

Congratulations to Carlos Pascual — and a broad supporting cast including M, E, H, RM, HR, OES, SECC and
S/EEE — who crossed the finish line this week in creating the Energy Resources Bureau (ENR). While important


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785087 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785087 Date: 12/31/2015




tasks remain in getting the bureau fully operational and finalizing its consolidation within the newly
reorganized E family of bureaus, Carlos's achievement represented an important Phase I milestone.

QDDR Website

Thank you all for your submissions for the QDDR website, which Secretary Clinton launched on September 14
with a personal message to all employees. The site has proven very popular, getting over 12,000 page views in
its first week alone. Stories submitted from the field and from Washington posted later on the site have also
gotten thousands of readers. I encourage you to submit additional stories or invite your subordinate offices
to do so, to demonstrate what you are doing to "make the QDDR Real" and share your accomplishments with
the broader Department community. The strategic communications points of contact in your office can send
such input to QDDRStories@state.gov.

Regular Reporting

S/ES will shortly be seeking your help in providing biweekly reports to the Deputy Secretary and Counselor in
the form of "stoplight charts" that will highlight the state of play on discreet implementation milestones. To
ensure we're workingfrom the same assumptions, your responsible Deputy Executive Secretary will soon
contact your office to validate the milestones we're planning to monitor as part of the regular reporting
process, and to share with you the suggested format for submissions. We will also seek in these regular
reports short synopses of recent progress, with which we will update the QDDR site on the intranet.

Thanks again for your assistance in meeting the Secretary's QDDR priorities, and please let me know if you
have any questions or concerns.

Best regards,

Steve




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785087 Date: 12/31/2015
