     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779596 Date: 12/31/2015


                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL


Mustapha Tlili

2011-03-15

NEW YORK. -- Mediterranean countries are experiencing turbulence unseen since the
era of decolonization and independence. Popular revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt
have swept away entrenched autocracies. Libya's Muammar el-Qaddafi is holding on
by the skin of his teeth, and political leaders in Algeria and Morocco are
scrambling to maintain authority.

Can a Mediterranean space nurtured by shared democratic values, interests, and
hopes emerge from this maelstrom?

The Mediterranean countries are home to 475 million people — 272 million
Europeans, including 20 million Muslims, and 200 million non-European Arabs and
Jews. It now seems possible that the Union for the Mediterranean (UfM), the
mechanism that French President Nicolas Sarkozy set up in 2008 to increase
regional cooperation, may actually step up to the challenge of reclaiming the
region's past as the cradle of reason, tolerance, and humanism. The UfM could
offer a model for coexistence to a world injured by dictatorship and fear of
Islamic fundamentalism.

Rising tensions in Europe over what has ominously crystallized as "the Muslim
Question" has made it all too easy to forget that there was a time when Islam
a more tolerant and inclusive civilization than it appears to be in the
post-9/11 West — was fully a part of European life.

Today, no less than yesterday, Mediterranean people — Muslims, Christians, and
Jews —share inescapable geopolitical, demographic, and economic realities. They
should remind themselves that demonization, exclusion, and division are not the
only options — and should not be the region's destiny. .

Among Sarkozy's main interlocutors at the birth of the UfM in 2008 were Tunisian
President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak_ Now
that. they are gone, so is their limited and limiting approach to international
dialogue, based almost exclusively on state-to-state relations-without any
significant input from civil society.

It is sad to note that European leaders sometimes adopt such narrow positions,
too, responding to the short-term demands of electoral politics instead of
facing the challenges of long-term strategic thinking. Sarkozy, too, has fallen
prey to this trend. Indeed, in February, he declared that multiculturalism was a
"failure," adding, "Our Muslim compatriots should be able to live and practice
their religion like anyone else...but it can only be a French Islam, not just an
Islam in France."

Sarkozy, of course, did not define what he meant by a "French Islam." But the
comments were widely interpreted as an echo of pronouncements a few days earlier
by Jean-Marie Le Pen, the former leader of the far-right National Front party.

Cooler heads should look, instead, to Muslim Spain, Al-Andalus, which shone in
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779596 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779596 Date: 12/31/2015



Europe from the eighth century until the fifteenth century — a fertile period of
cultural brilliance that paved the way for the Western Renaissance, as well as
an inspiring paradigm of convivencia,'or coexistence.

Integrating the Mediterranean world into a tolerant community that ensures the
peace and prosperity of all its peoples can happen today, because it has
happened before. Such an achievement would offer the world a needed alternative
to the increasingly questionable model of economic globalization.

Looking at Europe from a distance, it is tempting to see a continent receding
from the world stage and in conflict with itself and with its past. Yet the
reality is more nuanced. Today's Europe is filled with potential, provided that
the Mediterranean region harnesses the forces and wealth implicit in such
initiatives as the UfM.

Two important features of both the Tunisian and Egyptian revolutions will be
significant in assessing the chances for a renewed Mediterranean Union.

First, the large and effective use of social medialn both countries revealed
remarkable technological savvy and. creativity among the young. More
significantly, it displayed this generation's unprecedented level of political
awareness and activism. Indeed, the test of success of any new Mediterranean
structure' will be the degree to which it meets the aspirations and scrutiny of
this young, politically aware generation throughout the region.

For the same reasons, a new Mediterranean union could be a framework for a new
moral vibrancy, informed by the same universal. values that mobilized the young
in Tunisia, Egypt, and beyond -- freedom, individual responsibility and
accountability, transparency, tolerance, solidarity with the weak and oppressed,
justice, gender equality, and other fundamental human and democratic rights.

In light of this hopeful trend, how long can Europe's obsession with Islamic
fundamentalism.hold sway? How long can the so-called "Muslim Question" be used
as a tool to defeat political adversaries? Many young European voters, who may
know better, will most likely not look kindly at such opportunistic tactics.

Finally, one would hope that the concept of belonging to the same Mediterranean
family could bring about new solutions to old conflicts — for example, offering
Palestinians and Israelis alike the healing that both peoples desire, but which
the dyirig old Arab order failed to achieve.

The great philosophers of the Enlightenment would not hesitate to endorse the
moral consciousness expressed in the postings that flooded cyberspace during the
Tunisian revolution. Moral secularism at its best was on full display from the
rugged streets of Sidi Bouzid to the imposing refinement of Avenue Habib
Bourguiba in Tunis.

This renewed sense of belonging to the same human family and the same moral
universe resonated profoundly with Mediterranean Europeans, who found, in the
claims and expectations emerging on the opposite shore, echoes of their own
unfulfilled claims and expectations.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779596 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779596 Date: 12/31/2015




Mustaphali is a research scholar at New York University, founder and
director of the NYU Center for Dialogues, and a member of Human Rights Watch's
advisory committee for the Middle East and North Africa.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779596 Date: 12/31/2015
