       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781379 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                     B5,B6



From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Sent:                             Tuesday, April 19, 2011 4:16 AM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: PJ story




From: Rhodes, Benjamin J. [mailt4i
Sent: Monday, April 18, 2011 10: PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob 3; McDonough, Denis R.                             Reines, Philippe I;
NSC Deputy Press Secretary
Subject: P3 story




Why P.J. Crowley went rogue
By: Ben Smith
April 18, 2011 06:26 PM EDT

To friends, colleagues and even critics, there are few more unlikely candidates than P.J.
Crowley to become a free speech martyr and a darling of the left. A veteran of three
decades in the Air Force public affairs division, Crowley was a notoriously tight-lipped
spokesman for the National Security Council during the Clinton administration and has
been viewed for most his career as a guy who, above all, hates to make news.

How to square that, then, with the Crowley who , lost his job as assistant Secretary of State
last month by characterizing Wikileaks suspect Bradley Manning's treatment by the
Pentagon as "ridiculous, counterproductive and stupid"? The Crowley who was given a
chance by take those words back by Philippa Thomas, a BBC reporter on leave as a
Nieman fellow at Harvard University, but answered, after a brief pause, when Thomas
asked if was speaking on the record: "Sure."

When Thomas reported Crowley's statement, some of his friends thought he'd acted on
the flack's equivalent of a Freudian death wish, spontaneously combusting in the lab at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. His critics in government, who'd long regarded
him as too aggressive, even undisciplined, to speak from the State Department podium,
viewed the statement as his latest gaffe.

To Crowley, it was neither. It was just the latest step in his characteristically low-key
decision to go a just a little bit rogue, the latest step in a career spokesman's realization
that words can have real power.

"When I paused and then agreed to have the remark on the record, I knew there was a
dart that I was sending to the Pentagon," he said in a recent interview in the deserted bar
of a Washington hotel


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781379 Date: 12/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781379 Date: 12/31/2015




Crowley didn't know for sure he would lose his job the next day, he recalled, but he did
realize what he'd done.

"I knew it would get attention," he said.

And it did. Crowley might have kept his job, or at least found a softer landing, had
President Obama not been asked about his comment 18 hours later at a news conference
and voiced full support of the Pentagon.

"When I understood that both the question had been posed to the President and he
answered it the way he did, and then there was ... what the White House staff thought of
the situation," he said. "I knew I had lost their trust and confidence and in that
circumstance I knew that I had to resign.*

Washington, D.C. is full of people one sentence, one tweet, one false — that is, true — word
away from ending their careers. A sarcastic comment about the boss, a passionate
statement on policy, or an insensitive status update — all can be fatal to everyone from a
member of Congress to a junior staffer at a public relations firm+.

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton brought Crowley, 59, to the State Department in part
because he was viewed as someone who was virtually certain to make none of those
mistakes. Crowley had always seemed the soul of discretion, a spokesman so wedded to
the daily guidance during the Clinton White House years that reporters joked that he might
go on background if asked what the next day's weather forecast looked like.

But unbeknown to his new colleagues at State - and many of his old friends across
Washington - Crowley arrived at State after an evolution of sorts. The career Air Force
officer, who had entered a military establishment still scarred by the Vietnam War and still
deeply hostile to the press, spent his years in civilian life at the Center for American
Progress, thinking about strategy. There, some colleagues were surprised to find that his
politics seemed to have been shaped more, as one put it, by his native Massachusetts
than the Air Force. He settled on the idea of "strategic narrative," a concept that has made
its way into national security jargon from business theory, and one he included in a report
he wrote for CAR

At the State Department podium, Crowley seemed to find his voice and to also realize that
his voice could shape policy. "In the digital global age that we're in, our actions and our
words have greater impact. I knew that at the podium — that I would say something and
within a few hours, the message would be received somewhere else — and a response,"
he said. "That has impact, because on a regular basis, at the podium, I would challenge
the impact of other countries on the treatment of their own citizens, their treatment of
prisoners, on their treatment of the media."

And Crowley — to the occasional dismay of some of his colleagues at State and the White
House — had come to view himself as having a special public role.

"There were times when I thought it was important to push for the United States to take a
public stand," he said of his time at the podium. "I thought it was important to make sure
that what we were saying and what we were doing would be consistent with, not only our
interest but our values."


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781379 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781379 Date: 12/31/2015




Behind the scenes at the State Department, he'd often argued for blunter, less diplomatic
talk. And he'd at times angered the White House and his colleagues by straying
dramatically from his official guidance, and positioning himself not just as a staid briefer
but as a combatant on the global stage.

"The Egyptian government can't reshuffle the deck and then stand pat," he warned in one
late January tweet that had not, officials said, been approved by the White House staffers
trying to manage the chaos of President Hosni Mubarak's last days.

In an earlier instance, when Libyan leader Muammar Qadhafi called for a Jihad against
Switzerland last year, Crowley responded by mocking his lengthy speech at the United
Nations.

"'Lots of words and lots of papers flying all over the place, not necessarily a lot of sense,"
he said.

Qadhafi was, at the time, still a sometime partner of the United States, and Libyan
diplomats — and Crowley's own colleagues — were livid. He was forced to apologize.

"These comments do not reflect US policy and were not intended to offend," he said at
time. But in his interview last week with POLITICO, he was less repentant. "I was not
wrong. Maybe I wasn't diplomatic, but I was not wrong," Crowley said.

Even on the morning of his Manning remarks, Crowley had tweeted — and then deleted -
a comparison of the Japanese tsunami to the metaphorical "tsunami" sweeping the Middle
East and North Africa. He said he now regrets only deleting it, which he did because "my
staff thought that that was insensitive."

To the Obama Administration's careful national security team, these and other Crowley
comments were sloppy and infuriating. To Crowley, it was deliberate strategy in a job that
has, as he sees it, an institutional role beyond the demands of day-to-day politics.

"I view myself as a strategic thinker and always tried to put what I was saying at the
podium in a broader context and trying to always assess, will my words be credible?" he
said.

Crowley has stood by his blunt criticism of the Defense Department's treatment of
Manning, but it was the last straw, and the anger from the Pentagon and the White House
ensured his immediate departure.

And the State Department quietly put out word that he was on his way out with nothing to
lose, being pushed aside in favor of his deputy, Mike Hammer.

Neither of those claims is quite true. Crowley was indeed exhausted by his job and had
critics in the White House and rivals in Clinton's inner circle. But he'd been offered the
softest of landings, an ambassadorship, two senior Democrats said, a post the Manning
comments cost him.

And Crowley has no obvious successor in a post that has served as the latest illustration
of the quiet personnel wars that have long plagued Secretary Clinton. Crowley's tense
relationship with her longtime aide and former Senate spokesman, Philippe Reines,

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781379 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781379 Date: 12/31/2015




proved so problematic that hints of it made it into a draft inspector general's report that
also criticized Crowley's management. But the Assistant Secretary had been filling three
roles: He was the Assistant Secretary, but Clinton had failed to hire a Principal Deputy for
management after her first choice, Mary Ellen Glynn, fell through. Clinton had also been
looking for another spokesman to brief reporters daily, and Crowley had suggested former
Clinton White House and current State Department official Jonathan Prince, but no one
was ever hired to fill the post. State Department officials suggested when Crowley
departed that Hammer would permanently fill the post; now, two officials said, it appears
that he won't.

Some observers also believed, after Crowley's explosive exit, that he had made a clever
career move, positioning himself to leave government for a position as a hero of the left.
The anti-war group Code Pink even protested outside the State Department.

But Crowley himself turns a bit pink at the memory of that protest, leaning in and folding
his hands between his thighs out of evident embarrassment. Though he's made irregular
television appearances, he hasn't become a leader of the campaign to free Manning,
whom he thinks "should spend a long long time in jail," though his pre-trial treatment was
undermining perceptions of the American legal system.

Crowley, for his part, plans to begin teaching, he said.

"I'm not a larger than life person," he said. "I'm short, bald and old."




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781379 Date: 12/31/2015
