      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780909 Date: 12/31/2015



                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                       B6


From:                          Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                          Friday, July 22, 2011 7:37 PM
To:
Subject:                        Fw: Remarks by President Obama and Prime Minister Key. of New Zealand


Good stuff.



From: Russel, Daniel R.                                                                                  B6
Sent: Friday, July 22, 2011 06:41 PM
To: Campbell, Kurt M; Sullivan, Jacob 3
Subject: Fw: Remarks by President Obama and Prime Minister Key of New Zealand

Victory


From: White House Press Office <noreply@messages.whitehouse.gov>
To: Russel, Daniel R.
Sent: Fri Jul 22 17:19:12 2011
Subject: Remarks by President Obama and Prime Minister Key of New Zealand

                                         THE WHITE HOUSE
                                  Office of the Press Secretary

    For Immediate Release                                                                  July 22, 2011


                                  REMARKS BY PRESIDENT OBAMA
                            AND PRIME MINISTER KEY OF NEW ZEALAND

                                                Oval Office


2:10 P.M. EDT


     PRESIDENT OBAMA: I want to welcome Prime Minister Keys [sic] to the
Oval Office. We have had occasion to work together at various
multilateral summits in Asia, and have- always been struck by the
intelligence and thoughtfulness- that the Prime Minister brings to his
work.

     Obviously, we are very pleased that the relationship between New
Zealand and the United States is growing stronger by the day. Part of that
has to do with the great affection that our peoples have towards each
other. Part of it has to do with a great deal of common interests and a
set of common values.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780909 Date: 12/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780909 Date: 12/31/2015




     So the Prime Minister and I discussed a range of economic issues,
including our great interest in promoting a more effective trade regime
among the Asia Pacific nations, and we're working on this Trans-Pacific
Partnership; we hope to have a framework agreement by the time that we go
to Honolulu for the APEC meeting.

     We discussed how countries can cooperate around disaster
response. Obviously we are still heartbroken by the loss of life and
property resulting from the earthquakes in Christchurch and are incredibly
impressed by the resilience of the people of New Zealand as they rebuild
from that tragedy. But both of us, having seen what happened in Japan as
well, understand that when these kinds of natural disasters strike it's
important for us to be able to pool our resources to help each other.

     We discussed our security cooperation and continue to thank New
Zealand for its participation in our efforts in Afghanistan. We're very
grateful to the outstanding servicemen and women whom New Zealand has sent
there.

     And we discussed a wide range of regional issues. Our respective
foreign ministers are currently in Bali -- or at least -- I'm not sure if
they've left yet -- but they're talking about how we can work on a wide
range of issues -- everything from green growth to trying to standardize
regulations to include the flow of trade. And throughout this process,
whether it's in APEC settings, now the East Asia summit, we've always
found New Zealand to be an outstanding partner. And Prime Minister Keys
[sic] personally has always been an outstanding partner on these issues.

     So, welcome. We know it's hot out there, so this is a warmer welcome
than you perhaps had expected. (Laughter.) But we very much appreciate
your visit.

     I do want to also just make note -- we were just discussing the fact
that there has been a bombing in Oslo, Norway, as well as a shooting
there. We don't have information yet, but I wanted to personally extend
my condolences to the people of Norway. And it's a reminder that the
entire international community has a stake in preventing this kind of
terror from occurring. And so we have to work cooperatively together both
on intelligence and in terms of prevention of these kinds of horrible
attacks.

     I remember fondly my visit to Oslo and how warmly the people of
Norway treated me. And so our hearts go out to them, and we'll provide
any support we can to them as they investigate these occurrences.

     So, with that, John, welcome again. Thank you for being here.

     PRIME MINISTER KEY: Mr. President, firstly, thank you for the
invitation to Washington, to the White House.

     Similarly, I echo your sympathies and concern for that situation in
Norway. If it is an act of global terrorism, I think what it shows is no

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780909 Date: 12/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780909 Date: 12/31/2015




country, large or small, is immune from that risk. And that's why New
Zealand plays its part in Afghanistan as we try and join others like the
United States in making the world a safer place.

     We've had a very good and tremendous reception the last couple of
days. I want to thank you for that, personally. We're excited about the
opportunities of the Trans-Pacific Partnership. We're excited about the
chance to put together a regional trade deal which includes the United
States and which will expand over time beyond the nine countries -- and I
think it can deliver strengthened and continued economic growth, jobs and
higher incomes and better opportunities.

     I just want to thank the United States for its response when it came
to the Christchurch earthquake -- your urban search and rescue team were
fabulous, and your call immediately after the earthquake and the
tremendous outpouring of support from the people of America. So thank you
very much, indeed.

     We are great friends and strategic partners. The Marines are coming
down next year to commemorate their amazing contributions -- so we're
looking forward to welcoming them to New Zealand.

     Thank you for allowing us to have this visit. And we thoroughly
enjoyed our time here, and we'll see you very soon.

     PRESIDENT OBAMA: You're welcome, and I look forward to returning the
visit sometime.

         PRIME MINISTER KEY: Great.

     PRESIDENT OBAMA: My understanding is the American team is heading
out to New Zealand for the World Rugby Cup --

         PRIME MINISTER KEY: The World Cup --

     PRESIDENT OBAMA: -- the Rugby World Cup. And so, good luck,
guys. Although I hear the New Zealanders, the Kiwis are pretty good at
rugby so -- (laughter) -- I don't think we're seeded number one. I have
confidence that we will acquit ourselves well.

         All right? Thank you, everybody.

                                                          END                         2:16 P.M. EDT




Unsub scribe

The White House • 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW • Washington DC 20500 • 202-456-1111
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780909 Date: 12/31/2015
