     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778610 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                          sbwhoeop
Sent:                          Friday, February 4, 2011 7:03 PM
To:
Subject:                       H: intel & option. Sid
Attachments:                   hrc memo intel and option 020411.docx; hrc memo intel and option 020411.docx




                                     CONFIDENTIAL



                                             February 4, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Egypt intel and option on transition



   1. From Tyler Drumheller's sources (probably redundant information, but nonetheless...): The Egyptian
      army has inserted more experienced units around Tahrir Square to secure civil peace. The Mubarak
      thugs were given a one-time stipend that has run out and unlikely to be replenished. The army did not
      expect huge crowds to gather in Cairo on Friday. That was a turning point. The army will not push
      Mubarak out. Talk in the US Senate about cutting aid created some fear in the general staff. The most
      influential people they rely on for intelligence from the US are the military attaches assigned to the
      Egyptian embassy, who have reported back on the Senate. Mubarak's National Democratic Party is
      beginning to fracture and several parties will be formed out of it. The demonstrators respond positively
      to movement toward actual constitutional reform and a real transition. That is what will turn the
      movement in the streets into politics.
   2. Ideas/options (also may be redundant, but nonetheless...): The "transition" has focused rightly on
      constitutional amendments and reform. But if civil peace prevails over the weekend the formation of
      political parties should next week be openly encouraged by Egyptian authorities—accompanied by
      statements of respect for freedom of speech and association essential to parties and elections. Parties
      should now be created, begin the process of selecting candidates, shaping platforms, speaking on issues,
      and starting campaigns before the constitutional reform takes place and in anticipation of it. If the
       weekend goes well on the "transition," then the government should call for the people to start forming
       parties for the coming election and the army should be pledged to protect the fairness of the election
       process. Meanwhile, the fundamental constitutional reform proceeds...




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778610 Date: 12/31/2015
