      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779939 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL


From:                           Sullivan, Jacob 1 <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                           Monday, March 21, 2011 8:04 AM
To:
Subject:                        Fw: Placeholder Domestic media coverage on Operation Odyssey March 21, 2011



Fyi



From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Monday, March 21, 2011 07:58 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob
Subject: Placeholder Domestic media coverage on Operation Odyssey March 21, 2011

In case S is looking for it this am, we are working to add WSJ and, any relevant Editorials/Op-eds. But for
now hope this does the trick, going into mtgs with CDM.

Domestic media coverage on Operation Odyssey March 21, 2011

Over the course of Operation Odyssey, media coverage has shifted focus from actions on the ground to
analysis of the U.S. political climate surrounding the military operation. While coverage does not directly
indicate a rift within top levels of the U.S. Government, questioning of the U.S. mission's objective is at the
forefront. Prevailing question is whether there is a clear and defined end to U.S. action. The overall tone
indicates that the President's decision was risky test of his foreign policy leadership. Though top
Administration officials come across as supportive of operations, there is not conveyance of USG wide
support of military action, especially from Congressional leaders. Clips of Republicans criticizing the limited
parameters the President has placed on U.S. participation, and Democratic leaders questioning the
constitutionality of his authorization of American military action were incorporated into most television
news coverage. Republican sentiment that the President was too slow to act in Libya echoed through
coverage, much more so than liberal political disdain for military strikes.

Media asks almost unanimously, "Where does U.S. participation end and how are we to know that
American boots will not end up on the ground in Libya?" Defense Secretary Gates' comment that the
U.S. will turn over the preeminent role in operations in a matter of days is often juxtaposed against remarks
that the mission could end with Qadhafi still in power.

Stories note President Obama's international travel during the operation, but do not portray it negatively.
Domestic network coverage focused very little on the Arab League's dissent, which featured more
prominently in print publications. Moussa's comments were included in reporting during the last 24 hours,
but little analysis beyond the fact that loss of support from Arab leaders would be a particularly negative
blow to Coalition efforts was conveyed. Correspondents and pundits were confused, even mystified,
about the waffling sentiment of Middle Eastern leadership.
On the ground, media coverage of operations is portrayed as successful. Libyans are portrayed as
generally being pleased with the support provided by Coalition military assets. Though U.S. officials clearly
stated that Qadhafi nor his compound were direct targets, the missile strike on his home played widely in
network television coverage. Media coverage of the compound strike did not suggest that it was a
purposeful move on the part of the U.S.

NYT

With limited focus on the outcome of current tactical operations in Libya, the New York
Times (Cooper/Sanger)delves into the objectives and actual scope of U.S. participation in the operation,
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779939 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779939 Date: 12/31/2015




noting that Administration officials have continually defined America's participation as limited and clearly
defined. Administration officials quoted in NYT coverage are on track with that message, but questions of
how and when U.S. participation will taper are left open-ended. NYT alludes to in the Balkans,
Afghanistan and Iraq, had also assured Americans that campaigns would be short.


WaPo

The Washington Post provides broad coverage of international and domestic angles of the Operation
Odyssey. From the ground in Libya the Post covers the triumph and jubilance of Libyans surveying the
aftermath of Coalition strikes. In a separate story (by Cody) on the Arab League's shift in support for the
strikes WP featured little analysis outside of the fact that loss of the Arab League endorsement would
constitute a major setback to the U.S.-European campaign. The story noted that it is not clear how many
Arab countries share Amr Mousa's sentiments.

Politico

Politico keys on disparate Congressional support for Libya operations. Noting Speaker Boehner's limited
support but hesitance toward further action without Congressional consultation. Politico notes Senator
Lugar's skepticism of the operation's "nebulous objective," which he expressed Sunday on CBS's "Face
the Nation." The website dedicated a story to lack GOP hopeful's silence or discontent with the
President's decision. Newt Gingrich is scathingly critical of the President, referring to him as "spectator-in-
chief."




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779939 Date: 12/31/2015
