      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773168 Date: 12/31/2015




                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART B6


From:                              Sullivan, Jacob.) <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Tuesday, June 19, 2012 10:58 AM
To:
Subject:                           FW: WP: Israeli official says priority is peace process, not attack on Iran



FYI


From: Vinograd, Samantha
Sent: Tuesday, June 19, 2012 10:36 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob
Subject: FW: WP: Israeli official says priority is peace process, not attack on Iran

I think she is seeing him today so wanted to flag for you/ your team.

http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/middle eastfin-israel-shaul-mofaz-brings-dissonant-voice-to-netanyahu-
coalition/2012/06/19/gJQAbGuRnV print.html




Israeli official says priority is peace process, not
attack on Iran
By Karin Brulliard, Updated: Tuesday, June 19, 6:30 AM

PETAH TIKVA, Israel — On his debut trip to Washington as an Israeli vice prime minister, career military
man Shaul Mofaz says he will appeal this week for American support in ending the greatest threat to his
country.

It is not Iran's nuclear program, Mofaz says: What keeps him awake at night is Israel's drawn-out conflict with
the Palestinians and the prospect that it could cause the demise of the Jewish state if Arabs eventually
outnumber Jews in Israel.

"Time is not in favor of the state of Israel," Mofaz, 63, said in an interview in this central Israeli city, where
Kadima, the centrist political party he leads, is based. "The generation of the leaders today should decide. This
year, next year — we have to decide."

It is a dissonant message here. Though Israeli and Palestinian peace negotiators are said to be quietly meeting,
official talks have basically been frozen since 2008. These days, domestic concerns top the agenda in Israel;
discussions involving the occupied Palestinian territories generally center on controversial court-ordered
settlement evacuations in the West Bank, not peacemaking.

Mofaz, a former army chief and defense minister, argues that should and can change. In a sudden move that
rocked Israeli politics, Mofaz and hawkish Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu struck a deal last month to
form one of Israel's largest-ever governing coalitions. That gives the government a rare and fleeting power,
Mofaz asserts, to overcome dissent and push through a peace deal before elections in late 2013.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773168 Date: 12/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773168 Date: 12/31/2015




"It's about time," Mofaz said repeatedly, as if practicing a talking point ahead of his visit to Washington, where
he is scheduled to begin meetings on Wednesday with Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and U.S.
security officials.

He said he will pitch to them a peace plan he first unveiled in 2009, which envisions an interim Palestinian state
with temporary borders on 60 percent of the West Bank and continued negotiations. It would eventually end
with Israel keeping the main Jewish settlement blocs, the evacuation of almost 100,000 Israeli settlers outside
those, and land swaps giving Palestinians 100 percent of the territory they demand.

`On the cheap'

The question is whether Mofaz's opinion matters. Many analysts say no, in part because of the timing of his
alliance with Netanyahu's conservative Likud Party, something he had vowed never to do. Mofaz sealed the
deal after polls showed that his party, Israel's largest opposition group, would have fared badly in early
elections.

Yossi Alpher, a strategic affairs analyst, said those circumstances allowed Netanyahu to win Mofaz's
partnership "on the cheap," mostly by promising progress        two of Kadima's domestic priorities: changing the
military draft to recruit more religious and Arab soldiers, and overhauling the electoral system.

But Netanyahu's official stance on the peace process remains unchanged: He wants a two-state solution but will
negotiate only if the Palestinians drop all preconditions. Those include the demand for a halt to settlement
building, which the Palestinians say they will not abandon. And the Obama administration is considered loathe
to touch the issue in an election year.

Alpher deemed Mofaz's peace pitch "innovative." But under the circumstances, Alpher said, "if he actually
thinks he's going to get somewhere, then he's truly delusional."

Ghass.an Khatib, a spokesman for the Palestinian Authority, dismissed as "rhetoric" the idea that the formation
of a more centrist Israeli coalition might heighten the prospects for peace.

"We tend to take them more seriously on what they do than what they say," Khatib said of Israeli leaders. "I
open my eyes every morning and see new settlement building in the West Bank."

Unintended consequences

Of more interest to Israeli prognosticators is Mofaz's influence on the topic of Iran, the country from which he
immigrated as a child. In some respects, the Kadima leader echoes the position of the Netanyahu-led
government — all options must be on the table, Iran is buying time. But he also echoes several former security
officials who have deemed the push by Netanyahu and Defense Minister Ehud Barak for military action as
reckless or, in the words of one, "messianic."

Mofaz has been quoted as calling the idea of an Israeli attack on Iran "disastrous." In the interview, he was
more diplomatic, saying an attack could bring unintended consequences. Asked whether Netanyahu appeared to
weigh such counsel, Mofaz avoided specifics.

But he made clear that he does not consider the Iranian threat as urgent as Barak or Netanyahu do. Preventing
an Iranian bomb should be the "acid test" of the Obama administration, Mofaz said.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773168 Date: 12/31/2015
 UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773168 Date: 12/31/2015




"Speaking about an Israeli use of force, it is only when the sword will be on our neck and we see that no one is
going to act and there is no other option. And today this is not the situation," Mofaz said. "There is, today, time
and room for diplomacy and for sanctions."

For now, he said, Israel's international priority should be safeguarding its peace treaties with Jordan and Egypt.
Israel should work closely with whoever ends up leading Egypt, Islamist or otherwise, he said.

As turmoil and uncertainty pulsate through the Middle East, Israel's strategy has been to hunker down and wait.
Mofaz, however, said he believes "tectonic change" in the region is the precise reason to make peace with the
Palestinians.

"If we are able to achieve these two issues," Mofaz said, referring to a temporary deal on borders and security,
"I am certain that the relationship with the Palestinians and with other Arab states, including the Arab League,
will be changed. The atmosphere will be changed."




     imri ARRIFIM U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773168 Date: 12/31/2015
