     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794414 Date: 01/29/2016


                                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                             Wednesday, April 25, 2012 10:55 AM
To:                               'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                          Fw: CT



Pls print.
     Original Message
From: PIR
To: Evergreen
Subject: CT
Sent: Apr 25, 2012 10:03 AM

I'll have this to you in paper form by midday, but as I sad last night we're doing this whole thing on the down low, so let
me send to you this way first. This is based on the long mtg we had with them before heading out on the last trip, which
we downloaded to you, and then a call I did with they yesterday. It's what they're most interested in hearing about
directly from you. Obviously much of this you can't get into too much details about, and we'll pre-brief you first - but so
that you can start processing:

o How would you characterize the conversations you've had with President Obama on broad strategic CT questions?

OWhat has been the value to POTUS of having forward-leaning advisers like Brennan and yourself around him? (e.g., bin
Laden example).

OTo the degree that there has been pushback on the Administration's CT strategy, it has come from State. Can you
characterize that pushback? What questions have been raised and how were they sorted out?

® What kind of support or resistance have you detected from around the Department? (e.g., Ambassadors in countries
like Pakistan) How have you managed the tangible concerns on the ground?

GHow would you characterize your conversations with leaders in places like Yemen, Pakistan and parts of Africa about
the value of these operations?

• Is there a tipping point at which these operations do more harm than good?

• What was your reaction to materials found in the compound about "wanting to re-brand." Was that an affirming
moment? What was your reaction to the memos leaked by David Ignatius?

• Is there any truth to rumors that the US is at times making payments to facilitate the delivery of aid in Somalia?

o Can you characterize your general thoughts on the spreading problem of extremism in Africa? (Mali?) Are we doing
enough? What else needs to be done?

OAre there times when you have blocked certain things/timing for certain operations?




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794414 Date: 01/29/2016
