      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782881 Date: 01/29/2016



                                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Sunday, April 24, 2011 2:03 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: NYT-Wiki-GTMO update



For your situational awareness - NYT is publishing a bunch of DOD Gtmo docs from Wikileaks. Below is our statement.



    Original Message
From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Sunday, April 24, 2011 01:51 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Fried, Daniel; Mull, Stephen D; Smith, Dana 5; Chang, Benjamin
Subject: NYT-Wiki-GTMO update

Statement below is being sent to NYT co-signed by Geoff Morrell and Dan Fried (based on Dan's draft) which we worked
with DoD and NSS. Joint task force also passed NYT redaction requests. NYT article is expected to post online tonight at
10 pm. Dan/Jake - chime in as needed. Thanks all, particularly Dan, for jumping on this over the weekend - Happy
Easter.

STATEMENT TEXT:

"It is unfortunate that the New York Times and other news organizations have made the decision to publish numerous
documents obtained illegally by Wikileaks concerning the Guantanamo detention facility. These documents contain
classified information about current and former GTMO detainees, and we strongly condemn the leaking of this sensitive
information .

"The Wikileaks releases include Detainee Assessment Briefs (DABs) written by the Department of Defense between 2002
and early 2009. These DABs were written based on a range of information available then.

"The Guantanamo Review Task Force, established in January 2009, considered the DABs during its review of detainee
information. In some cases, the Task Force came to the same conclusions as the DABs. In other instances the Review
Task Force came to different conclusions, based on updated or other available information. The assessments of the
Guantanamo Review Task Force have not been compromised to Wikileaks. Thus, any given DAB illegally obtained and
released by Wikileaks may or may not represent the current view of a given detainee.

"Both the previous and the current Administrations have made every effort to act with the utmost care and diligence in
transferring detainees from Guantanamo. The previous Administration transferred 537 detainees; to date, the current
Administration has transferred 67. Both Administrations have made the protection of American citizens the top priority
and we are concerned that the disclosure of these documents could be damaging to those efforts. That said, we will
continue to work with allies and partners around the world to mitigate threats to the U.S. and other countries and to
work toward the ultimate closure of the Guantanamo detention facility, consistent with good security practices and our
values as a nation."




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05782881 Date: 01/29/2016
