        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764356 Date: 01/29/2016



                                                                                               RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                               B5


From:                               Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                               Wednesday, September 02, 2009 12:28 PM
To:
Subject:                            FW: 9/2 Senior Staff




From: Smith, Daniel B
Sent: Wednesday, September 02, 2009 9:52 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob
Subject: 9/2 Senior Staff

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Afghanistan — Contractor Issues

    •     Eric Boswell raised the Washington Post story about the Project on Government Oversight investigation of
          misbehavior by private contract security guards at U.S. Embassy Kabul. Eric noted that the allegations involve
          third-country national supervisors of the guard force (most of the guard force rank and file are Gurkhas and do
          not present a problem). There are lewd pictures involving activities by the supervisors at parties as well as
          other allegations of inappropriate behavior. They are employees of ArmorGroup, a subsidiary of Wakenhut
          Services. He noted that a number of actions have already been taken including the firing of the head of the
          guard camp, posting of DS agents at the camp and increased supervision of the guard force overall. DS has also
          launched its own investigation. The guard camp itself has been "dry" since August 15, a sign Eric believes that
          the contractor knew there were problems with alcohol-related incidents. Ambassador Eikenberry plans to hold
          a town hall with embassy employees today to reassure them that they remain secure.

    •     Cheryl emphasized the need to develop a strategy to manage not only the flow of information and what we say
          about this scandal, but also what we are doing to meet the Secretary's objective of reducing dependency on
          contractors and increasing oversight of remaining contractors. She wanted to discuss this further with Eric, but
          indicated she had in mind a team of three or four people devoted to this.

    •     Related to this, PI reported that the press had picked up on the temporary extension of the Blackwater contract
          for air support in Baghdad.

Honduras

    •                                                            and will send a note to the Secretary afterwards. He
          added that the election campaign has begun there and we will have to firm up our position, especially since the
          other major countries (Brazil, Mexico, Argentina and Chile) have indicated that they will not accept the
          legitimacy of the election under current conditions. There was further discussion of this and whether it would
          be better to make clearer now our position on the elections so that there is no misunderstanding on the part of
          the de facto regime about where we stand. Anne-Marie said she planned to have a "Plan B" strategy paper on
          the elections to the Secretary today. There was also discussion of whether the Secretary should make a
          statement to the press after her meeting with Zelaya tomorrow, but agreement that she should not appear with
          Zelaya before the press.

Legal Issues


                                                       36
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764356 Date: 01/29/2016
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764356 Date: 01/29/2016




   •     Harold reported


   •     Yesterday, Harold indicated, he had met with lawyers representing Libyan claimants trying to resume old claims
         in light of what happened with al-Megrahi. One attorney threatened to use his influence to place a hold on
         Hormats' nomination.

Storm Watch

   •     I noted that Hurricane Jimena will now likely make landfall north of the main tourist resorts in Baja. We have
         had relatively few calls from American citizens thus far and are in close touch with posts. Meanwhile, Tropical
         Storm Erika in the Atlantic will likely hit D.R. and northern Haiti this weekend.

PA Issues

   •     PJ and Ian noted a number of issues that the press will be following, including the security contractor issue,
         Senator Mitchell's meeting with the Israelis today, and the P5+1 meeting in Germany. PA will also announce
         Bosworth's trip to Asia today.




                                                       37
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764356 Date: 01/29/2016
