      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780185 Date: 01/29/2016


                                                                                                          RELEASE IN
                                                                                                          FULL



From:                             Valenzuela, Arturo A <ValenzuelaAA@state.gov>
Sent:                             Thursday, March 10, 2011 6:43 PM
To:
Cc:                               Steinberg, James B; Burns, William J; Sullivan, Jacob J; Jacobson, Roberta S
Subject:                          Briefing of Congressmen Mack and Engle on Regional Security


Madam Secretary,

You will recall that last year Congressmen Engle and Mack came to see you about WHA issues and asked that you
consider appointing a Regional Security Coordinator for our citizen safety initiatives (Merida, Colombia, CARSI, CBSI.)
The suggestion, primarily from then HFAC WHA Subcommittee chair Engle, stemmed from congressional concerns that
there was no centralized coordination mechanism at State for these programs. You agreed to the suggestion. When
Craig Kelly retired as PDAS and we appointed Roberta Jacobson to that position—we asked her to assume the newly
created Coordinator role.

At the first HFAC Hearing of the WHA Subcommittee of the new Congress on February 15, 2011, we had included
Roberta's appointment as part of my testimony. Mack staff asked that we not mention the matter because he apparently
wanted to address it in a subsequent hearing—but Engle in his questioning pressed for details, revealing some difference
of opinion between the new Chairman and the Ranking Minority member. I stated that following your instructions we had
made an appointment, that we very much welcomed their input, and that we would be delighted to provide them with a
briefing at their earliest convenience.

On March 9, 2011, Roberta went to brief Mack and Engel. She outlined progress on Merida and spelled out the steps we
have taken to bolster CARSI and CBSI. She briefed on her trip to Colombia and Central America with Bill Brownfield, and
noted the close working relationship between WHA and INL. Both Members offered strong congressional support on
security issues in the Hemisphere. Representatives David Rivera and Jean Schmidt also dropped by the briefing.

Mack and Engel were delighted that you had agreed to this move and highlighted their role in asking you to create the
position. They stressed their general agreement on key foreign policy priorities in the Western Hemisphere. Both asked
whether we had adequate resources and offered their support as we move ahead (staff , budget), though we see no need
for that now. Mack reviewed his frustration with the slow pace of Merida equipment delivery, but was very satisfied with
Roberta's outline of this year's accelerated schedule. Engel and Mack asked for more communications and follow up with
us, and we will work with their staff to increase the tempo of engagement; we are already scheduling a follow-up on
CARSI and CBSI.




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780185 Date: 01/29/2016
