      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772063 Date: 01/29/2016


                                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                       B1,1.4(D),B5



From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Tuesday, November 30, 2010 6:53 AM
To:                                H
Subject:                           FW: Troubling wikileaks covereage


 Classified by DAS, A/GIS, DoS on 01/29/2016 — Class: CONFIDENTIAL — Reason: 1.4(D) — Declassify
 on: 11/30/2025

    Original Message
From: Crowley, Philip J
Sent: Tuesday, November 30, 2010 6:52 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Klevorick, Caitlin B; Goldberg, Philip 5; Kennedy, Patrick F; Thessin, James H; Verma, Richard R; Rodriguez, Miguel E;
Wells, Alice G; Reines, Philippe I; Sullivan, Jacob
Subject: Re: Troubling wikileaks covereage

Judith, we are doing what you outline. A clear editorial in today's WP about what happened. We are actively
backgrounding media. The "spy" cable story has crested.
                                                                                                                             1.4(D)
                                                                                                                             B1

PJ

----- Original Message
From: Mills, Cheryl D
To: Crowley, Philip J
Cc: Klevorick, Caitlin B; Goldberg, Philip S; Kennedy, Patrick F; Thessin, James H; Verma, Richard R; Rodriguez, Miguel E;
Wells, Alice G; Reines, Philippe I; Sullivan, Jacob J
Sent: Tue Nov 30 05:27:39 2010
Subject: FW: Troubling wikileaks covereage

FYI

    Original Message
From: McHale, Judith A
Sent: Tuesday, November 30, 2010 2:15 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl 0; Sullivan, Jacob J
Cc: DiMartino, Kitty
Subject: Troubling wikileaks covereage

Just landed in Hong Kong en route to Jakara.

I am extremely concerned about the turn the coverage is taking and making it seem as if State is the culprit in this
disaster. See below.

You are all closer to this then I am but I believe                                                                              B5
               I realize that may be politically challenging but the current situation is untenable.

 Thoughts ? Can Phillipe engage off record with traveling press ?



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772063 Date: 01/29/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772063 Date: 01/29/2016




WikiLeaks, Hillary Clinton, and the Smoking GunThe leaked cables make it impossible for Hillary Clinton to continue as
secretary of state.
By Jack Shafer
Posted Monday, Nov. 29, 2010, at 5:32 PM A U.S. diplomat must possess patience, poise, and tact. He must also be
attentive to cultural differences, a good observer, and proficient in several languages. When called upon, he must use
his skills as a negotiator in the national interest. And, as the latest dump of WikiLeaks tells us, if the dip works for
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, he must also be prepared to spy on his fellow diplomats.
To be fair to Clinton, she isn't the first secretary of state to issue cables telling U.S. foreign service officers to spy on
other diplomats. According to the leaked diplomatic cables, Condoleezza Rice likewise instructed State Department
diplomats to collect such intelligence, and I wouldn't be surprised if previous secretaries of state encouraged if not
instructed their diplomats to push information-collection all the way to intelligence-gathering.But what makes Clinton's
sleuthing unique is the paper trail that documents her spying-on-their-diplomats-with-our-diplomat orders, a paper trail
that is now being splashed around the world on the Web and printed in top newspapers. No matter what sort of noises
Clinton makes about how the disclosures are "an attack on America" and "the international community," as she
did today, she's become the issue. She'll never be an effective negotiator with diplomats who refuse to forgive her
exuberances, and even foreign diplomats who do forgive her will still regard her as the symbol of an overreaching United
States. Diplomacy is about face, and the only way for other nations to save face will be to give them Clinton's scalp.
How embarrassing are the WikiLeaks leaks? A secret cablefrom April 2009 that went out under Clinton's name
instructed State Department officials to collect the "biometric data," including "fingerprints, facial images, DNA, and iris
scans," of African leaders. Another secretcable directed American diplomats posted around the world, including the
United Nations, to obtain passwords, personal encryption keys, credit card numbers, frequent flyer account numbers,
and other data connected to diplomats. As the Guardian puts it, the cables "reveal how the US uses its embassies as part
of a global espionage network."
Additionally, Clinton's State Department specifically targeted United Nations officials and diplomats posted to the
United Nations. Among the targeted were Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and permanent security-council
representatives from China, Russia, France, and the United Kingdom, as this secret cable from July 2009 lays out. The
State Department also sought biometric information on North Korean diplomats, security-council permanent
representatives, "key UN officials," and other diplomats at the United Nations.Of course, U.S. diplomats have always
collected information, no matter where posted. And, as the New York Times reports today, the United States has
routinely placed intelligence officers abroad under the diplomatic cover of a State Department posting. But the price of a
diplomat (or undercover intelligence officer) overstepping to engage in what the host nation considers to be spying has
always been expulsion or, as illustrated earlier this month inNorway, a demand that the U.S. ambassador explain the
"spying."As the Times and other publications report, international treaties make the United Nations a spy-free zone—or
at least they're supposed to make it spy-free. "In one 2004 episode, a British official revealed that the United States and
Britain eavesdropped on Secretary General Kofi Annan in the weeks before the invasion of Iraq in 2003,"
the Times reports. Anne Applebaum writes in Slatetoday that nobody should be honestly horrified at the image of the
United States spying in the United Nations. Nobody in the diplomatic community is. But that doesn't mean that they're
not going to take advantage of the moment to demand retribution that will shame the high-and-mighty United
States.There is no way that the new WikiLeaks leaks don't leave Hillary Clinton holding the smoking gun. The time for her
 departure may come next week or next month, but sooner or later, tthe weakened and humiliated secretary of state will
 have to pay.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772063 Date: 01/29/2016
