UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793226 Date: 01/29/2016




                                 THE IRAN PROJECT
                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL



                                                                           December 12, 2011


       President Barack Obama
       The White House
       1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
       Washington D.C. 20500


       Dear Mr. President,

       The several of us follow closely relations between the United States and Iran and the situation in
       that country. We do so in part because of our deep preoccupation with the dangers this country
       might face if we and Iran came to blows. We do so as well because we believe improved
       relations between our two countries are key to stability in the Middle East and our broader
       interests. We have stayed abreast of your efforts to reach out to Iran's leaders and share your
       disappointment that these have born no fruit. Over the past years we have discussed these
       matters with Iranians, both within and outside their government.

       As this year draws to a close, we remain deeply concerned about the possibility of conflict
       between our two countries. The troubling threat of attacks against Iran's nuclear facilities is ever
       present; but of immediate concern to us is the possibility of conflict through accident or
       miscalculation. American forces are present along Iran's borders and will remain so for some
       time, notably in Afghanistan. American naval deployments in the Gulf continue at a very high
       level and United States responsibility for assuring the freedom of navigation in those waters is a
       national priority. At the same time, Iran's naval units ply the same waters and often in
       dangerous proximity to American vessels.

       We write to suggest ways be sought to ensure that accidents do not occur and that the United
       States and Iran do not enter through accident or miscalculation into a confrontation that neither
       side seeks. The consequences could be disastrous. The dangers of a mistake, a misreading of
       intentions, or of unauthorized actions are real and must be hedged against. It is our
       understanding that some technical lines of communications exist between United States naval
       forces and the Iranians in the Gulf. To the best of our knowledge, these are not robust nor do
       they necessarily engage communications with senior military or political leaders on both
       sides. We also understand that your administration has sought ways significantly to enhance
       communications and crisis management capabilities between the US and Iran and that the Iranian
       military has not been responsive to proposals from the United States.

       We offer a few thoughts on this important and urgent issue. First, to be effective, crisis
       management procedures need to encompass US and Iranian military units that face each other
       along the Afghan border as well as in the Gulf and on the high seas. It is our impression from our
       discussions with the Iranians that it might be possible to engage them in designing such
       procedures if they cover the full range of areas where United States forces and the Iranians are
       likely to be in proximity.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793226 Date: 01/29/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793226 Date: 01/29/2016




       Second, given the difficulty that your administration has apparently encountered in working
       directly with the Iranian military on this matter, we suggest a combination of political and
       military approaches. We suggest that an intermediary nation, friendly to both the US and Iran, be
       invited to assist this process. Among the few governments in the region that has been capable of
       dealing directly with Iran and with the Supreme Leader is Oman. Given Oman's past help to the
       US on other issues, such as the release of the American hikers last September, we believe it
       would be worthwhile to work through the Sultan of Oman to engage both the Supreme Leader
       and the Iran Revolutionary Guard Corps in discussions on emergency communications.

       Third, we have also discussed with some Iranians the possibility of setting up crisis
       communications with the help of senior retired military figures on both sides. One of our group
       discussed this idea with Foreign Minister Salehi when he has here in September and he
       expressed interest. We believe there are a number of senior US military officers who would be
       willing and interested in helping set up this expanded communications link with Iran. Of course
       getting a willing group of senior US officers lined up to work on this new communications link
       would still leave the Administration with the problem of getting a comparable group on the
       Iranian side that would have the authority and capability of cooperating on this important
       venture. However, with the help of Oman this idea too might be tried as a second track effort to
       complement or if necessary, substitute for something more direct.

       Given deep differences between Iran's leaders and mistrust of the United States, we can be sure
       that these negotiating procedures might be no easier than other efforts you have undertaken in
       the past. But given what is at stake, the effort should, we believe, be made. Time is clearly very
       important. If we can be of assistance to your officers in thinking through the best ways to
       proceed, we would be pleased to do so.

       Sincerely,




       Stephen B. Heintz                                William H. Luers



          -6/
       6,William         e;rv471
                 G. Miller                               Thomas R. Pickering

                    J-21


       James Walsh                                       Frank G. Wisner




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793226 Date: 01/29/2016
