       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797990 Date: 01/29/2016


                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART B5, B6




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Saturday, January 12, 2013 11:20 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: HuffPo OpEd: Obama, the President Who Ends AIDS




    Original Message
From: Goosby, Eric
Sent: Saturday, January 12, 2013 11:13 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Fw: HuffPo OpEd: Obama, the President Who Ends AIDS

Cheryl:

Just what we wanted. With the slides I sent you last week you also see we have delivered 8 countries to the programatic
tipping point, just as the modeling predicted, just as Secretary Clinton presented in her November speech. (I have this
coming to you in an information memo now).



I feel grateful that you (my ROCK) and the Secretary had enough trust to take the risk with an AIDS Free Generation.
Now we see the modeling was absolutely correct validating the prediction and establishing the legacy for S and POTUS.




Eric



     Original Message
From: Chris Collins [mailto
Sent: Saturday, January 12, 2013 09:25 AM
To: Goosby, Eric; VonZinkernagel, Deborah J; Martin, Julia C; 'Iorriemchugh
                                 Needle, Richard H; 'Gayle_E. Smith
'Gayle_E._Smith                                                     'hfeldbaum
'harley_feldbaurn                                                     • 'Adam_J _Ross
                                   'Grant N Colfax
'Howard.Koh                                         ron.valdiserr                                           Shah, Rajiv
(AID/A); Sumilas, Michele (AID/A); Stanton, David L (GH/OHA/TLR); Wolf, Cameron (GH/OHA/TLR); Pick,
 Billy(GH/OHA/SPER); 'tfrieden                                  'txf2                               'emg5
                    'jblandford                                   •  lonathan.mermin(
                                     'rwolitski                                  'keith_tontenot
                                    'dmcdonough                                                  ; 'vjarrett
                            afauci                                           'Luiettenba
                             >-'1W14z                                  'WERTHEIW

Subject: HuffPo OpEd: Obama, the President Who Ends AIDS


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797990 Date: 01/29/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797990 Date: 01/29/2016



Obama, the President Who Ends AIDS

by Chris Collins, amfAR

http://www.huffingtonpost.com/chris-collins/obama-hivaids_b_2455984.html

The Blueprint for an AIDS-Free Generation released by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in November 2012 makes a bold
declaration: We are at a tipping point in this most devastating pandemic of our time. By scaling up core, effective
interventions, HIV infection and death rates can be brought down steadily in the coming years, and in relatively short
order the costs will begin to recede as well.

There are many reports on the topic of global health. This one deserves to be read and acted on -- and funded. If you
don't read the whole report, look at the pictures. Four graphs in the Blueprint are based on mathematical modeling of
the distinctly different epidemics in Cambodia, Kenya, Uganda and Zambia. In each case, as AIDS treatment reaches
people earlier in the course of disease, and as part of a combination of proven interventions, HIV incidence falls more
rapidly. A separate graph, for Uganda, shows the dynamic effect of scaled-up services leading to reduced resource needs
within just a few years. The same progress is possible in the U.S. epidemic, where some jurisdictions that have expanded
coverage of AIDS-related services have seen declining HIV infection rates.

The Blueprint could be a road map for accelerating the end of the global AIDS epidemic. Or it could be a political
document that showed us what could have been accomplished, while instead we resigned ourselves to the devastation
of AIDS for decades to come.

The outcome will be determined by the actions of Congress and the White House in the coming weeks. Will budget
sequestration go into effect in early March, slashing global health along with other discretionary spending? Will we
maintain critical investments in research to find a cure and a vaccine? And will the President's fiscal year 2014 budget
proposal, expected by March, ask for increased funding for PEPFAR and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria?

The strategic vision of the Blueprint cannot survive a major cut to PEPFAR, the popular and enormously successful
President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief initiated by President George W. Bush. The Blueprint makes the business case
for investment now: not treading water, but more rapidly scaling up the interventions that we know work. Doing so will
advance global health more broadly. A recent study showed that investments in PEPFAR improved the overall strength
of health systems and increased life expectancy in recipient countries.

For President Obama, this is a legacy issue. On domestic AIDS, the president has demonstrated great leadership with
passage of the Affordable Care Act and creation of the National HIV/AIDS Strategy. On the global epidemic, the
president's Administration has accelerated scale up of effective services. With full implementation of the Blueprint, he
can be the president who drove AIDS toward its end.

Leadership is needed from Congress, too. PEPFAR is the premier example of a bipartisan program at a time when those
are hard to come by. Congress should remember that foreign aid is investment in global good will and stability on the
cheap. As Senator Lindsey Graham said about foreign aid in volatile areas of the world, "The way I look at it is, it's
national security insurance we're buying."

U.S. spending on global health is only about one quarter of one percent of the federal budget. You can't solve the
federal debt problem by slashing global health funding, but you can do enormous damage to millions of children and
adults and squander terrific opportunities in the process.

This winter and early spring, when lawmakers are making big decisions about our course as a nation, we must act on the
science, and on our humanitarian and diplomatic interests. The president's fiscal year 2014 budget should request
increased funding for PEPFAR and the Global Fund, along with increased investments in research and domestic AIDS
programming.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797990 Date: 01/29/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797990 Date: 01/29/2016




Mr. President and members of Congress, we have the plan to end AIDS. Now is the time to fund it.



Chris Collins is vice president and director of public policy at amfAR, The Foundation for AIDS Research. His email is
chris.collins@amfar.org




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797990 Date: 01/29/2016
