      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793835 Date: 01/29/2016



                                                                                               RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                               B5,B6


From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, November 15,.2012 7:11 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: Egyptian Rep in Ramallah on GOE Contacts with Hamas and GOI



FYI



From: Shapiro, Daniel B (Tel Aviv)
Sent: Thursday, November 15, 2012 06:48 AM
To: Lempert, Yael; Patterson, Anne W; Sherman, Wendy R; issimon(                    <issimon(                •                   B6
'jabell                                    ); Burns, William J; Hale, David M; Sullivan, Jacob J; Ratney, Michael A;
Dibble, Elizabeth L; Jones, Beth E
Cc: Bitar, Maher B; Goldberger, Thomas H; Sievers, Marc J; Gavito, Jennifer D; Hegadorn, Chris S; 'Canegallo, Kristie A.'
                                    ; 'svinograd                 <'svinograd
Subject: RE: Egyptian Rep in Ramallah on GOE Contacts with Hamas and GOI

Following the President's calls with PM Netanyahu and President Morsi last night, I spoke with DM Barak (late last night)
and NSA Amidror (this morning).                                                                                                       B5
                                                                            that Secretary Clinton had made the same
points with FM Amr, and that Morsi had said he would do so. With Amidror, I expressed condolences on the three
Israelis killed earlier today by a rocket strike on Kiryat Malachi. I told both of them that we understood what Israel had
told us about the various stages of their operation. To Amidror, I said I also understood that the deaths in Kiryat Malachi
would produce pressure on the GOI for a response.

I also said that, as we work with the Egyptians to get them to pressure Hamas to deescalate, it will be important for
Israel to allow a pause between the phases of their operation in order to give an opportunity for the Egyptian de-
escalation efforts to work. As the Israeli position is 1) that it hopes not to have to proceed to the additional stages of the
operation, but is prepared to do so if Hamas does not stop the rocket fire, and 2) it is not seeking a ceasefire but is
prepared to listen if Hamas seeks one, there should be sufficient time built into Israel's timetable to give an opportunity
for the Egyptian deescalation efforts to work.

Amidror said that as of this morning, they had seen no indication of an Egyptian effort to get Hamas to deescalate.
                                                                   a full night had passed, and there were indications that
the Egyptians were having trouble reaching their key Hamas contacts in Gaza, so if Egypt is making such an effort, it will
probably take a bit longer to see it and for it to bear any fruit.

I should be speaking with both of them later today. If Embassy Cairo or others have any indications of the Egyptian
effort to approach Hamas on deescalating, it would be very helpful to receive them.


From: Lempert, Yael
Sent: Thursday, November 15, 2012 12:54 PM
To: Patterson, Anne W; Sherman, Wendy R; 'ssimon,                    'jabell                Burns, William J; Hale, David             B6
M; Sullivan, Jacob J; Ratney, Michael A; Shapiro, Daniel B (Tel Aviv); Dibble, Elizabeth L; Jones, Beth E
Cc: Bitar, Maher B; Goldberger, Thomas H; Sievers, Marc J; Gavito, Jennifer D; Hegadorn, Chris S; Canegallo, Kristie A.;
'svinograd
Subject: Egyptian Rep in Ramallah on GOE Contacts with Hamas and GOI

Just spoke with Ambassador Yasser Othman, the Egyptian rep in Ramallah. He said that yesterday evening, the
Egyptians "got a message from Israeli NSA Amidror, who said that if Hamas is ready to establish a new calm,

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793835 Date: 01/29/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793835 Date: 01/29/2016




Israel is ready to discuss the matter." He noted that Egypt (didn't specify, but presumably EGIS) had spoken with
someone in Hamas' Gaza political leadership this morning, who stated that Hamas "does not want to blow up the
whole situation ... there need to be red lines beyond which no one progresses, so we are able to ultimately
contain the situation and return back to the position from which we started." Othman reiterated that the
Egyptians are having great difficulty in reaching contacts from Hamas' military wing, "as they've all gone
underground, and are not picking up their phones." He also noted that "there is a sentiment of profound fury
within Hamas over al-Ja'bari's killing, it will be very hard to convince them to return to calm this time."

Othman said that Cairo is nonetheless actively trying to calm the situation, urging Hamas leadership to get
things under control, as "it is not in Egypt's interest for the situation to deteriorate, as the more it does, the
harder it will be for our leadership to contain the mood in Egypt." He underscored that "Egypt is doing its part to
try to restrain Hamas, and the U.S. needs to do its part to restrain Israel."

Othman said the Egyptians decided yesterday evening to open Rafah 24 hours a day for passenger traffic.

From: Shapiro, Daniel B (Tel Aviv)
Sent: Wednesday, November 14, 2012 9:38 PM
To: Patterson, Anne W; Sherman, Wendy R; 'ssimon                    ;                      Jones, Beth E; Burns, William 3;        B6
Hale, David M; Sullivan, Jacob J; Ratney, Michael A
Cc: 'Kristie_A._Canegallo               k 'svinograd                Bitar, Maher B; Lempert, Yael; Goldberger, Thomas H;
Sievers, Marc J
Subject: Re: Egyptian ambassador

Yup, just spoke to him, and he had gotten the call 10 minutes ago. Going home for consultations. Nothing indicated about
how long or when he'd return.


From: Patterson, Anne W
To: Sherman, Wendy R; Shapiro, Daniel B (Tel Aviv); 'ssimon                   <ssimon                                         B6
'jabell               <jabelli                Jones, Beth E; Burns, William J; Hale, David M; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Ratney,
Michael A
Cc: 'Kristie_A. _Canegallo               <Kristie_A._Canegallo                 ; 'svinograd
<svinograd                 >; Bitar, Maher B; Lempert, Yael; Goldberger, Thomas H; Sievers, Marc 3
Sent: Wed Nov 14 21:35:59 2012
Subject: Re: Egyptian ambassador

Yes it is right. Just spoke to Haddad.


From: Sherman, Wendy R
Sent: Wednesday, November 14, 2012 09:32 PM
To: Shapiro, Daniel B (Tel Aviv); 'ssimon                <ssimon                 ;
                                                                                                                              B6
<jabell                  Jones, Beth E; Burns, William J; Hale, David M; Sullivan, Jacob J; Ratney, Michael A; Patterson,
Anne W; Sullivan, Jacob J
Cc: 'Canegallo, Kristie A.' <                                   >; 'svinograd                <svinograd(
Bitar, Maher B; Lempert, Yael; Goldberger, Thomas H; Sievers, Marc 3
Subject: RE: Egyptian ambassador

Have let Dan know that ops alert says that Egyptian ambassador has been recalled. Dan calling him again.


From: Shapiro, Daniel B (Tel Aviv)
Sent: Wednesday, November 14, 2012 1:35 PM
To: Shapiro, Daniel B (Tel Aviv); 'ssimon                ; 'jabell             Jones, Beth E; Sherman, Wendy R; Burns,             B6
William J; Hale, David M; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Ratney, Michael A; Patterson, Anne W; Sullivan, Jacob 3
Cc: 'Canegallo, Kristie A.'; 'svinograd              ; Bitar, Maher B; Lempert, Yael; Goldberger, Thomas H; Sievers, Marc
J
Subject: Egyptian ambassador



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793835 Date: 01/29/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793835 Date: 01/29/2016



I called the Egyptian Ambassador in Tel Aviv to check on rumors that he has been told by his government to go
home. He denied that he had received any communication about his status from Cairo. It's just rumors, he told me.

He said that yesterday he had conveyed a message from directly from Ismail Haniyeh to the GOl, saying that Hamas
wants to end the current round and was ready to stop firing if Israel stopped. The message also said Hamas was ready
to exert control over the other organizations firing rockets.

Now, he said, it appears Israel has chosen to start something new. He said he is seeking information on how much more
can be expected. I said I did not think the GOI had made any final decisions yet about how this would proceed.

Comment: The "offer" from Haniyeh is what Amidror said specifically Israel could no longer accept — every other month
150 or so rockets, followed by an Egyptian-conveyed request for a ceasefire.


From: Shapiro, Daniel B (Tel Aviv)
Sent: Wednesday, November 14, 2012 6:12 PM
To: Donilon, Thomas E.; 'McDonough, Denis R.'; 'ssimon                  label!               Jones, Beth E; Sherman,       B6
Wendy R; Burns, William 3; Hale, David M; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Blinken, Tony; Ratney, Michael A; Patterson, Anne W; 'Bash,
Jeremy CIV SD'
Cc: Canegallo, Kristie A.; 'svinograd              Bitar, Maher B; 'Finer, Jonathan J.'; Lempert, Yael; Sievers, Marc 3;
Goldberger, Thomas H
Subject: Barak/Amidror on Gaza

Just sent high side readout of my discussions with Barak and Amidror on the Gaza operation.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793835 Date: 01/29/2016
