      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793423 Date: 01/29/2016



                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                              Gordon, Philip H <GordonPH@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, December 6, 2012 8:16 AM
To:
Cc:                                Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject:                           Fw: FM Fabius NYTimes Op-ed on France and NATO




From: Daalder, No H
Sent: Thursday, December 06, 2012 02:37 AM
To: Gordon, Philip H; esherwood-randall           <(                                     p                                   B6
Subject: Fw: FM Fabius NYTimes Op-ed on France and NATO

This is pretty disappointing and very different in tone and substance from Vedrine - a mixture old-fashioned Gaullism (see
punchline) and dreamy Euro-federalism...
Sent Using U.S. Department of State / Blackberry Server



From: Gonzales, Robert L
To: USNATO POL; USNATO PAA DL
Sent: Wed Dec 05 16:14:14 2012
Subject: FM Fabius NYTimes Op-ed on France and NATO




December 5, 2012



France and NATO
By LAURENT FABIUS
Paris

AT the last NATO summit in Chicago, very soon after he took office, President Francois Hollande set out his
vision of our country's place in the Atlantic alliance: France is an ally that exercises its responsibility as a
founding member and is committed to promoting common values but does not hesitate, if necessary, to air its
differences honestly. This position is in line with the one the Socialist Party took in particular during the debate
in 2009 on France's return to the integrated command: allied yes, aligned no.

France is a key partner within the alliance at the military, political and financial levels, and it intends to remain
so. When the decision to act is made, France shoulders its responsibilities; it was the Socialist president
Francois Mitterrand who, in 1993, decided to deploy French forces under the alliance's banner.

In 2009, we did not support a return to the integrated command, but there is no question of organizing a
permanent to-ing and fro-ing, and there would be little point in leaving it again today. However, we must ensure


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793423 Date: 01/29/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793423 Date: 01/29/2016




that our return, now officially endorsed, does not result in a trivialization of our foreign policy or a deterioration
of our ability to make decisions and act, but on the contrary, in the growth of our influence and capabilities.

In this way, France will play its full role in an organization whose chief mission is to enable democracies with
shared values and interests to organize effectively their armed forces' interoperability while guaranteeing their
collective defense.

The report [ROI] that the former foreign minister Hubert Vedrine has just presented to the French president on
our country's role in NATO is a highly useful contribution to the work of the White Paper Commission tasked
with considering our defense and security policy agenda.

The report shares the same agenda. In particular, it emphasizes a twofold need: to strengthen our influence
within the alliance by showing ourselves to be vigilant there, and to be more proactive in building a European
defense.

These recommendations are pertinent. In order to implement them and optimize NATO's role in the new world
around us, our policy must set itself at least three goals.

1) For France, NATO must remain a special instrument of the trans-Atlantic relationship for the sake of values
and interests we share — Europeans on the one hand and Americans and Canadians on the other. NATO is the
natural framework for our forces' joint engagement with the Americans.

In this context, France will act to pursue the reform of the alliance in order to make it more effective. It will
continue to shoulder its responsibilities, while preserving autonomy in its fundamental choices: to implement its
nuclear deterrent; to withdraw its combat troops from Afghanistan, as it has now done; to develop a NATO anti-
missile defense mechanism — for which, at the alliance's latest summit, President Hollande set out his
conditions, endorsed by the other 27 heads of state and government; and more generally, to retain freedom in
the use of its forces and develop Defense Europe, which is an integral part of the project of political union.

France will also continue working to strengthen all areas of cooperation between NATO and Russia, which in
our eyes is a vital partner in different fields, such as Afghanistan and the fight against piracy and terrorism.

2) There must be calm discussion — facilitated by President Obama's re-election — of a new sharing of
security and defense responsibilities between Europeans and Americans. The United States needs a reliable
European ally capable of shouldering all its responsibilities.

The Libya crisis showed that Europeans could play their part in dealing successfully with a conflict. We took on
the bulk of the risks, responsibilities and military contributions. But the crisis also showed that we still need the
support provided by the United States. Insofar as it has the necessary capabilities — as is not sufficiently the
case today — it should be the European Union that acts when Europeans' security interests are primarily at
stake.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793423 Date: 01/29/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793423 Date: 01/29/2016




In a few months' time, for example, the E.U. will have to play its full role supporting the United Nations in
helping Mali regain its sovereignty and fight terrorism. For the same reason, it would be good to start thinking
about the responsibilities it will have to take on alongside the future Syrian authorities.

3) The efforts initiated for Defense Europe must be pursued. NATO can make its contribution, but it is up to the
Europeans first of all to work on it among themselves.

This project is consistent with what we are doing to ensure that the European Union has a coordinated foreign
policy with the means to make and implement decisions. We must act now toward this end, whereas our
country, mobilized these past few years by its return to NATO's integrated command, has been rather sparing
when it comes to the resources devoted to Defense Europe.

We are going to continue working to build support for this project among European institutions and all our
European partners, including the British. Defense Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian and I recently hosted a meeting
with our German, Italian, Spanish and Polish colleagues in order to make progress, calling on all the member
states to join us in developing this project in cooperation with our main partners, who obviously include NATO.

All these approaches must allow France to guarantee its independence and its capacity for action in a new world
and at a time when we are facing strong budget constraints. We shall thus be able to remain an "influential
power" that is expected to speak out and is listened to and respected.

Laurent Fabius is foreign minister of France.



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793423 Date: 01/29/2016
