        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787275 Date: 01/29/2016




                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                              B5,B6



From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                             Tuesday, May 17, 2011 7:55 AM
To:                               'JilotyLC©state.gov'
Subject:                          Fw: Goodwin Liu Cloture Vote on Thurs
Attachments:                      Secty Clinton to Key Rs - Background and Tps.doc



Pls print.


From: Mills, Cheryl D [mailto:MillsCD@state.gov]
Sent: Tuesday, May 17, 2011 07:24 AM
To: H
Cc: Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Subject: Goodwin Liu Cloture Vote on Thurs

H RC:

Per my earlier email from Ann, Goodwin's cloture vote is up on thurs.

They would welcome any calls you would be prepared to make to help get cloture (as opposed to secure an actual vote
for him should he achieve cloture).

For cloture, they believe they have all the Dems (Webb may be wobbly but not running again so _Reid think he will      B5
stick), they believe they have Brown, Snow, Collins and Murkowski and so need 3 more. Below are suggested four calls
for you — are you inclined to do any calls and if so, which of the four?

See below.

cdm


          Secretary Clinton's Calls to Encourage Rs to Support Cloture for Goodwin Liu

Background:

WHAT:            Phone calls to key Republican Senators to encourage them to vote for cloture in order to allow an
                 up or down vote on the merits of Goodwin Liu's nomination to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
                 Ninth Circuit.

WHEN:            Senator Reid is expected to file cloture on Tuesday, in which case the cloture vote would occur
                 Thursday morning, May 19, 2011.

WHY:             Senator Reid is working to hold all 53 Democrats for cloture. We have strong indications that 4
                 Republicans will vote for cloture: Senators Scott Brown (MA), Susan Collins (ME), Senator
                 Lisa Murkowski (AK), and Senator Snowe (ME). If these all hold, we have 57 "yes" votes on
                 cloture.
                 In an effort to get the remaining three votes needed for cloture, we are targeting seven Senators:
                 Lamar Alexander (TN), Saxby Chambliss (GA), Johnny Isakson (GA), Mark Kirk (IL), Richard
                 Lugar (IN), Senator Rob Portman (OH), and John Thune (SD).


        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787275 Date: 01/29/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787275 Date: 01/29/2016




WHO:


                In the past, Senators Alexander and Isakson have made very strong statements against
                filibustering judicial nominees and in the most recent cloture vote (on controversial district court
                nominee Jack McConnell of Rhode Island) both voted for cloture:

                    •   Senator Lamar Alexander (TN): "I have pledged and I still pledge to give up my right
                        to filibuster any president's nominee for the appellate courts" (5/20/05). In 2005, Senator
                        Alexander declined to join the Gang of 14, explaining that "[t]hey kept all kinds of
                        exceptions and qualifying phrases in [the agreement], so I couldn't participate. I said,
                        `No filibusters; no exceptions' " (5/25/05).

                    •   Senator Johnny Isakson (GA): "[T]he Constitution require[s] an up-or-down vote" on
                        judicial nominees. "I will vote to support a vote, up or down, on every nominee.
                        Understanding that, were I in the minority party and the issues reversed, I would take
                        exactly the same position because this document, our Constitution, does not equivocate"
                        (5/19/05).

                Despite voting against cloture in the most recent cloture vote on a judicial nominee, we believe
                Senators Lugar and Portman could support cloture on Goodwin:
                   • Senator Richard Lugar (IN): In his thirty years in the Senate, Senator Lugar has only
                       twice voted against cloture on judicial nominees. The first was a vote against Stephen
                       Breyer when he was put forward for the First Circuit and the second was a vote against
                       the recent federal district court nominee, Jack McConnell of Rhode Island. In both
                       instances, concerns were raised about the ethical conduct of the nominee.

                    •   Senator Rob Portman (OH): While Senator Portman is new to the Senate and voted
                        against cloture for the recent district court nominee, there are several indicators that lead
                        us to believe he could vote for cloture: (1) He's a moderate R, with a reputation for being
                        reasonable, decent, and level-headed; (2) Ohio is a closely divided state politically. Like
                        Brown in Massachusetts and Kirk in Illinois, Portman can't go too far to the right. (3)
                        There are a lot of Asian Americans in Ohio. Many are Republicans. They are weighing
                        in. (4) We have some key Republican business leaders in Ohio weighing in.

                In addition to these indications on cloture, it is important to remember that Senators Alexander
                and Lugar voted in favor of then Judge Sonia Sotomayor on the merits. Goodwin's record, like
                Sotomayor's record, is well within the legal mainstream.

Suggested Talking Points for Phone Calls

   •    Thank you for taking my call. I'm calling today not with my hat on as Secretary of State, but with my
        hat on as a friend, mentor and fan of judicial nominee Goodwin Liu, who I know you will be voting on
        later this week.

   •    During my time as Secretary of State, I have never weighed in on judicial nominees and don't intend to
        make this a practice. But this is personal. Goodwin is not only a friend, but he is one of the brightest
        young minds I have met in my time in public service and I want to urge you to support cloture on his
        nomination so that he can get an up or down vote on the merits of his nomination.

   •     Goodwin Liu is an award-winning scholar and teacher, is a former Supreme Court law clerk, Rhodes
         Scholar, and Yale law graduate. Before becoming a law professor, he practiced appellate litigation at a

       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787275 Date: 01/29/2016
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787275 Date: 01/29/2016




          large firm and served as a special assistant to the Deputy Secretary at the U.S. Department of
          Education.

    •     The ABA has given Liu its highest rating of "unanimously well-qualified," and he has the support of
          conservative legal scholars such as Ken Starr, Tom Campbell, and John Yoo.

    •     Given his qualifications and bipartisan endorsements, it is only fair that Liu—who has waited over 400
          days, longer than any current judicial nominee—receive an up-or-down vote on the merits of his
          nomination.

    •     Although some have labeled Liu's writings as "extreme," the reality is that Goodwin's scholarship is
          well within the American legal mainstream. To be sure, his writings are subject to reasonable
          disagreement, just as most academic work is. But if substantive disagreement with Liu's scholarly work
          is grounds for a filibuster, then we are surely on a path to confirmation gridlock. There are no
          "extraordinary circumstances" warranting a filibuster here.
    •     In my personal experience, Goodwin is thoughtful and measured. I have co-authored a law review
          article and worked with him on legal speeches, followed his legal career and taken notice when he has
          departed from others on the left—supporting school vouchers, for example. Goodwin follows the law to
          its logical conclusion, even when it is not convenient to those on the left.

    •     I recognize that you may not be able to support Goodwin's confirmation when the merits vote is taken,
          but I'm calling because...
             o [FOR ALEXANDER AND ISAKSON]...in the past, you have voted consistently in favor of
               giving every judicial nominee, regardless of party, a fair up-or-down vote. Your voice of reason
               has kept excessive partisanship out of the confirmation process, and I hope you will follow the
               same approach on Goodwin's nomination and vote "yes" on cloture.
             o [FOR LUGAR]...in the past, you have voted in favor of giving judicial nominees, regardless of
               party, a fair up-or-down vote. Your voice of reason has kept excessive partisanship out of the
               confirmation process, and I hope you will follow the same approach on Goodwin's nomination
               and vote "yes" on cloture.
             o [FOR PORTMAN]...while you are new to the Senate, I know you are reasonable and measured
               and experienced your own frustration over the nominations process when you served in the Bush
               Administration. We need more voices of reason to keep excessive partisanship out of the
               confirmation process, and I hope you will be one of those voices of reason and vote "yes" on
               cloture for Goodwin Liu.



From: Ann O'Leary [mailto:
Sent: Monday, May 16, 2011 07:05 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: jlichtma
Subject: Talking points for Secty Clinton

Dear Cheryl -

The vote should happen on Thursday morning (exact time will be announced tomorrow) - so anytime before
that would be great. Keep us in the loop of you or HRC get feedback.

THANK YOU          ir
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787275 Date: 01/29/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787275 Date: 01/29/2016




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787275 Date: 01/29/2016
