UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792452 Date: 01/29/2016




                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL




                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                              October 4, 2012



  For: John Martina
  From: Sidney Blumenthal
  Re: It Now Depends On Biden



      1. This is no time for excuses, looking for silver linings, or claiming that Obama won on
         this or that point.
      2. Whatever Obama was advised for the debate and whatever his own responsibility, his
         advisers failed to understand the dynamics and imperatives of the debate.
      3. Whatever the many opportunities Obama squandered, at no point did he communicate the
         gravity of the election. He utterly failed to explain the stakes.
      4. Whatever detailed policies Obama cited, at no point did he offer any theme whatsoever,
         or explain how his policies, despite Republican resistance, have laid the foundation for
         recovery.
      5. Obama utterly failed to understand Romney's strategic objective in the debate: to
         reposition himself as more centrist while emitting dog whistles to the right—"etch-a-
         sketch." Instead, Obama graciously conceded all that centrist ground to Romney by his
         elaborate praise of how Romney had enacted health care with Democratic support in
         Massachusetts—rather than pointing to Romney's cynical partisan hypocrisy, refusal to
         stand by health care in Massachusetts and dishonesty in his attacks on Obamacare.
         Obama could not have served Romney better.
      6. For 90 minutes, Obama failed to mention even once: women and Hispanics. And he
         forgot that Obamacare covers preexisting conditions, women's reproductive health,
         young people to age 26 under their parents' insurances, and prevents bankruptcies; the
         Republican congressional assaults on contraception, women's rights and reproductive
         health; the Dream Act; his student loan bill; etc.
      7. For 90 minutes, Obama failed to mention Paul Ryan and how Romney adopted his
         budgetary priorities, which have no known statistical basis, would destroy 100 years of
         progress by Democratic and Republican administrations alike, and throw the economy
         into recession.
      8. Obama's closing statement, explaining his understanding of the nation, was bizarre in the
         extreme, historically false and seemingly ignorant (the point of the United States




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792452 Date: 01/29/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792452 Date: 01/29/2016




          apparently being "free enterprise"), and to the right of Romney, who at least cited the
          Constitution and the Declaration of Independence and political democracy (another
          lapsed opportunity for Obama, who failed to mention Republican voter suppression
          efforts, every one knocked down by the courts).
      9. The political consequences of the first debate may not mean that Obama will lose the
          election. Its structure still favors him. But the momentum that was building for greater
         Democratic Party gains has been thwarted and will be difficult if not impossible to
         recreate. Obama's performance has inflicted invisible damage on the party—what will
         not happen.
      10.The responsibility for stopping the bleeding rests squarely with Biden, not Obama.
         Obama cannot try to redo his debate on the fly the day after. He would appear as
         attempting to do what he failed to do. He would underscore his failure. Biden is the next
         up with the vice presidential debate and should bear the burden of carrying the attack. He
         should attack now, today, and continue ceaselessly into the debate on October 11.
      11.What Biden should say: Romney said in the debate that no one is entitled to their own
         facts. That begins with Romney. We cannot have an honest debate unless we deal in facts
         and the truth. So let's clear away the falsehoods. Romney's falsehoods fall into two
         categories: One, brazen lies, and, two, 180 degree reversals of previous positions while
         claiming they were his all along. Let's go through Romney's top ten lies...
      12.Having done this for a week, Biden should open his debate with this same statement,
         declaring that there cannot be an honest debate until the falsehoods are cleared away. He
         must do this in the debate even if he's been doing this for the previous week in order to
         reach the largest possible audience to define Romney as a liar, to demonstrate that his
         "victory" in the first debate was based on falsehoods and therefore illegitimate, and to
         present an aggressive, spirited case in contrast to Obama's listless performance.
      13.Biden must do this now. Democrats cannot wait for Obama's next debate in two weeks.
         If Biden does this work, he will reverse Romney's gain and establish the basis for Obama
         to give a very different kind of performance to project strength without having to do all
         the remedial labor in the second debate.
      14.Biden must articulate the gravity of the election, the immense stakes. After defining
         Romney the liar, he must state the theme that the Obama administration has fought
         against relentless Republican obstruction to lay the foundation for recovery and that the
         administration has plans to secure and expand it, and create a new period of growth and
         progress. And: Romney and the Republicans are waging an assault on the rights of
         Americans—women's rights, Hispanics aspiring to the American Dream, every citizen
         who has the constitutional right to the vote, and every citizen who now will have the right
         to health care. Obama will protect the rights of all Americans; Romney wants to take
         them away. Obama will go forward; we can't go back.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792452 Date: 01/29/2016
