      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764811 Date: 01/29/2016



                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                    B6


From:                              sbwhoeop
Sent:                              Wednesday, October 14, 2009 6:01 PM
To:
Subject:                           FYI: Tony... Sid


H: This is the take of the Guardian today on Berlusconi's endorsement of Tony for EU president. Don't know if
you have proper venue or method to make your own comment but I'm sure it would be helpful. Will learn more
from Shaun about subsequent meetings. Sid




Silvio Berlusconi backs Tony Blair for EU
presidency
Italian prime minister Silvio Berlusconi has backed old friend Tony Blair for EU presidency. Photograph: Stefano
Rellandini/Reuters
Tony Blair's bid for the presidency of Europe may have been struggling to make headway, but today it hit a rock when he
won the endorsement he must secretly have been dreading.
In a letter published in an Italian newspaper, Silvio Berlusconi threw his less than colossal moral authority behind his old
friend's candidacy. The man who promised to put Britain "at the heart of Europe", but chose to stay out of the euro and
maintain border controls, had "all his papers in order to become the first president of the European council [of ministers]
under the terms of the Lisbon treaty", the Italian prime minister declared.
Signalling what could prove a fatal blow to the Blair cause, Berlusconi, whose own incursions into Europe have included
comparing a German MEP to a Nazi concentration camp guard, vowed: "I and my government will make every effort to
ensure that a great political heritage is not wasted." Congratulating the editor of the centre-right daily II Foglio on an
editorial supporting Blair, he listed his qualities as "courage, steadiness [and] prudence, always exercised without
indecision".                      •
Like all great political friendships, the one between Blair and Berlusconi was troubled by the odd frisson. But Italian and
British officials alike will attest that the rapport between them was real. Someone present at one of their convivial
encounters told the Guardian that Berlusconi had been quite unable to contain his admiration for the British leader.
"You know, Tony?" he blurted out. "If you were a woman, I'd ask you to marry me." According to the source, Blair replied:
"You know, Silvio? If you were as rich as you are, I think I'd accept."




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764811 Date: 01/29/2016
