      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783212 Date: 01/29/2016




                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                    B1,B5,1.4(D),B6


From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Tuesday, September 20, 2011 11:03 PM
To:                                H
Subject:                           Fw: another Wiki cables story -- the Seychelles and US Reaper drones

  Classified by DAS, A/GIS, DoS on 01/29/2016 — Class: CONFIDENTIAL — Reason: 1.4(D) — Declassify on:
  09/19/2026


From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Tuesday, September 20, 2011 10:07 PM
To: Carson, Johnnie; Wharton, David B; Mills, Cheryl D; Kennedy, Patrick F; Mull, Stephen D; Blake, Robert 0; Benjamin,
Daniel S
Cc: Smith, Dana S; Zeya, tiara S; Naranjo, Brian R
Subject: Re: another Wild cables story -- the Seychelles and US Reaper drones

The WaPo article just posted:

U.S. building secret drone bases in Africa, Arabian Peninsula, officials say
By Craig Whitlock and
Greg Miller,

Tuesday, September 20, 9:14 PM

The Obama administration is assembling a constellation of secret drone bases for counterterrorism operations in the
Horn of Africa and the Arabian Peninsula as part of a newly aggressive campaign to attack al-Qaeda affiliates in Somalia
and Yemen, U.S. officials said.

One of the installations is being established in Ethi o pia, a U.S. ally in the fight against al-Shabab, the Somali militant
group that controls much of the country. Another base is in the Seychelles, an archipelago in the Indian Ocean, where a
small fleet of "hunter killer" drones resumed operations this month after an experimental mission demonstrated that
the unmanned aircraft could effectively patrol Somali territory from there.

The U.S. military also has flown drones over Somalia and Yemen from bases in Djibouti, a tiny African nation at the
junction of the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden. In addition, the CIA is building a secret airstrip in the Arabian Peninsula so
it can deploy armed drones over Yemen.

The rapid expansion of the undeclared drone wars is a reflection of the growing alarm with which U.S. officials view the
activities of al-Qaeda affiliates in Yemen and Somalia, even as al-Qaeda's core leadership in Pakistan has been
weakened by U.S. counterterrorism operations.

The U.S. government is known to have used drones to carry out lethal attacks in at least six countries: Afghanistan, Iraq,
Libya, Pakistan, Somalia and Yemen. The negotiations that preceded the establishment of the base in the Republic of the
Seychelles illustrate the efforts the United States is making to broaden the range of its drone weapons.

The island nation of 85,000 people has hosted a small fleet of MQ-9 Reaper drones operated by the U.S. Navy and Air
Force since September 2009. U.S. and Seychellois officials have previously acknowledged the drones' presence but have
stated their primary mission was to track pirates in regional waters. But classified U.S. diplomatic cables show that the
unmanned aircraft have also conducted counterterrorism missions over Somalia, about 800 miles to the northwest.

The cables, obtained by the anti-secrecy group WikiLeaks, reveal that U.S. officials asked leaders in the Seychelles to

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783212 Date: 01/29/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783212 Date: 01/29/2016




keep the counterterrorism missions a secret. The Reapers are described by the military as "hunter-killer" drones
because they can be equipped with Hellfire missiles and satellite-guided bombs.

To allay concerns among islanders, U.S. officials said they had no plans to arm the Reapers when the mission was
announced two years ago. The cables show, however, that U.S. officials were actively thinking about weaponizing the
drones.

During a meeting with Seychelles President James Michel on Sept. 18, 2009, American diplomats said the U.S.
government "would seek discrete [sic], specific discussions ... to gain approval" to arm the Reapers "should the desire
to do so ever arise," according to
a cable summarizing the meeting. Michel concurred, but asked U.S. officials to approach him exclusively for permission
"and not anyone else" in his government, the cable reported.

Michel's chief deputy told a U.S. diplomat on a separate occasion that the Seychelles president "was not philosophically
against" arming the drones, according to another cable. But the deputy urged the Americans "to be extremely careful in
raising the issue with anyone in the Government outside of the President. Such a request would be 'politically extremely
sensitive' and would have to be handled with 'the utmost discreet care."

A U.S. military spokesman declined to say whether the Reapers in the Seychelles have ever been armed.

"Because of operational security concerns, I can't get into specifics," said Lt. Cmdr. James D. Stockman, a public affairs
officer for the U.S. Africa Command, which oversees the drone base in the Seychelles. He noted, however, that the MQ-
9 Reapers "can be configured for both surveillance and strike."

A spokeswoman for Michel said the president was unavailable for comment.

Jean-Paul Adam, who was Michel's chief deputy in 2009 and now serves as minister of foreign affairs, said U.S. officials
had not asked for permission to equip the drones with missiles or bombs.

"The operation of the drones in Seychelles for the purposes of counter-piracy surveillance and other related activities
has always been unarmed, and the U.S. government has never asked us for them to be armed," Adam said in an e-mail.
"This was agreed between the two governments at the first deployment and the situation has not changed."

The State Department cables show that U.S. officials were sensitive to perceptions that the drones might be armed,
noting that they "do have equipment that could appear to the public as being weapons."

To dispel potential concerns, they held a "media day" for about 30 journalists and Seychellois officials at the small, one-
runway airport in Victoria, the capital, in November 2009. One of the Reapers was parked on the tarmac.

"The Government of Seychelles invited us here to fight against piracy and that is its mission," Craig White, a U.S.
diplomat, said during the event. "However, these aircraft have a great deal of capabilities and could be used for other
missions."

In fact, U.S. officials had already outlined other purposes for the drones in a classified mission review with Michel and
Adam. Saying that the U.S. government "desires to be completely transparent," the U.S. diplomats informed the
Seychellois leaders that the Reapers would also fly over Somalia "to support ongoing counter-terrorism efforts," though
not "direct attacks," according to a cable summarizing the meeting.

U.S. officials "stressed the sensitive nature of this counter-terrorism mission and that this not be released outside of the
highest ... channels," the cable stated. "The President wholeheartedly concurred with that request, noting that such
issues could be politically sensitive for him as well."

The Seychelles drone operation has a relatively small footprint. Based in a hangar located about a quarter-mile from the

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783212 Date: 01/29/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783212 Date: 01/29/2016



main passenger terminal at the airport, it includes between three and four Reapers and about 100 U.S. military
personnel and contractors, according to the cables.

The military operated the flights on a continuous basis until April, when it paused the operations. They resumed this
month, said Stockman, the Africa Command spokesman.

The U.S. aim of constructing a constellation of bases in the Horn of Africa and Arabian Peninsula is to create overlapping
circles of surveillance in a region where al-Qaeda offshoots could emerge for years to come, U.S. officials said.

The locations "are based on potential target sets," said a senior U.S. military official. "If you look at it geographically it
makes sense — you get out a ruler and draw the distances [drones] can fly and where they take off from."

One U.S. official said that there had been discussions about putting a drone base in Ethiopia for as long as four years, but
that plan was delayed because "the Ethiopians were not all that jazzed." Other officials said that Ethiopia has become a
valued counterterrorism partner because of threats posed by al-Shabab.

"We have a lot of interesting cooperation and arrangements with the Ethiopians when it comes to intelligence collection
and linguistic capabilities," said a former senior U.S. military official familiar with special operations missions in the
region.

The former official said that the United States relies on Ethiopian linguists to translate signals intercepts gathered by U.S.
agencies monitoring calls and e-mails of al-Shabab members. The CIA and other agencies also employ Ethiopian
informants who gather information from across the border.

Overall, officials said the cluster of bases reflects an effort to have wider geographic coverage, greater leverage with
countries in the region and backup facilities if individual airstrips are forced to close.

"It's a conscious recognition that those are the hot spots developing right now," said the former senior U.S. official.




From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Monday, September 19, 2011 09:42 PM
To: Carson, Johnnie; Wharton, David B; Mills, Cheryl D; Kennedy, Patrick F; Mull, Stephen D; Blake, Robert 0; Benjamin,
Daniel S                                                                                                              1.4(D)
Cc: Smith, Dana S; Zeya, Uzra S; Naranjo, Brian R                                                                     B1
Subject: Re: another Wiki cables story -- the Seychelles and US Reaper drones

Johnnie -
                                                                                   DoD is doing likewise.


From: Carson, Johnnie
Sent: Monday, September 19, 2011 08:56 PM
To: Hammer, Michael A; Wharton, David B; Mills, Cheryl D; Kennedy, Patrick F; Mull, Stephen D; Blake, Robert 0;
Benjamin, Daniel S
Cc: Smith, Dana S; Zeya, Uzra S; Naranjo, Brian R
Subject: Re: another Wiki cables story -- the Seychelles and US Reaper drones

Mike:                                                                                                                            B5

Johnnie


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783212 Date: 01/29/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783212 Date: 01/29/2016




From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Monday, September 19, 2011 12:53 PM
To: Carson, Johnnie; Wharton, David B; Mills, Cheryl D; Kennedy, Patrick F; Mull, Stephen D; Blake, Robert 0; Benjamin,
Daniel S
Cc: Smith, Dana S; Zeya, Uzra S; Naranjo, Brian R
Subject: Re: another Wiki cables story -- the Seychelles and US Reaper drones

Team -                                                                                 Am alerting DoD and NSS.           B5


From: Craig M Whitlock                                                                                                    B6
Sent: Sunday, September 18, 2011 09:59 PM
To: Hammer, Michael A
Subject: re: another cables story -- the Seychelles and US Reaper drones

Dear Mike,

I'm working on another national-security story involving some State Department cables, and was hoping you
could help, or point me in the right direction.

This story will report that the U.S. military (specifically, the U.S. Africa Command and the Navy) have been
deploying MQ-9 Reaper drones on secret counter-terrorism missions over Somalia from a base in the Republic
of the Seychelles.

The U.S. Africa Command had announced publicly in September 2009 that it was basing some Reaper drones
in the Seychelles as part of an anti-piracy mission. But several confidential State Department cables make clear
that the drones were also being used to perform counter-terrorism missions over the Horn of Africa and
Somalia, and that U.S. officials asked the president of the Seychelles to keep it secret.

Given that Wikileaks recently posted the remainder of its database of State Department cables to its publicly
accessible website, my editors have determined that it's no longer necessary for the Post to provide the State
Department with hard copies of the cables we are planning to cite in advance -- as we have done in the past.

Naturally, however, The Post would still like to get reaction or comment from the State Department for the
story. In the interest of transparency, the primary cables we plan to cite or publish are as follows:

09PORTLOUIS218
09PORTLOUIS271
09P ORTLOUIS292
09PORTLOUIS397

(As you may know, the U.S. government does not have an embassy in the Seychelles; the nearest U.S.
diplomats are based in Port Louis, Mauritius)

I have already been in touch with the U.S. Africa Command and the Navy to ask questions about operational
details of the Reaper drone deployments to the Seychelles.

But I did have some specific questions for the State Department that I was hoping you could assist with:

1) The cables state that a primary reason for basing the Reaper drones in the Seychelles was so they could
conduct counter-terrorism missions over Somalia and the Horn of Africa. Yet U.S. diplomats asked Seychelles
President Jean Michel and other Seychellois officials to keep this aspect of the program "discreet" or a secret.
Why did the State Department insist on the need for confidentiality? Was the publicly advertised anti-piracy

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783212 Date: 01/29/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783212 Date: 01/29/2016




mission a ruse or a cover story?

2) One cable (09PORTLOUIS292) indicates that one purpose for the drone flights over Somalia was to supply
force protection to AMISOM (African Union peacekeepers) forces in Somalia, but that this particular mission
was not disclosed to President Michel because he did not ask about it.
  Did the State Department or other U.S. officials subsequently inform the Seychellois government that the
drones were being used to supply force protection to AMISOM troops?

3) Although U.S. officials stated publicly in 2009 that the Reaper drones were unarmed, the cables make clear
that the U.S. government was contemplating arming the UAVs. In fact, two cables reveal that U.S. diplomats
told President Michel that they would notify him in advance if they decided to go ahead and arm the Reapers
with missiles.
  Did U.S. diplomats or other U.S. officials subsequently notify President Michel that UAVs based in the
Seychelles would be armed? if so, when?

We have not fixed a publication date for this article yet, but it is possible that we will publish as soon as
Wednesday.

Thanks again for your help and patience with these queries.

All the best,

Craig


Craig Whitlock
staff writer
The Washin on Post




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783212 Date: 01/29/2016
