     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798182 Date: 01/29/2016



                                                                                          RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                          B5



From:                           Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
Sent:                           Tuesday, January 29, 2013 8:33 AM
To:                             H
Subject:                        Syria and Yemen.



On Syria,


The humanitarian situation is dire, and today, President Obama approved and announced an additional $155
million in humanitarian aid - bringing the US total to $365 million - to underscore to the Syrian people and the
international community the U.S. commitment to assisting Syrians and other refugees in need of immediate,
lifesaving assistance as a result of Assad's brutality. It will buy flour and food for the hungry, winter tents,
clothing and heating, and badly needed medical supplies. It will also provide health care to victims of sexual
violence.

Much of this assistance will go directly to areas the regime no longer controls and through UN agencies to
regime controlled parts of Syria. It will also go to Syria's neighbors who are sheltering refugees.

We will work with the Syrian Opposition Coalition to identify needs and coordinate the provision of assistance
with their efforts.

The President also hopes this announcement will encourage other international donors to give as generously as
the American people have. (This announcement is timed to the International Humanitarian Pledging
Conference for Syria in Kuwait tomorrow).

The POTUS video transcript is pasted below the Dhow answer for reference.


On Yemen and the dhow: The dhow is now in Aden. They will offload the cargo and take photos
soon.


The United States provided support to the Government of Yemen in intercepting and inspecting a vessel
suspected of smuggling contraband into Yemen. We commend Yemeni authorities for this successful and
important interdiction effort.

I would refer you to the Government of Yemen for more details, but Yemeni authorities informed us the cargo
included MANPADs, explosives, mortars, RPGs and equipment for making IEDs.

Yemeni authorities are continuing to investigate the vessel's shipping route, [though it is suspected the ship
originated in Iran]. I would refer you to the GOY for details about the origin of the ship.


POTUS video transcript

For nearly two years, the Assad regime has waged a brutal war against the Syrian people -
murdering innocent men, women and children, in their homes, in bread lines, and at universities.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798182 Date: 01/29/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798182 Date: 01/29/2016




In the face of this barbarism, the United States has joined with nations around the world in calling for
an end to the Assad regime and a transition that leads to a peaceful, inclusive and democratic Syria,
where the rights of all Syrians are protected. We've worked to isolate Assad and his regime; impose
sanctions that starve the regime of funds; recognize the Syrian Opposition Coalition as the legitimate
representative of the Syrian people; call for accountability for perpetrators of atrocities; and provide
humanitarian relief to Syrians in need.

The relief we send doesn't say "Made in America," but make no mistake — our aid reflects the
commitment of the American people. American aid means food and clean water for millions of
Syrians. American aid means medicine and treatment for hundreds of thousands of patients in
Damascus, Dar'a and Horns. It means immunizations for one million Syrian children. American aid
means winter supplies for more than half a million people in Aleppo, Horns and Dayr az Zawr. And
we're working with allies and partners so that this aid reaches those in need.

Today, we're taking another step. I've approved an additional $155 million in humanitarian aid for
people in Syria and refugees fleeing the violence. Here, I want to speak directly to the people of
Syria. This new aid will mean more warm clothing for children and medicine for the elderly; flour
and wheat for your families and blankets, boots and stoves for those huddled in damaged
buildings. It will mean health care for victims of sexual violence and field hospitals for the
wounded. Even as we work to end the violence against you, this aid will help address some of the
immediate needs you face each day.

This new commitment will bring America's total humanitarian aid to Syria to $365 million—making
us the largest single donor of humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people. Today, I also call on the
international community to do more to help these Syrians in need, and to contribute to the latest UN
humanitarian appeal.

We're under no illusions. The days ahead will continue to be very difficult. But what's clear is that
the regime continues to weaken and lose control of territory. The opposition continues to grow
stronger. More Syrians are standing up for their dignity. The Assad regime will come to an end. The
Syrian people will have their chance to forge their own future. And they will continue to find a
partner in the United States of America.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798182 Date: 01/29/2016
