UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016




                                                                                       RELEASE IN
                                                                                       FULL




         An Uncertain Spring
                          Carving out the first
                                  No Kill Zones




                                             Qalaat AI-Shgur, Idlib Governorate




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016




  An unusually cold winter gave way to an uncertain spring in the mountainous folded
  border region of northwest Syria as conditions remained tense, but for the moment free
  of killing and personal uncertainty. The first No Kill Zone had been secured in the rising
  hills of Idlib Governorate along the frontier with Turkey. This governorate abuts
  Turkey's Hatay Province, previously a Syrian governorate early in the last century. A
  number of minorities in the northwest reflect this recent history as their populations
  straddle the Turkish-Syrian frontier with relations in both countries.

  Serious moves to establish safe zones began after the failure of the Kofi Annan
  ceasefire in April. By the middle of the month it had become clear that the Damascus
  regime was in a fight to prevail, to put the lid back on and re-establish a condign
  climate. Conditions deteriorated further and Syrians continued to flee shelled cities and
  towns as the White House began to look for an alternative to diplomatic initiatives.

  The DoD continued to frame the Syrian Conflict in conventional military terms as critics
  began to point out flaws in DoD's assessments; staffers at the White House began
  soliciting opinions outside of the Administration. They started with the decisive insight
  that the safety of Syrians had to be the objective of any action undertaken, much less
  those of a kinetic nature.

  The specter of the conflict exploding open sectarian fissures as the Assad regime
  deliberately exacerbated ethnic relations kept the international community on edge.
  That the conflict could erupt into civil war began to loom large in many observers'
  analysis. The fighting continued to spill over into Turkey, Lebanon, and Jordan while
  Syrian Kurdish threats to splinter off and form a rump state in Al-Hasakah Governorate
  resurfaced to percolate in the northeast. Early reports of revenge executions finally
  prompted the White House to act.1

  A contributing factor was the insistent voice of Senator John McCain to act and the
  previously cautious Romney campaign making bold foreign policy comments on the lack
  of leadership. Heeding McCain's pleas was viewed as politically acquiescent, so the
  Administration began to reconsider options such as the idea of "no kill zones."

  This approach was more collaborative and less of a 'doing to' the Syrian regime and
  'doing for' Syrians seeking both relief and regime change. It advocated working with
  civilian resistance inside Syria to establish No Kill Zones, or universal safety areas to
  protect the population from the Damascus regime. Local battalions would liaison with
  military attaches assigned to a US Consular mission to the LCC, or Local Coordinating
  Committee.

  DoS analysts who saw the Arab Spring as a tectonic shift in dynamics that were
  underpinned by the youthful demographics of Arab countries saw the strategic


  1 The Responsibility To Protect, Report of the International Commission on Intervention
  and State Sovereignty - December 2001




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016




  imperatives in shifting perceptions of the United States over the medium term as these
  youthful cohorts matured.2

  Active US involvement at such a late stage was also propelled by a NIE that indicated
  revenge killings were already occurring and likely to escalate as the balance of control
  shifted on the ground in Syria. That same NIE indicated that 1.5 million Syrians were
  internally displaced.

  By the beginning of May a reorientation of US policy regarding Syria was becoming
  visible. Jeffrey D. Feltman, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs, and
  Lt. Gen. Michael T. Flynn, newly appointed Director of National intelligence, jointly led
  the ad hoc action team assembled by the White House. The first step taken was to
  ramp up the US Mission to Syria under Ambassador Robert S. Ford and assign FSOs
  from the region.to fill out an expanded consular effort directed to the 14 LCCs related to
  the governorates in Syria. This outreach effort was essentially military satcom and web-
  based in the weeks before the first Foreign Service officer was safely on the ground in
  Syria.

  The Mission effort also included FSOs being tasked to specific issues and concerns
  such as displaced women and children, as an institutional means of maintaining clarity
  in a fluid situation.3 These FSOs reported directly to what was now called the United
  States Diplomatic Mission to the Levant.

  Functional relations were established with the negotiation and agreement of a
  Memorandum of Understanding with two LCCs in Idlib Governorate, Saragib LCC and
  Idlib LCC as well as representatives from Jisr ash-Shughur. Rebel unit commanders
  from the Osama bin Zaid, Suleiman, Harmoush, and Hamza Battalions were also
  consulted as observers to the MOU negotiations. Such ad hoc diplomatic negotiations
  with LCCs utilized the concept of MOU based granular recognition for towns and cities.

  Although this approach was difficult compared to conventional approaches, this was
  seen as preferable to allowing for an 'intestate' vacuum as Damascus lost control over
  Syria, leading to a failed state condition extending over a shifting geography that would
  persist over an indeterminate time span.

  Sectarian killings were becoming news items as consular officials reminded Syrian
  counterparts and media alike that the US position regarding Syria was about No Kill
  Zones and Universal Public Safety, and the re-establishing of rule of law. Upon
  reviewing the mounting evidence of revenge killing and summary execution of soldiers
  by rebels, the White House came to the realization that R2P in a fluid situation simply



  2 The Heritage Foundation: Opinion of the US on the rise. Available at
  http://www.heritage.org/press/commentary/ed031005.cfm accessed 4.15.09
  3 July 8, 2011 Secretary Hillary Clinton Interview With PBS's Gini Reticker for "Women,
  War and Peace" Series



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016




  shifts with vulnerability; thus NKZs to protect EVERYONE, including from each other,
  became the stated Allied common denominator.4

  In a practical sense, the US was linking legitimacy to the ability to ensure or
  secure public safety and rule of law, a position that has been endorsed by prominent
  international lawyers and Syrian opposition members.5 The template crafted for
  negotiating MOUs with LCC civilian leadership within Syria set forth a set of criteria with
  regard to protecting all people within a zone, representing all groups in decision-making,
  and choosing peaceful protest over violence as conditions for recognition and support.
  The agreements went further in specifying benchmarks and agreed upon means of
  monitoring. They also laid a foundation for providing Syrians temporary travel
  documents similar to those issued in WW II to displaced persons.

  The consular effort began engaging the LCCs and local fighters in late May as newly
  assigned FSOs began emphasizing the support and recognition (limited) that would be
  forthcoming if the LCC and local resistance units agreed to creating a NKZ, or universal
  safe zone. This recognition of conditional sovereignty on the ground based on a
  demonstrated commitment to public safety for became the common glue of the different
  LCCs. As the number of No Kill Zones increased, governorates continued to slip away
  from Damascus' effective control.

  This new diplomatic approach was tied to a shift in FSA military tactics toward regime
  forces access to population centers. Denial of access provided for public safety and
  denied the regime control over people. It is a direct alternative both to challenging the
  Damascus regime and to seeking control over territory.




  4 VOICES FROM CIVIL SOCIETY 2011 International Coalition for the R2P
  5 A Strategy for Syria Under International Law: How to End the Assad Dictatorship
  While Restoring Nonviolence to the Syrian Revolution
  Chibli Mallat, Jane Mansbridge, Sadek Jalal al-Azm, Trudi Hodges, Mansoor al-Jamri,
  Ishac Diwan, Sharhabeel al-Zaeem, John J. Donohue, S.J., Yang Jianli, Ph.D.*, pp 147-
  48. Harvard International Law Journal Online March 2012 Volume 53




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016




    Qala'at al-Madiq - FSA firing stolen 9M133 Kornet AT missile at Syrian Army T-72 tank

  Concurrently, Ambassador Ford began initiatives to establish communications directly
  with Alawi, Druze, Assyrian, Syriac, Kurd, Armenian, and other minorities. Ford began
  the influence battle for minority support, in part by assigning UN observers with direct
  communications to SF advisors, LCCs and local battalions to minority areas near or
  within cordoned areas. Interlocutors were engaged inside Syria as well as the
  expatriate communities. An aspect of this outreach was countering the fear based
  propaganda campaign being waged by Syrian media and the Damascus 'Syrian
  Electronic Army'. Technologically adept nonviolent Resistance and bloggers were given
  monetary & non-monetary support to enable them to counter Syria's digital
  disinformation war

  Further east, the US Mission began working with Syrian Kurds, who were given an
  unambiguous statement of position from the US that Syria's borders would remain the
  same post-conflict. At Washington's behest, the Iraq KRG publicly supported the US
  position. At the same time the US Consul for Al-Hasakah Governorate made clear US
  intent to protect the rights of Kurds and other minorities and that full citizenship was part
  of that consideration. US diplomatic relations however must be with the Al-Hasakah
  Governorate LCCs.

  Functional relations were established with the negotiation and agreement of a
  Memorandum of Understanding with Al Hasaka and Qamishli LCCs. Al-Hasakah
  Governorate is located in the far northeast corner of Syria and Al-Hasakah has the
  second highest population in the governorate with most being Assyrian and Syriac
  Christians. Muslims in the city are mainly Kurds and Bedouin. Qamishli is




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016




            Syrian refugees fleeing ldlib Governorate at Turkish Border on Hatay Province

  also mixed, with Kurds being more prominent. A community of Armenians also made
  Qamishli their home. They are descendents of Armenians who remained after the
  expulsions and mass killings as the Ottoman Empire collapsed.

  During quiet concurrent negotiations in Erbil, Iraq additional codicils were written into
  the MOU crafted for the Syrian KNC. An airbridge was set up with Erbil, KRG, Iraq as
  the terminus. From Erbil the aid was transported by ground into northeast Syria's
  Kurdish regions via the M-4 motorway.

  As a confidence building measure, consular officials worked with Syrian Kurds on
  additional quid pro quo aid deals to send on more aid to Bedouin areas to the west such
  as Dier ez-Zor on the Euphrates and Al Raqqah, southeast of Aleppo.

  SF advisors on the ground continued to discourage the local units from going on the
  offensive for the sake of militarily defeating Damascus via attrition as opposed to
  degrading LOCs and Syrian Army fuel logistics, population denial and establishing No
  Kill Zones for all Syrians. SF advisors pointed out the nonproductive casualties that
  resulted from these non-ambush actions and the logistics the newly wounded required.
  By instructing at the same time the advisors emphasized that an effective defense is
  usually more sustainable than going on the offensive and going head to head with
  Syrian Army units. The LCCs threw their influence behind protecting civilians first, and
  taking the fight out of the urban areas. Cordons became bastions. No Kill Zones were
  now real.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016




                             Syrian Army tanks firing into Baba Amr neighborhood, Horns

  Feltman and Flynn agreed that integrating communications with the resistance within
  Syria was essential, and they reached out via the LCCs as the civilian authority. This
  approach established the Allied belief that rule of law and civilian authority over fighting
  units was critical to the post-conflict demobilization and reconstitution of the Syrian
  Armed Forces.

  By early July the communications infrastructure with the LCCs had become more robust
  and the US State Department opened up bandwidth for other participating nations to
  establish ad hoc relations with the LCCs. The assigning of a military attaché to each
  LCC consular effort proved critical in getting local resistance units to accept civilian
  authority as primary, and the establishment of NO Kill Zones to protect as the tactical
  objective. US military attaches also coordinated with the Saudi and Qatari SF advisors
  who were augmented with civilian contractors in a few areas.

  Military attaches also served to coordinate Allied assets with advisors. The advisors
  inside Syria coordinated the intel products flow and also served as monitors until the UN
  sent in public safety monitors in late June.

  Humanitarian Assistance - In early May the State Department began planning and
  consultation with other countries and their ability to take stabilized patients from patient
  flow. Incirlik Airbase became the distribution hub for patients needing further care in
  hospitals in Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE. Medical
  personnel began coordinating on how to collect patient data beginning inside Syria to
  begin managing patient flow fleeing Syria. This allowed medical and logistics managers
  to anticipate future needs and follow through care numbers to send on to receiving
  hospitals and to create and database patient flows starting inside Syria. By late
  summer a coordinated medical operation was functioning, and Syrian medical
  personnel who had fled the country were returning to secured NKZs and participating in
  the medical relief as well as attending to normal medical needs.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016




   Within days of establishing the first No Kill Zone, emergency medical evacuations
   began. The Landing Helicopter Dock LHD-4 USS Boxer was standing by at Iskenderun,
   Turkey and deployed soon after off the southern Turkish coast. Within hours USS Boxer
   began receiving both patients and medical personnel being flown to the ship. Further
   offshore, south of Cyprus, an unseen US CVN delayed its transit through the Suez
   Canal to a pre-assigned station in the Arabian Sea. In the event, this contingency
   proved unnecessary and the carrier group exited the area in late July.

   The USS Boxer is an amphibious warship and has medical and dental facilities capable
   of providing intensive medical assistance to 600 casualties, whether combat incurred or
   brought aboard ship during humanitarian missions. The ship's corpsmen also provide
   routine medical/dental care to the crew and embarked personnel. Major medical
   facilities include four main and two emergency operating rooms, four dental operating
   rooms, x-ray rooms, a blood bank, laboratories, and patient wards. In addition, three
   battle-dressing stations are located throughout the ship, as well as a casualty collecting
   area at the flight deck level. Medical elevators rapidly transfer casualties from the flight
   deck and hangar bay to the medical facilities.

   In a rapid augmentation of medical personnel, the Department of State utilized social
   media to send out an appeal for doctors, nurses, and medical technicians. In response
   medical professionals began staging at Incirlik Airbase in southern Turkey.

   The Defense Logistics Agency's Philadelphia medical unit organized initial load-outs for
   combat wounds treatment and medical supplies. One of the first tasks accomplished
   was sending out "Pharmacies in a Container" to replicate general population medical
   needs to prevent chronic illnesses from being life threatening.

   A multi-national working Committee was set up to design a system to manage patients'
   medical records so that they followed the patient to the receiving facility. It also
   addressed the consumables that receiving facilities for stabilized patients would burn
   through. The Committee initiated joint planning with FSA, Turkish military, and the
   Turkish Red Crescent as host to Intl org.

   The focus was assisting the FSA In developing a medical relief "ratline" out of Syria and
   transportation of patients from secured areas in Syria. The FSA also began setting up
   more forward aid stations inside Syria. Returning ratline personnel transported medical
   supplies into Syria. The FSA needed reminding that the medical lines of communication
   they established and manage SHOULD NOT be the same as what they are using for
   military logistics heading in-country.

   The reason should have been self-explanatory. The al-Assad regime had to be denied
   any pretext to attack the medical LOC. This effort also allowed the LCCs and FSA to
   incorporate civilians without military experience into a very critical mission for the Syrian
   citizenry.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016




  As the above operations wound down a year after the conflict subsided, the
  international Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief communities began to assess
  the combined effort. There were many lessons to be learned, and they understood that
  Syria would not be an isolated example in the decades to come.
  Military and civilian organizations alike grasped the need for forward thinking as an
  imperative if competence in a new operational dynamic was to be achieved.6




   6Health Care Logistics Response in a Disaster, Jerry D. Van Vactor, United States
   Army Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management
   Volume 7, Issue 1 2010




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792771 Date: 01/29/2016
