     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784443 Date: 01/29/2016



                                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                       B6



From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov >
Sent:                              Friday, April 29, 2011 3:20 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: WP story




From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Thursday, April 28, 2011 11:19 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Nides, Thomas R; Sullivan, Jacob )
Subject: Re: WP story running tmw

Article posted online:

U.S. military dismayed by delays in 3 key development projects in Afghanistan

By Rajiv Chandrasekaran, Thursday, April 28, 7:14 PM\

U.S. aid officials have been forced to delay three large development programs intended to support the American military
strategy in southern Afghanistan at a critical, make-or-break moment in the war.The initiatives, which are supposed to
support local governments, agricultural development and job-training efforts, have been held up by bureaucratic
missteps and funding cuts by Congress, according to senior U.S. officials. As a result, the programs will not begin until
much of the summer fighting season has concluded.Military commanders have voiced dismay that the initiatives, to be
run by the U.S. Agency for International Development, have been pushed back. "Our flank is exposed" without these
programs, said one senior U.S. officer in Afghanistan.After repeated complaints from the military, USAID is scrambling to
implement interim measures. Senior agency officials insist the delays will not affect the delivery of agricultural aid or
assistance for local governance."There will be no gaps in USAID's stabilization programming this summer," said Earl Gast,
the agency's director in Afghanistan.But in the case of the program to support local governments — designed to help
train officials and fund small reconstruction projects — the interim efforts will not be as robust as the delayed initiative,
according to development specialists familiar with the issue.With regard to the agriculture program — aimed at creating
more farm-related jobs — USAID is considering whether to extend a costly project that some of the agency's senior
leaders deem ineffective and wasteful in an attempt to mollify the military until a new assistance program is
implemented. The new program was supposed to have started six months ago.U.S. commanders and diplomats had
hoped that the new programs would assist in cementing recent military gains against the Taliban, which have come at a
significant cost of American lives. They believe that if Afghans have expanded access to jobs and can rely on local
governments for basic services, many will renounce the insurgency.This report is based on interviews with more than a
dozen civilian and military officials involved in Afghanistan policy. All insisted on anonymity, but for different reasons:
 USAID staff members critical of the agency's operations said they feared retribution if they were quoted by name;
 military officials said they were concerned about angering their civilian counterparts; and USAID officials authorized to
speak for the agency said they were unable to answer most questions on the record.A development specialist who
 recently completed a year-long assignment at USAID's mission in Kabul blamed the delays on a staff turnover rate of
 more than 85 percent a year, shifting priorities among senior officials responsible for setting policy, and an ongoing
 conflict within the agency between short-term programs and longer-range development work."There's been a failure of
 planning and management," the specialist said.USAID's problems have been compounded by months of budgetary
 uncertainty, followed by steep cuts to foreign aid in the 2011 spending bill that were demanded by House Republicans.
 The agency also is awaiting money from the 2010 budget because congressional requirements call for Secretary of State
 Hillary Rodham Clinton to certify that the Afghan government is making progress on women's rights and fighting
 corruption before those funds can be released.Although USAID officials said they do not know how much they will have
 to trim from their Afghanistan initiatives, some programs have already taken a hit because of the agency's preemptive

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784443 Date: 01/29/2016 •
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784443 Date: 01/29/2016




budget-cutting. The job-training program, for instance, was once envisioned as a $125 million project over 18 months; it
has been scaled back to between $25 million and $40 million.The delays have heightened tensions between U.S. civilian
and military officials in Afghanistan, prompting some senior officers to employ their own resources for development
projects.Top military commanders recently dispatched a contingent of U.S. troops to augment State Department and
USAID personnel in the provincial reconstruction team office in Kandahar. And the commanders have requested military
agribusiness development teams, composed of National Guard personnel who are farmers, because they feel there are
not enough civilian agriculture experts from the U.S. government in southern Afghanistan."The civilians had promised
they would do certain things, and we expected them to follow through," the senior officer said. "Now we've realized
that we can't depend on them, so we have to do it on our own."

Flaws in USAID program

USAID's agriculture problems in the south began with money. Too much of it.ln 2009, the agency issued a $300 million
grant to Arlington-based International Relief and Development (IRD) to help farmers in two southern provinces -
Kandahar and Helmand — improve productivity over just one year. The agency initially did not want to spend so much in
such a small area so quickly, but it was told to do so by Richard C. Holbrooke, who had been President Obama's special
envoy to Afghanistan and Pakistan until his death in December.The program's goal was to increase employment
opportunities by rehabilitating farms in both provinces. That was to be accomplished by paying for day-labor jobs to
clean canals so more water could get to crops, offering subsidized seeds so farmers would be encouraged to switch from
growing opium-producing poppies, distributing tractors and other equipment, and constructing a network of gravel
roads so growers could take their goods to market.Because many parts of the two provinces were too unsafe at the time
for civilian reconstruction workers, IRD concentrated its activities on a few districts, flooding those places with cash and
supplies. Some American officials and development specialists would later conclude that the influx distorted local
economies and created an unhealthy dependence on U.S. handouts.ln Kandahar province, farmers were given far more
seed than they needed, according to an evaluation conducted by an agricultural adviser working on the project. "Instead
of distributing one package of seeds and fertilizer per farmer, those who could be found ended up walking away with six
packages, perhaps more than any one individual could possibly contemplate planting," the report stated. The result was
that tons of seed as well as scores of free tractors were taken to neighboring Pakistan by farmers and sold for cash,
according to officials involved with the program."Trying to spend $300 million in one year was not realistic," said William
Slocum, a senior program officer at IRD.IRD's approach also riled Afghan officials. Local leaders halted a plan to hand out
thousands of water pumps in Helmand because of concerns that the pumps would suck irrigation canals dry, starving
farmers downstream. Those pumps are now sitting in warehouses, gathering dust.ln Kandahar, a program to pay
thousands of men to prune 50,000 acres of orchards — in an effort to increase the amount of fruit grown on the trees -
has been met with derision from the governor. "In my childhood, everyone was cleaning the canals. They were pruning
their trees. Nobody was paying them," said Kandahar Gov. Tooryalai Wesa, who holds a doctorate in agricultural
economics. "IRD is killing the culture here."Slocum and other IRD officials insist their program has been effective, noting
that they have provided 5.4 millions days of labor to unemployed men. They said their distribution of subsidized seeds
has generated an estimated $200 million in additional income for farmers across the south. "This is the beginning of
something really exciting," Slocum said.But within USAID, despite public pronouncements of success, reports of
overspending and poor oversight fueled deep concern about the program. "It was seriously flawed," a senior U.S. official
said.Although the program could have been extended, USAID decided not to do so. Instead, it asked interested
development contractors in May to submit proposals for a follow-on project, valued at $350 million, with the goal of
 having it operational by October, when IRD's one year had finished.To maintain impartiality in the contracting process,
 proposals are evaluated by a separate team of development specialists at USAID. According to a senior U.S. official
familiar with the matter, the team was set to award the follow-on project to IRD. When senior agency staff members
 learned of the decision, they decided to cancel the project rather than give it to IRD, the official said.USAID then set out
 to redesign the program, hoping that another firm would win it. But the agency has not yet awarded a contract for the
 new program. In the interim, it has given IRD three quarterly extensions on the existing program, the last of which is set
 to expire June 30."We're taking important lessons learned from the first generation of stabilization programs — what
 aspects have worked well and what didn't deliver the results we'd hoped for — and using that information to tailor
 future programming that will both meet the near-term goals of the military effort and also sustainably underpin longer-
 term stability in Afghanistan," Gast said.USAID had been reluctant to give IRD another extension, reasoning that a gap in
 agriculture assistance would be less bad than continuing a program it knew to be problematic. Several agency officials

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784443 Date: 01/29/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784443 Date: 01/29/2016




also believe that the current program's emphasis on day-labor projects is unsustainable and needs to end.But the
military has a different take on day labor. It regards cash-for-work as a critical component of U.S. counterinsurgency
operations, allowing the Americans to lure disaffected, unemployed young men away from Taliban recruiters. And when
it became clear to commanders that there would be a gap between the programs, they howled."The military thinks the
consequences of killing it far outweigh keeping it alive," the senior U.S. official said of the current agriculture program.
"AID sees it the other way.... It doesn't see its activities as key elements of a military campaign plan. It sees them as
contractual agreements. The military implications aren't the top priority."After pressure from the military and inquires
from The Washington Post, USAID told military commanders last week that it will ensure there is no stoppage of
agriculture assistance."AID feels bullied into this," the senior official said. "It feels powerless to say no to the
military."IRD officials said they have not been told that their program will be extended. As a consequence, they have
started to lay off staff members and shut down activities in Helmand and will begin doing the same in Kandahar over the
next few weeks. Restarting operations, Slocum said, could take six to eight weeks.

Communication gaps

With regard to its program to bolster local governments, USAID's problem stems from a failure to communicate.The
agency designed a $140 million initiative last year to help stabilize areas in the south in the wake of military operations
to clear out insurgents. The new program, which was supposed to begin this spring, was aimed in part at coordinating
what have been disparate and overlapping efforts to train local officials and fund small reconstruction projects. In one
part of Kandahar city, USAID recently discovered that it had several contractors "doing the same thing," one senior
agency official said.ln November, USAID released an outline of the new program and solicited bids from contractors. It
publicly identified the Afghan government's Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development as its partner for the
program.But it was only after the release of that outline that USAID presented the program to senior leaders at the
ministry — to ask for a single person to participate on a team evaluating bids.The Afghans balked, saying that they had
not been consulted in a substantive way during the design of the program, despite repeated declarations from senior
U.S. officials that they want to work in partnership with the Afghan government. Fearful of an angry reaction from
President Hamid Karzai, the agency withdrew the solicitation and spent weeks working with the ministry to revise the
program."This delay was 100 percent preventable," said the development specialist, who recently left USAID. "They
could have reached out and worked with the ministry much, much earlier."The do-over will postpone the start of the
program by at least four months, according to agency documents. Although USAID officials insist they will be able to
expand other projects to fill the gap between the new stabilization program and an existing local-government program,
which is in the process of shutting down, development specialists said the lack of a seamless transition between the two
initiatives could lead critical Afghan staff members to quit, taking with them valuable institutional knowledge."If you're
looking at this in terms of counterinsurgency, and trying to partner and plan with the military, the civilians aren't doing
their jobs properly," the specialist said.


From: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Thursday, April 28, 2011 10:28 PM
To: Nides, Thomas R; Sullivan, Jacob J; Hammer, Michael A
Subject: Fw: WP story running tmw




From: Feldman, Daniel F
Sent: Thursday, April 28, 2011 10:20 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Klevorick, Caitlin B
Subject: WP story running tmw




From: Darcy, Shannon M
Sent: Thursday, April 28, 2011 10:08 PM
To: Anderson, Lars (LPA/AA); Carey, James (OAPA/SPME); Bommer, Ashley F; Hammer, Michael A;
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784443 Date: 01/29/2016
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784443 Date: 01/29/2016




'shawn s._turner                                                  E Ray, Diane (OAPA/AF); Whelan, Moira (LPA/AA);
Hubbar7d, Benjamin (AID.A); Albert, Joshua (LPA/CL); Feinstein, Barbara (LPA/AA); Thier, Alex (OAPA/OD); Schimpp,
Michele J (OAPA/OD); Pryor, Jeanne Marie (OAPA/AF); Smith, Dana S; Steinberg, Donald (AID/A); Harper, Ryan (AID/A);
Feldman, Daniel F; Hach Nayyera
Subject: Re: Just checking in on your story

Lars,

Can you please send around the latest Talking Points?

From: Anderson, Lars (LPA/AA) [mailtolaanderson@usaid.gov]
Sent: Thursday, April 28, 2011 09:39 PM
To: Carey, James (OAPA/SPME); Bommer, Ashley F; Hammer, Michael A; Darcy, Shannon M;
'shawn_s._turner                                                 Ray, Diane (OAPA/AF); Whelan, Moira (LPA/AA);
Hubbard, Benjamin (AID.A); Albert, Joshua (LPA/CL); Feinstein, Barbara (LPA/AA); Thier, Alex (OAPA/OD); Schimpp,
Michele J (OAPA/OD); Pryor, Jeanne Marie (OAPA/AF); Smith, Dana S; Steinberg, Donald (AID/A); Harper, Ryan (AID/A)
Subject: Fw: Just checking in on your story


Fyi ... Washington post story on our stabilization programs in Southern Afghanistan will run in the morning


From: Rajiv Chandrasekaran
To: Anderson, Lars (LPA/AA)
Sent: Thu Apr 28 21:17:34 2011
Subject: Re: Just checking in on your story

Running tomrw

Rajiv Chandrasekaran
Senior Correspondent and Associate Editor
The Washington Post
Global mobile: +




    Original Message
 From: "Anderson, Lars (LPA/AA)" [laanderson@usaid.gov]
 Sent: 04/28/2011 04:04 PM AST
 To: Rajiv Chandrasekaran
 Subject: Just checking in on your story



Will your story run tomorrow? Thanks.

Lars Anderson
Press Director and Spokesman
U.S. Agency for International Development I USAID
+1 202.712.5174 I Laanderson@usaid.gov
                 cell
Visit us on the Web at www.usaid.gov




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784443 Date: 01/29/2016
