     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761254 Date: 01/29/2016

                                                                                            RELEASE IN PART B5




From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Thursday, April 16, 2009 12:06 PM
To:                              H
Subject:                         Fw: Release of OLC Memos




From: McDonough, Denis R.
To: Donoghue, Joan E; Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Meltzer, Daniel ; Craig, Gregory B. ; Brennan, John 0. ; Donilon, Thomas E. ; Sutphen, Mona K. ; DeRosa, Mary B.
Sent: Thu Apr 16 11:23:39 2009
Subject: Release of OLC Memos
Hello, Joan,




Thanks,
Denis.

                      Statement of President Barack Obama on Release of OLC Memos

The Department of Justice will today release certain memos issued by the Office of Legal Counsel between
2002 and 200 5 as part of an ongoing court case. These memos speak to techniques that were used in the
interrogation of terrorism suspects during that period, and the law requires their release.

My judgment on the content of these memos is a matter of record. In one of my very first acts as President, I
prohibited the use of these interrogation techniques by the United States because they undermine our moral
authority and do not make us safer. Enlisting our values in the protection of our people makes us stronger and
more secure. A democracy as strong as ours must reject the false choice between our security and our ideals,
and that is why these methods of interrogation are already a thing of the past.

But that is not what compelled the release of these legal documents today. While I believe strongly in
transparency and accountability, I also believe that in a dangerous world, the United States must sometimes
carry out clandestine activities and hold information that is classified for purposes of national security. I have
already fought for that principle in court and will do so again in the future. However, after consulting with the
Attorney General, the Director of National Intelligence, and others, I believe that exceptional circumstances
surround these memos and require their release.

First, the interrogation techniques described in these memos have already been widely reported. Second, the
previous Administration publicly acknowledged portions of the program — and some of the practices -
associated with these memos. Third, I have already ended the techniques described in the memos through an
Executive Order. As such, the classified nature of these memos has already been compromised, rendering moot
the national security mandate that they be kept secret. Withholding these memos would only deny the
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761254 Date: 01/29/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761254 Date: 01/29/2016




acknowledgment of information that is widely available. This could contribute to an inaccurate accounting of
the past, and fuel erroneous and inflammatory assumptions about actions taken by the United States.

In releasing these memos, it is our intention to assure those who carried out their duties relying in good faith
upon legal advice from the Department of Justice that they will not be subject to prosecution. The men and
women of our intelligence community serve courageously on the front lines of a dangerous world. Their
accomplishments are unsung and their names unknown, but because of their sacrifices, every single American is
safer. We must protect their identities as vigilantly as they protect our security, and we must provide them with
the confidence that they can do their jobs.

Going forward, it is my strong belief that the United States has a solemn duty to vigorously maintain the
classified nature of other activities and information related to national security. This is an extraordinarily
important responsibility of the presidency, and it is one that I will carry out assertively irrespective of any
political concern. There is a strong legal basis for maintaining the classified nature of clandestine activities that
are not characterized by the exceptional circumstances that surround these memos. As such, I will always do
whatever is necessary to protect the national security of the United States.

This is a time for reflection, not retribution. I respect the strong views and emotions that these issues evoke. We
have been through a dark and painful chapter in our history. But at a time of great challenges and disturbing
disunity, nothing will be gained by spending our time and energy laying blame for the past. Our national
greatness is embedded in America's ability to right its course in concert with our core values, and to move
forward with confidence. That is why we must resist the forces that divide us, and instead come together on
behalf of our common future.

The United States is a nation of laws. My Administration will always act in accordance with those laws, and
with an unshakeable commitment to our ideals. That is why we have released these memos, and that is why we
have taken steps to ensure that the actions described within them never take place again.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439
                                                     1           Doc No. C05761254 Date: 01/29/2016
