      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016



                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                             Wednesday, February 29, 2012 11:51 PM
To:                                'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                          Fw: Interview of the President by Jeff Goldberg


Pls print.

From: Sullivan, Jacob J [mailto:SullivanJJ@state.gov]
Sent: Wednesday, February 29, 2012 11:13 PM
To: H
Subject: Fw: Interview of the President by Jeff Goldberg

FYI



From: Rhodes, Benjamin J. [mailto:                                     J
Sent: Wednesday, February 29, 2012 07:05 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3
Subject: Fw: Interview of the President by Jeff Goldberg

Close hold. This is going to run friday morning



From: Suntum, Peggy (Contractor)            .
Sent: Wednesday, February 29, 2012 06:45 PM
Subject: Interview of the President by Jeff Goldberg

                                                  THE WHITE HOUSE

                                      Office of the Press Secretary



Internal
Transcript
                                                                                     February 29,
2012


                                        INTERVIEW OF THE PRESIDENT
                                             BY JEFF GOLDBERG

                                                    Oval Office


3:21 P.M. EST



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016




     Q    Well, thanks for doing this. I thought I would start with some
specific and then move to the general, and then go to the metaphysical.

     THE PRESIDENT: Once we get to the metaphysical I may get a little --

     Q    No, I'm looking forward to the metaphysical part. From what
we've read -- and I don't know if it's true or not what we've read -- the
Prime Minister of Israel is coming here to ask you for some specific
enunciations of red lines, of specific promises. And what I wanted to
understand from you first is -- on this very specific level -- what is
your message to the Prime Minister? What do you want to get across to
him? It seems like this is a very -- maybe they're all crucial meetings,
but this seems like a particularly --

     THE PRESIDENT: Well, first of all, I think it's important to say, I
don't know exactly what the Prime Minister is going to be coming with. We
haven't gotten any indication that there is some sharp ask that is going
to be presented.

     I think both the United States and Israel have been in constant
consultation about a very difficult issue, and that is the prospect of
Iran obtaining a nuclear weapon. This is something that has been one of
my top five foreign policy concerns since I came into office. We
immediately, upon taking over, mapped out a strategy that said we are
going to mobilize the international community around this issue to isolate
Iran, to send a clear message to them that there's a path they can follow
that allows them to rejoin the community of nations, but if they refused
to follow that path, that there would be an escalating series of
consequences.

     And three years later, we can look back and say that we have been
successful I think beyond most people's expectations -- that when we came
in, Iran was united and on the move, and the world was divided about how
to address this issue. Today the world is as united as we've ever seen it
around the need for Iran to take a different path on its nuclear program,
and Iran is isolated and feeling the severe effects of the multiple
sanctions that have been placed on it.

     At the same time, we understand that the bottom line is, does the
problem get solved? And I think Israel, understandably, has a profound
interest not just in good intentions but in actual results. And in the
conversations that I've had over the course of three years, but over the
course of the last three months, and three weeks, what I've emphasized is
that preventing Iran from getting a nuclear weapon isn't just in the
interest of Israel, it's profoundly in the security interest of the United
States; that when I say that we're not taking any option off the table, we
mean it; that we are going to continue to apply pressure until Iran takes
a different course.

     Q    Go back to this language, "all options on the table," because
you've probably said it in one form or another 50, 100 times. And a lot
of people believe it. The two intended main audiences, meaning two

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016




individuals, the Supreme Leader of Iran and the Prime Minister of Israel,
you could argue don't entirely trust that -- the intention behind that. I
mean, that's -- the impression that I get from the Israelis -- I haven't
talked to the Supreme Leader of Iran lately -- is that it's such a vague
expression at this point and maybe it's been used for so many years -- I
mean, is there some ramping up that you can give him that --

     THE PRESIDENT: I think the public understands it. I think the
Israeli people understand it. The American people understand it. I do
think the Iranians understand it. It means a political component that
involves isolating Iran. It means an economic component that involves
unprecedented and crippling sanctions. It means a diplomatic component in
which we have been able to strengthen the coalition that presents to Iran
various options through the P5-plus-1 and ensures that the IAEA is robust
in evaluating Iran's program. And it includes a military component. And I
think people understand that.

     Now, I think the Israeli government recognizes that as President of
the United States, I don't bluff. I also don't -- as a matter of sound
policy -- go around advertising exactly what our intentions are. But I
think both the Iranians and the Israeli government recognize that when the
United States says that it's unacceptable for Iran to have a nuclear
weapon, we mean what we say.

     And let me describe very specifically why this is important to
us. In addition to the profound threat that it poses to Israel, one of
our strongest allies in the world, in addition to the outrageous language
that has been directed towards Israel by the leaders of the Iranian
government, if Iran gets a nuclear weapon, it runs completely contrary to
my policies of nonproliferation. The risks of a Iranian nuclear weapon
falling into the hands of terrorist organizations are profound. It is
almost certain that other players in the region would feel it necessary
the get their own nuclear weapon, so now you have the prospect of a
nuclear arms race in the most volatile region in the world that's rife
with unstable governments and sectarian tensions. And it would provide
Iran the additional capability to sponsor and protect its proxies in
carrying out terrorist attacks because they are less fearful of
retaliation.

     Q      If you removed Israel from this picture, in other words --

     THE PRESIDENT: It would still be a profound national interest of the
United States to prevent Iran from getting a nuclear weapon. And --

     Q      Why has it become such a binary in a way?

     THE PRESIDENT: Meaning?

     Q    Meaning it's always defined now as it's Israel versus Iran, how
do we stop Israel from preempting, how do we stop Iran from --

     THE PRESIDENT: You know, I think --

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016




     Q      -- maybe it's Bebe talking about it for --

     THE PRESIDENT: I think it has to do with a legitimate concern on the
part of Israel that they are a small country in a tough neighborhood, and
as a consequence, even though the U.S. and Israel very much share
assessments of how quickly Iran could attain breakout capacity, and even
though there is constant consultation and intelligence coordination around
that question, Israel feels more vulnerable. And I think the Prime
Minister and the Minister of Defense and others feel a profound historic
obligation not to put Israel in a position where it cannot act decisively
and unilaterally to protect the state of Israel.

     I understand those concerns. And as a consequence, I think that it's
not surprising that the way it gets framed at least in this country, where
the vast majority of people are profoundly sympathetic to Israel's plight
and potential vulnerabilities, that articles and stories about it get
framed in terms of Israel's potential vulnerability.

     But I want to make clear that when we travel around the world and
make presentations, that's not how we frame it. We frame it as this is
something in the national security interests of the United States and in
the interests of the world community. And I assure you that Europe would
not have gone forward with sanctions on Iranian oil exports -- which are
very difficult for them to carry out because they get a lot of their oil
from Iran -- had it not been for their understanding that this is in the
world's interest to prevent Iran from getting a nuclear weapon.

     China would not have abided by the existing sanctions coming out of
the National Security Council, and other countries around the world would
not have unified around those sanctions, had it not been for us making a
presentation about why this is important to everybody, not just one
country.

     Q    I'm now going to commit the sin that I was just talking about by
bringing you back to Israel, and asking you, is it possible that the Prime
Minister of Israel has over-learned lessons of the Holocaust?

     THE PRESIDENT: I think that the Prime Minister has a profound
responsibility in protecting the Israeli people in a hostile
neighborhood. And I am certain that the history of the Holocaust and
anti-Semitism and brutality directed against the Jewish people for more
than a millennia weighs on him when he thinks about these questions.

     I think it's important to recognize, though, that the Prime Minister
is also head of a modern state that is mindful of the profound costs of
any military action. And in our consultations with the Israeli
government, I think they take those costs and potential unintended
consequences very seriously. So --

     Q    Do you think Israel could cause itself damage in America by
preempting militarily?

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016




     THE PRESIDENT: I don't know how it plays in America. I think --

     Q      Well, America is its main benefactor and ally.

     THE PRESIDENT: I think we in the United States instinctively
sympathize towards Israel, and I think political support for Israel is
bipartisan and is powerful.

     In my discussions with Israel, the key question that I ask is, how
does this impact their own security environment? I've said it publicly
and I say privately, ultimately, the Israeli Prime Minister and Defense
Ministers and others in the government, they have to make their decisions
about what they think is best for Israel's security. And I don't presume
to tell them what is best for them. But as Israel's closest friend and
ally, and as one that has devoted the last three years to making sure that
Israel has additional security capabilities, and has worked to manage a
series of difficult problems and questions over the last three years, I do
point out to them that we have a sanctions architecture right now that is
far more effective than anybody anticipated, that we know is having an
impact on Iran, that we have a world that is about as united as you get
behind those sanctions, and that our assessment, which is shared by the
Israelis, is that Iran does not yet have a nuclear weapon and is not yet
in a position to obtain an nuclear weapon without us having a pretty long
lead time before we know that they are making that attempt.

     In that context, our argument is going to be that it's important for
us to see if we can solve this thing permanently as opposed to
temporarily. And the only way, historically, that a country has
ultimately decided not to get nuclear weapons without constant military
intervention has been when they themselves take it off the table.

     That's what happened in Libya. That's what happened in South
Africa. And we think that without in any way being under illusion of
Iranian intentions, without in any way being naive about the nature of
that regime, they are self-interested and they recognize that they are in
a bad, bad place right now.

     It is possible for them to make a strategic calculation that, at
minimum, pushes much further to the right whatever potential breakout
capacity they may have. And that may turn out to be the best decision for
Israel's security.

     Now, these are difficult questions. And, again, if I were the Prime
Minister of Israel, I'd be wrestling with them. And as President of the
United States, I wrestle with them, as well.

     Q    Could you -- it would be interesting for you to shed some light
on your relationship with the Prime Minister. You met with him more I
think than any other foreign leader. It's assumed -- and maybe you
correct the record -- that you have somewhat of dysfunctional


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016




relationship. And I'm wondering if you could just sort of talk about what
it's actually like as opposed to these -- all the filters we get.

     THE PRESIDENT: I actually think the relationship is very functional,
and the proof of the pudding is in the eating. I mean the fact of the
matter is we've gotten a lot of business done with Israel over the last
three years. I think the Prime Minister, certainly the Defense Minister,
would acknowledge that we've never had closer military and intelligence
cooperation; that when you look at what I've done with respect to security
for Israel -- from joint training and joint exercises that outstrip
anything that's been done in the past, to helping to finance and to
construct the Iron Dome program to make sure that Israeli families are
less vulnerable to missile strikes, to ensuring that Israel maintains its
qualitative military edge, to fighting back against the de-legitimization
of Israel -- whether it's in the Human Rights Council or in front of the
U.N. General Assembly, or during the Goldstone Report, or after the flare-
up involving the flotilla -- the truth of the matter is, is that the
relationship has functioned very well.

     Q    Are you friends? Do you talk about things other than the
business --

     THE PRESIDENT: You know the truth of the matter is both of us have
so much on their plate -- our plate that there's not always a lot of time
to have discussions beyond business.

     But having said that, look, I think what is absolutely true is that
the Prime Minister and I come out of different political traditions that -


     Q      Your early experience with Jabotinsky is more
limited.    (Laughter.) That's clear.

     THE PRESIDENT: This is one of the few times in the history of U.S.-
Israeli relations where you have a government from the right in Israel at
the same time that you've got a center-left government in the United
States. So I think what happens then is that a lot of political
interpretations of our relationship gets projected onto it.

     But the one thing that I found in working with Prime Minister
Netanyahu is . we can be very frank with each other, very blunt with each
other, very honest with each other. And for the most part, when we have
differences, they're tactical and not strategic. Our objectives are the
same. Our objectives are a secure United States, a secure Israel, peace,
the capacity for our kids to grow up in safety and security and not have
to worry about bombs going off, and being able to promote businesses and
economic growth and commerce. And so we have a common vision about where
we want to go.

     At any given moment, as is true, frankly, with my relationship with
every other government and every other leader, there's not going to be a


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016




perfect alignment in terms of how we think the best way to achieve those
objectives are.

     Q    Let me bring it a little bit to Iran for a second and it's a
Bebe related question, in a way. I interviewed him three years ago right
before he became Prime Minister, and he described Iran as being run by a
"Messianic apocalyptic cult." Last week, General Dempsey referred to the
Iranian leadership as rational actors, or some formulation like that. And
I'm wondering, just a real interest, where you fall on that continuum --
if you feel that these people are so irrational that they might not act in
what we would understand their own best interest to be, or somewhere else
on that continuum?

     THE PRESIDENT: I think you're right to describe it as a
continuum. I think there is no doubt that they are isolated. They have a
very ingrown political system. They are founded and fueled on hostility
towards the United States, Israel, and to some degree, the West. And they
have shown themselves willing to go outside of international norms and
international rules to achieve their objectives, all of which makes them
dangerous. They have also been willing to crush the opposition in their
own country in brutal and bloody ways. And so I think it's entire --

     Q      Do you think that they are Messianic or --

     THE PRESIDENT: I think it's entirely legitimate to say that this is
a regime that does not share our worldview or our values. I do think what
probably General Dempsey was referring to is that as we look at how they
operate and the decisions they've made over the last three decades, that
they care about the regime's survival and they are sensitive to the
opinions of their people, and they are troubled by the isolation that
they're experiencing, and they know that, for example, when these kinds of
sanctions that we're seeing right now are applied, that it puts a world of
hurt on them. And they are able to make decisions based on trying to
avoid bad outcomes, from their perspective. And so if we are -- if they
are presented with options that lead to either a lot of pain, from their
perspective, or, potentially, a better path, then there is no guarantee,
but it is conceivable that they can make that (inaudible) decision.

     Q    It seems unlikely that a regime built on anti-Americanism would
want to appear to succumb to an American-led sanctions effort.

     THE PRESIDENT: I think the question here is going to be, what,
exactly are their genuine interests? Now, what we've seen, what we've
heard directly from them over the last couple of weeks is that nuclear
weapons are sinful and un-Islamic. And those are formal speeches from the
Supreme Leader and their Foreign Minister.

     Q      Do you believe his sincerity?

     THE PRESIDENT: My point here is not that I believe the sincerity of
the statements coming out of the regime. The point is that for them to
prove to the international community that their intentions are peaceful
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016




and that they are, in fact, not pursuing weapons is not inconsistent with
what they've said. So it doesn't require them to knuckle under to
us. What it does require is them to actually show to the world that there
is consistency between their.actions and their statements. And that's
something they should be able to do without losing face.

     Q    Can I flip this entirely and just ask the question on the
opposite end, which is why is containment not your policy? In the sense
that we contained the Soviet Union, North Korea --

     THE PRESIDENT: It's for the reason I described -- because you're
talking about the most volatile region in the world. It will not be
tolerable to a number of states in that region for Iran to have a nuclear
weapon and them not to have a nuclear weapon. Iran is known to sponsor
terrorist organizations, so the threat of proliferation becomes that much
more severe.

     The only analogous situation is North Korea. We have applied a lot
of pressure on North Korea as well and, in fact, today found them willing
to suspend some of their nuclear activities and missile testing and come
back to the table. But North Korea is even more isolated and certainly
less capable of shaping the environment than Iran is. And so the dangers
of an Iran getting nuclear weapons that then leads to basically a free for
all in the Middle East is something that I think would be very dangerous
for the world.

     Q      Do you see as an issue the accidental nuclear escalation?

     THE PRESIDENT: Absolutely.

     Q    Talk about that for a minute because that's an interesting,
unexplored Piece.

     THE PRESIDENT: Look, the fact is I don't know exactly -- why don't
you refine your question? I don't think any of it would be accidental. I
think it would be very intentional. If Iran gets a nuclear weapon, I
won't name the countries but there are probably four or five countries in
the Middle East who say, we are going to start a program and we will have
nuclear weapons. And at that point, the prospects of miscalculation in a
region that has that many tensions and fissures is profound. You
essentially then duplicate the challenges of India and Pakistan fivefold
or tenfold.

     Q      Right, with everybody pointing at everybody else.

     THE PRESIDENT: With everybody pointing at everybody else.

     Q    What I'm getting at specifically is -- that is a component of it
-- the other component is Israel. Let's assume there's a Hezbollah attack
on Israel. Israel responds into Lebanon. Iran goes on some kind of a
nuclear alert and then one, two, three --


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016




     THE PRESIDENT: The potential of escalation in those circumstances
are profoundly dangerous, and in addition to just the potential human
costs of a nuclear escalation like that in the Middle East, just imagine
what would happen in terms of the world economy. The possibilities of the
sort of energy disruptions that we've never seen before occurring and the
world economy basically coming to a halt would be pretty profound.

     So this is -- when I say this is in the U.S. interest, I'm not saying
this is something we'd like to solve. I'm saying this is something we
have to solve.

     Q    One of the aspects of this that is so interesting to me is that
it's about you in a way. I mean, I don't know if you know this or not,
but I've been in the camp of people arguing that it's plausible that
Barack Obama would use military power to stop Iran for the following
three, four reasons: The Republicans are trying to make this an issue --
and not only the Republicans -- saying that this man, by his disposition,
by his character, by his party, by his center-left outlook, is not going
to do that. I wanted to just sort of tease out a little bit this
subject. It's flummoxing a little bit --

      THE PRESIDENT: I guess -- look, if people --

      Q      What does a guy got to do?

      THE PRESIDENT: Look, if people want to say about me that I have a
.profound preference for peace over war, that every time I order young men
 and women into a combat theater and then see the consequences of some of
 them, even if they're lucky enough to come back, and that weighs on me --
 I make no apologies for that. Because anybody who is sitting in my chair
 who isn't mindful of the costs of war shouldn't be here, because it's
 serious business. These aren't video games that we're playing here.

      Now, having said that, I think it's fair to say that the last three
 years I've shown myelf pretty clearly willing, when I believe it is in
 the core national interest of the United States, to direct military
 actions, even when they entail enormous risks. And obviously, the bin
 Laden operation is the most dramatic, but al Qaeda was on its heels well
 before we took out bin Laden because of our activities and my direction.

      In Afghanistan, we've made very tough decisions because we felt it
 was very important in order for an effective transition out of Afghanistan
 to take place for us to be pushing back against Taliban momentum.

      So aside from the usual politics, I don't think this is an argument
 that gets a lot of legs. And by the way, it's not an argument that the
 American people buy. They may have complaints about high unemployment
 still and that the recovery needs to move faster, but you don't hear a lot
 of them arguing somehow that I hesitate to make decisions as Commander-in-
 Chief when necessary.



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016




     Q    I want to loop back finally to -- back to Israel in a
second. But can you just talk about Syria for a second as a strategic
issue? Talk about it as a humanitarian issue, as well. But it would seem
to me that one way to weaken and further isolate Iran is to remove or help
remove its only Arab ally.

     THE PRESIDENT: Absolutely.

     Q      And so the question is, what else can this administration be
doing?

     THE PRESIDENT: Well, look, there's no doubt that Iran is much weaker
now than it was a year ago, two years ago, three years ago. The Arab
Spring, as bumpy as it has been, represents a strategic defeat for Iran
because what people in the region have seen is that all the impulses
towards freedom and self-determination and free speech and freedom of
assembly have been constantly violated by Iran. They're no friend of that
movement towards human rights and political freedom. But more directly,
it is now engulfing, Syria, and Syria is basically their only true ally in
the region.

     And it is our estimation that Assad's days are numbered. It's a
matter not of if, but when. Now, can we accelerate that? We're working
with the world community to try to do that. It is complicated by the fact
that Syria is a much bigger, more sophisticated, and more complicated
country than Libya, for example --

     Q      You saved me a question, thank you.

     THE PRESIDENT: -- that the opposition is hugely splintered; that
although there's unanimity within the Arab world at this point,
internationally, countries like Russia are still blocking potential U.N.
mandates or action. And so what we're trying to do -- and the Secretary
of State just came back helping to lead the "Friends of Syria" group in
Tunisia -- is to try to come up with a series of strategies that can
provide humanitarian relief. But they can also accelerate a transition to
a peaceful and stable and representative Syrian government. If that
happens, that will be a profound loss for Iran.

     And by the way, this is part of --

      Q      Is there anything you could do to kick it faster?

     THE PRESIDENT: Well, nothing that I can tell you because your
classified clearance isn't good enough. (Laughter.)

     But this is part of, by the way, the context in which we have to
examine our approach towards Iran, because at a time when there is not a
lot of sympathy for Iran and its only real ally is on the ropes, do we
want a distraction in which suddenly Iran can portray itself as a victim,
and deflect attention from what has to be the core issue, which is their
potential pursuit of nuclear weapons?
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016




     That's an example of factors that when we are in consultation with
all our allies, including the Israelis, we raise because this is a game of
many dimensions that we're playing here, and we have to make sure --
scratch game. This is a strategy --

     Q      An issue.

     THE PRESIDENT: -- an issue with many dimensions, and we've got to
factor all them in to achieve the outcome that hopefully we all want.

     MR. RHODES: We've jot time for one more.

     Q      Okay, all right. I'm rounding third.

     Go back to the Israelis, for a second. A, off this last question, do
the Israelis understand that? When you talk to -- I'm trying to get some
insight into why -- and there have been obviously disagreements between
Israel and the U.S. before, but this is coming to a head about what the
Israelis see as an existential issue.

     And you're right, it's not about the ultimate goal. It's about, it
seems like, timing and method. But in those details are sort of the
entire dilemma. And so the question is, in your mind, have you brought
arguments to Netanyahu that have so far worked well? Or are you worried
that you're going to have another meeting where he's going to listen to
all of your rational pleas for time and space, and say, history is
weighing on me and I have to go do this now?

     THE PRESIDENT: Well, look, the --

     Q      You've become an expert on Israeli psychology.

     THE PRESIDENT: I think that in the end, Israel will make -- Israel's
leaders will make determinations based on what they believe is best for
the security of Israel, and that is entirely appropriate.

     When we present our views and our strategy approach, we try to put
all our cards on the table, to describe how we are thinking about these
issues. We try to back those up with facts and evidence. We compare
their assessments with ours, and where there are gaps, we try to narrow
those gaps. And what I also try to do is to underscore the seriousness
with which the United States takes this issue. And I think that -- I
think Ehud Barak understands it. I think that Prime Minister Netanyahu,
hopefully when he sees me next week, will understand it.

     Q      How serious --

     THE PRESIDENT: And one of the things that I like to remind them is
that every single commitment I have made to the state of Israel and its
security I have kept. I mean, part of your -- not to put words in your
mouth, but part of, I think. the underlying question is, why is it that

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016




despite me never failing to support Israel on every single problem that
they've had over the last three years, that there are still questions
about that?

      Q      That's a good way to phrase it.

     THE PRESIDENT: And my answer is, there is no good reason to doubt me
on these issues.

     Some of it has to do with the fact that in this country and in our
media, this gets wrapped up with politics. And I don't think that's any
secret. And if you have a set of political actors who want to see if they
can drive a wedge not between the United States and Israel, but between
Barack Obama and a Jewish American vote that has historically been very
supportive of his candidacy, then it's good to try to fan doubts and raise
questions.

     But when you look at the record, there's no "there" there. And my
job is to try to make sure that those political factors are washed away on
an issue that is of such great strategic and security importance to our
two countries. And so'when I'm talking to the Prime Minister, or my team
is talking to the Israel government, what I want is a hardheaded, clear-
eyed assessment of hbw do we achieve our goals.

      And our goals are in sync. And historically, one of the reasons that
 the U.S.-Israeli relationship has survived so well and thrived is shared
 values, shared history, the links between our peoples. But it's also been
 because it's been a profoundly bipartisan commitment to the state of
 Israel. And the flip side of it is that, in terms of Israel politics,
 there's been a view that regardless of whether it's a Democratic or
.Republican administration, the working assumption is we've got Israel's
 back. And that's something that I constantly try to reinforce and remind
 people of.

      Q    I mean, in three of our words, is that your message to the Prime
 Minister -- we've got Israel's back?

      THE PRESIDENT: That is not just my message to the Prime Minister,
 that's been my message to the Israeli people, and to the pro-Israel
 community in this country since I came into office.

      It's hard for me to be clearer than I was in front of the U.N.
 General Assembly when I made a full-throated defense of Israel and its
 legitimate security concerns than any President in history. Not, by the
 way, in front of an audience that was particularly (inaudible) --

      Q      Not Hadassah.

       THE PRESIDENT: -- to the message.

      So that actually won't be my message. My message will be much more
 specific about how do we solve this problem.

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016




  All right? Thanks, Jeff.

  Q      Thank you. I appreciate it.

                                                                          END
                                                                     4:05 P.M. EST




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794251 Date: 01/29/2016
