        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790799 Date: 01/29/2016




                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART B6


• From:                            Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
  Sent:                            Monday, June 4, 2012 9:52 AM
  To:
  Subject:                         Fw: WSJ: Germany Signals Crisis Shift



  FYI



  From: Nuland, Victoria 3
  Sent: Monday, June 04, 2012 09:06 AM
  To: Gordon; Philip H; 'ESherwood-Randall                                             ; Sullivan, Jacob 3       B6
  Subject: Fw: WSJ: Germany Signals Crisis Shift




  From: PA Clips [mailto:paclips@state.gov]
  Sent: Monday, June 04, 2012 06:32 AM
  To: PA-Monitoring-Group-DL; EUR-Press; EB-A-PD-DL
  Subject: WSJ: Germany Signals Crisis Shift

  EUROPE NEWS Updated June 3, 2012, 9:14 p.m. ET

  Germany Signals Crisis Shift

  Berlin Begins Outlining Conditions for Sharing More Risk With Other Countries in the Euro Zone

  Article

  By WILLIAM BOSTON



  BERLIN—Germany is sending strong signals that it would eventually be willing to lift its objections to ideas

  such as common euro-zone bonds or mutual support for European banks if other European governments

  were to agree to transfer further powers to Europe.



  If embraced, the move would deepen in fundamental ways Europe's political and fiscal union and represent

  one of the boldest steps taken by the bloc since the euro was launched. Germany has never before been

  willing to discuss the conditions it believes necessary to move toward assuming common risks within the euro

  zone. Now, although the end may be a long way off, it appears willing to discuss those conditions.



  "The more that other member states get involved with this development and are prepared to give up

  sovereign rights to get European institutions more involved, the more we will be prepared to play an active


        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790799 Date: 01/29/2016
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790799 Date: 01/29/2016



role in developing things like a banking union," a German official familiar with the discussions told The Wall

Street Journal. "You can't have one without the other."



Europe has been blocked from taking bold steps to stem the crisis and calm financial markets because

leaders can't bridge two fundamentally different approaches to the crisis. Countries such as France believe

Europe must create instruments such as euro bonds to place the burden of debt on many shoulders. Others,

especially Germany, say a further economic integration requires a common fiscal policy and transfer of

national sovereignty over budgets to Europe. Berlin wants all of these issues to be put into a broader

discussion about the future of Europe and the structure of the euro zone. Germany believes the parts of any

master plan for Europe can only be introduced together, not in isolation.



Behind the scenes, Europeans are working to pull together a "grand plan" as proposed at May's EU summit,

a senior European Union official said. He said Germany was "willing to play ball in a grand design but at the

obvious price of more transfer of sovereignty on fiscal matters." That, he said, was a tough requirement in

almost all member states and may also require changes to EU treaties. He said governments were seeking to

influence the approach to be taken at the next EU summit on June 28-29.




"Bottom line of it all: the game is on," he said.



Many of the ideas under discussion aren't new, but the sheer force of the resurgence of the euro crisis over

the past month is forcing European leaders to realize that their piecemeal approach to resolving the crisis is

failing.



Still, there is no guarantee that European leaders will overcome the differences they have failed to bridge in

the past. Any move to relinquish sovereignty over national budgets would also meet fierce resistance in

member states, fueling populist political parties and fierce constitutional battles over the rights of states. But

the idea, strongly advocated by German Chancellor Angela Merkel, that. the crisis must be used to create a

political union to bolster the euro may be gaining traction.



"The European Union needs to reinforce its architecture," said Spanish Premier Mariano Rajoy over the

weekend. "And this means a compromise to create a new European fiscal authority which would guide the




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790799 Date: 01/29/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790799 Date: 01/29/2016




fiscal policy in the euro zone, harmonize the fiscal policy of member states and enable a centralized control of

(public) finances."



At their informal summit on May 23, European leaders charged Herman Van Rompuy, the European Council

president, José Manuel Barroso, president of the European Commission, Mario Draghi, president of the

European Central Bank, and Jean-Claude Juncker, head of the Eurogroup, to pull together proposals for the

next summit that would help European leaders create a road map for discussion about the future European

architecture.



The issues on the table fall broadly into two categories. There are ideas such as creating joint European

bonds, a European -wide deposit insurance and more broadly a "banking union," which fall into the category
of mutual liability for sovereign debt and European banks. These are ideas French President Francois

Hollande backs, but have been anathema to Ms. Merkel unless power to enforce budget discipline is shifted

to Europe, which would mean a sacrifice of sovereignty.



Germany is pushing again for far-reaching European control of national budgets, a fiscal-policy union, which

would require member states to cede control of national budgets to some future European fiscal authority, an

idea France staunchly opposes. There is little chance of a breakthrough in June, but German officials said a

process is beginning.



"There will be no big bang at the June summit," said a German official. "But it would be a big step for Europe

if we succeed in creating a structure for the discussion, establishing a method, asking the right questions and

putting it all into a certain timetable hat would be significant for Europe."



Speaking to reporters at a summit of Baltic Sea Coast leaders last week, Ms. Merkel suggested she is willing

to engage in discussion about any idea on the table.



"Of course, it is possible to consider how we are going to develop over the next five to 10 years," she said.

 "But if we are constantly censuring our ideas it won't work."



German officials say everything is on the table, but no single element can be adopted on its own. To see the

 whole picture of what Europe will look like in the future, all the pieces of the puzzle are necessary. For the

 Germans, this means that it will never be possible for any German leader to agree to joint European bonds or


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790799 Date: 01/29/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790799 Date: 01/29/2016




insuring bank deposits from Ireland to the Iberian coast unless Berlin is assured it has a say in the national

fiscal policies in Europe. Germany is offering Europe a kind of quid pro quo and may be setting the stage for

a huge step forward in European integration.



One piece of the puzzle that is still missing is France. Now that all ideas are being put on the table, it is still

unclear if Mr. Hollande will soften his opposition to a tough, German-style fiscal union.



"European institutions have started working and we are mobilized to make sure this process yields results at

the late June summit," a senior French official said.



—Stephen Fidler in Brussels and David Gauthier-Villars in Paris contributed to this article.

Write to William Boston at william.boston@dowjones.com


DGH




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790799 Date: 01/29/2016
