     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792460 Date: 01/29/2016




                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                             B6


From:                          Sidney Blumenthal                                                              B6
Sent:                          Friday, October 5, 2012 12:22 AM
To:
Subject:                       Re: H: Because I like to waste my time. Sid
Attachments:                   biden_debate_memo_2_100412.docx



Yet another:




                                     CONFIDENTIAL



                                             October 5, 2012



For: John Martilla
From: Sidney Blumenthal
Re: Biden Debate (Memo 2)


   1. Biden should adopt a divide and conquer strategy in the debate with Paul Ryan that keeps him on the
      defensive and undermines Romney's motives while staying substantive. At the same time, Biden should
      force Ryan to admit his differences with Romney and that Romney embraces his right-wing panaceas.
      Ryan must be made into the instrument to define Romney as two-faced, hypocritical and dangerously far
      right. Biden can make Ryan do this work. Turn him into the witness against Romney.
   2. Biden should force Ryan to admit that Romney's statement about Obama cutting Medicare by $716
      million is not only false but that Ryan knows better and Romney should, too. That exact figure is, of
      course, in Ryan's budget. He knows that Obama has not cut Medicare, but is cutting waste, fraud, abuse
      and overcharging from providers. Biden: Why did Romney five times misrepresent that figure in the
      debate that appears in your own proposal? Have you never discussed this important proposal of yours
      with him? Does he not know where you stand? Does he agree or disagree with you? If he agrees with
      you, why did he attack your policy to try to damage the President? Is Romney completely unfamiliar
      with this policy, or is he misrepresenting it? Do you think you should bring your position to his attention
      perhaps again so he doesn't commit that mistake again?
   3. Romney stayed on taxes as much as possible during the first debate because he believed that issue most
      favored him and the Republicans. On Romney's claim that he doesn't have a tax cut for the wealthy that
      will blow a $5 trillion hole in the budget, Biden can push Ryan to the wall. Biden: You know and I
      know that the nonpartisan, independent Tax Policy Center reported that Romney's tax cut that would
      benefit the upper, upper bracket will blow a $5 trillion hole in the budget. You're the policy wonk;
      you've read the report. It's OK. You're among serious policy people up here. (Ryan will try to interrupt;
      don't let him.) And you know and I know that Romney says he'll fill this crater by closing loopholes and
      deductions, but that he hasn't said which ones. Come on, Paul, it's just the two of us up here. You can
      tell me: Is it the mortgage deduction he's going to get rid of? The charitable deduction? We know it's
       not that loophole for the windfall royalties for the big oil companies because he opposes that, right? But
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792460 Date: 01/29/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792460 Date: 01/29/2016




        if Romney hasn't shared this information about which deductions he'll eliminate with you maybe you
        should tell us that right now. You're the policy guy, so you can tell us. Let me get this straight: You are
        saying that Romney claimed before the whole country in the last debate that he has a well thought out
        plan but that in fact he has no actual hard numbers at all. Or is there a secret plan? Now, you've said you
        read that Tax Policy Center report on the $5 trillion Romney budget buster. So you also know that the
        Tax Policy Center experts; lacking any numbers from Romney, who won't provide them, tried to fill that
        immense $5 trillion hole by coming up with potential deductions that might be eliminated. And you
        know what? They couldn't do it. The numbers don't add up. It can't be done. The experts can't do it.
        Now, you have read that report, Paul? Have you told Governor Romney that his big tax plan just doesn't
        compute? Have you mentioned that report to Romney? How did that discussion go? Or did you not
        mention that the central policy of the entire Romney economic approach just doesn't add up?
   4.    Stay on Medicare as much as possible, as much as Romney kept his debate on taxes. Biden: Exactly
        when did Romney agree with your plan to turn Medicare into a voucher system? Tell us about that
        conversation. Did you convince him or was he already in favor of dismantling Medicare? Go through
        exactly who will pay more and how much under the Romney voucher plan that tears apart Medicare.
        Ryan will contest this. Throw Romney's quote at Ryan: "You aren't entitled to your own facts."
   5.    Romney's falsehoods during the first debate provide a road map for the second debate to use policies at
        Ryan. See: http://thinkprogress.org/politic s/2012/10/04/958801/at-last-nights-debate-romney-told-27-
        myths-in-38-minute s/
   6.    Go at Ryan's extreme positions, but always in the context of Romney, never in isolation. Biden:
        Romney is aware of your extreme position on women's rights, he vetted your positions, and he agrees
        with them, doesn't he? Enumerate Ryan's extreme positions on women's right and ask if Romney agrees
        with each one, starting with Ryan's sponsorship of the Personhood Amendment that would criminalize
        abortion, some forms of contraception and in-vitro fertilization.
   7.    Dream Act. Biden: Now, Paul, I know you admired Ronald Reagan and I watched your tireless support
        for George W. Bush. Ronald Reagan was for the equivalent of the Dream Act in his time. George W.
        Bush was for the Dream Act. But you and Romney think Reagan and Bush were wrong, don't you?
   8.    In foreign policy, Ryan will run through the talking points about U.S. weakness and decline under
        Obama. Biden: You know, I was a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which I chaired,
        for decades before I became Vice President. And I want to say as strongly as I can, demagogy about
        domestic policy is dishonest but demagogy about foreign policy is dangerous.




    Original Message
From: H <HDR22@clintonemail.com>
To: 'sbwhoeop
Sent: Thu, Oct 4, 2012 10:49 pm
Subject: Re: H: Because I like to waste my time. Sid

And because you care about our country.

From: Sidney Blumenthal [mailto
Sent: Thursday, October 04, 201 11:39 AM
To: H
Subject: H: Because I like to waste my time. Sid




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792460 Date: 01/29/2016
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792460 Date: 01/29/2016




                                  CONFIDENTIAL



                                         October 4, 2012



For: John Martilla
From: Sidney Blumenthal
Re: It Now Depends On Biden



  1. This is no time for excuses, looking for silver linings, or claiming that Obama won on this or
     that point.
  2. Whatever Obama was advised for the debate and. whatever his own responsibility, his advisers
     failed to understand the dynamics and imperatives of the debate.
  3. Whatever the many opportunities Obama squandered, at no point did he communicate the
     gravity of the election. He utterly failed to explain the stakes.
  4. Whatever detailed policies Obama cited, at no point did he offer any theme whatsoever, or
     explain how his policies, despite Republican resistance, have laid the foundation for recovery.
  5. Obama utterly failed to understand Romney's strategic objective in the debate: to reposition
     himself as more centrist while emitting dog whistles to the right—"etch-a-sketch." Instead,
     Obama graciously conceded all that centrist ground to Romney by his elaborate praise of how
     Romney had enacted health care with Democratic support in Massachusetts—rather than
     pointing to Romney's cynical partisan hypocrisy, refusal to stand by health care in
     Massachusetts and dishonesty in his attacks on Obamacare. Obama could not have served
     Romney better.
  6. For 90 minutes, Obama failed to mention even once: women and Hispanics. And he forgot that
     Obamacare covers preexisting conditions, women's reproductive health, young people to age
     26 under their parents' insurance, and prevents bankruptcies; the Republican congressional
     assaults on contraception, women's rights and reproductive health; the Dream Act; his student
     loan bill; etc.
  7. For 90 minutes, Obama failed to mention Paul Ryan and how Romney adopted his budgetary
     priorities, which have no known statistical basis, would destroy 100 years of progress by
     Democratic and Republican administrations alike, and throw the economy into recession.
  8. Obama's closing statement, explaining his understanding of the nation, was bizarre in the
     extreme, historically false and seemingly ignorant (the point of the United States apparently
     being "free enterprise"), and to the right of Romney, who at least cited the Constitution and the
     Declaration of Independence and political democracy (another lapsed opportunity for Obama,
     who failed to mention Republican voter suppression efforts, every one knocked down by the
     courts).
  9. The political consequences of the first debate may not mean that Obama will lose the election.
     Its structure still favors him. But the momentum that was building for greater Democratic
      Party gains has been thwarted and will be difficult if not impossible to recreate. Obama's
      performance has inflicted invisible damage on the party—what will not happen.
  10. The responsibility for stopping the bleeding rests squarely with Biden, not Obama. Obama
      cannot try to redo his debate on the fly the day after. He would appear as attempting to do what
      he failed to do. He would underscore his failure. Biden is the next up with the vice presidential

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792460 Date: 01/29/2016
 UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792460 Date: 01/29/2016




   debate and should bear the burden of carrying the attack. He should attack now, today, and
   continue ceaselessly into the debate on October
11.What Biden should say: Romney said in the debate that no one is entitled to their own facts.
   That begins with Romney. We cannot have an honest debate unless we deal in facts and the
   truth. So let's clear away the falsehoods. Romney's falsehoods fall into two categories: One,
   brazen lies, and, two, 180 degree reversals of previous positions while claiming they were his
   all along. Let's go through Romney's top ten lies...
12. Having done this for a week, Biden should open his debate with this same statement, declaring
   that there cannot be an honest debate until the falsehoods are cleared away. He must do this in
   the debate even if he's been doing this for the previous week in order to reach the largest
   possible audience to define Romney as a liar, to demonstrate that his "victory" in the first
   debate was based on falsehoods and therefore illegitimate, and to present an aggressive,
   spirited case in contrast to Obama's listless performance.
13.Biden must do this now. Democrats cannot wait for Obama's next debate in two weeks. If
   Biden does this work, he will reverse Romney's gain and establish the basis for Obama to give a
   very different kind of performance to project strength without having to do all the remedial
   labor in the second debate.
14. Biden must articulate the gravity of the election, the immense stakes. After defining Romney
   the liar, he must state the theme that the Obama administration has fought against relentless
    Republican obstruction to lay the foundation for recovery and that the administration has
    plans to secure and expand it, and create a new period of growth and progress. And: Romney
   and the Republicans are waging an assault on the rights of Americans—women's rights,
    Hispanics aspiring to the American Dream, every citizen who has the constitutional right to the
   vote, and every citizen who now will have the right to health care. Obama will protect the rights
   of all Americans; Romney wants to take them away. Obama will go forward; we can't go back.




 UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792460 Date: 01/29/2016
