UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792461 Date: 01/29/2016




                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL




                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                               October 5, 2012



 For: John Martilla
 From: Sidney Blumenthal
 Re: Biden Debate (Memo 2)


     1. Biden should adopt a divide and conquer strategy in the debate with Paul Ryan that keeps
        him on the defensive and undermines Romney's motives while staying substantive. At
        the same time, Biden should force Ryan to admit his differences with Romney and that
        Romney embraces his right-wing panaceas. Ryan must be made into the instrument to
        define Romney as two-faced, hypocritical and dangerously far right. Biden can make
        Ryan do this work. Turn him into the witness against Romney.
     2. Biden should force Ryan to admit that Romney's statement about Obama cutting
        Medicare by $716 million is not onlyialse but that Ryan knows better and Romney
        should, too. That exact figure is, of course, in Ryan's budget. He knows that Obama has
        not cut Medicare, but is cutting waste, fraud, abuse and overcharging from providers.
        Biden: Why did Romney five times misrepresent that figure in the debate that appears in
        your own proposal? Have you never discussed this important proposal of yours with him?
        Does he not know where you stand? Does he agree or disagree with you? If he agrees
        with you, why did he attack your policy to try to damage the President? Is Romney
        completely unfamiliar with this policy, or is he misrepresenting it? Do you think you
        should bring your position to his attention perhaps again so he doesn't commit that
        mistake again?
     3. Romney stayed on taxes as much as possible during the first debate because he believed
        that issue most favored him and the Republicans. On Romney's claim that he doesn't
         have a tax cut for the wealthy that will blow a $5 trillion hole in the budget, Biden can
         push Ryan to the wall. Biden: You know and I know that the nonpartisan, independent
         Tax Policy Center reported that Romney's tax cut that would benefit the upper, upper
         bracket will blow a $5 trillion hole in the budget. You're the policy wonk; you've read
         the report. It's OK. You're among serious policy people up here. (Ryan will try to
         interrupt; don't let him.) And you know and I know that Romney says he'll fill this crater
         by closing loopholes and deductions, but that he hasn't said which ones. Come on, Paul,
         it's just the two of us up here. You can tell me: Is it the mortgage deduction he's going to
         get rid of? The charitable deduction? We know it's not that loophole for the windfall
         royalties for the big oil companies because he opposes that, right? But if Romney hasn't



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792461 Date: 01/29/2016
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792461 Date: 01/29/2016




           shared this information about which deductions he'll eliminate with you maybe you
           should tell us that right now. You're the policy guy, so you can tell us. Let me get this
           straight: You are saying that Romney claimed before the whole country in the last debate
           that he has a well thought out plan but that in fact he has no actual hard numbers at all. Or
           is there a secret plan? Now, you've said you read that Tax Policy Center report on the $5
           trillion Romney budget buster. So you also know that the Tax Policy Center experts,
           lacking any numbers from Romney, who won't provide them, tried to fill that immense
          $5 trillion hole by coming up with potential deductions that might be eliminated. And
          you know what? They couldn't do it. The numbers don't add up. It can't be done. The
          experts can't do it. Now, you have read that report, Paul? Have you told Governor
          Romney that his big tax plan just doesn't compute? Have you mentioned that report to
          Romney? How did that discussion go? Or did you not mention that the central policy of
          the entire Romney economic approach just doesn't add up?
     4.   Stay on Medicare as much as possible, as much as Romney kept his debate on taxes.
          Biden: Exactly when did Romney agree with your plan to turn Medicare into a voucher
          system? Tell us about that conversation. Did you convince him or was he already in favor
          of dismantling Medicare? Go through exactly who will pay more and how much under
          the Romney voucher plan that tears apart Medicare. Ryan will contest this. Throw
          Romney's quote at Ryan: "You aren't entitled to your own facts."
     5.   Romney's falsehoods during the first debate provide a road map for the second debate to
          use policies at Ryan. See: http://thinkprogress.org/politics/2012/10/04/958801/at-last-
          nights-debate-romney-told-27-myths-in-38-minutes/
     6.   Go at Ryan's extreme positions, but always in the context of Romney, never in isolation.
          Biden: Romney is aware of your extreme position on women's rights, he vetted your
          positions, and he agrees with them, doesn't he? Enumerate Ryan's extreme positions on
          women's right and ask if. Romney agrees with each one, starting with Ryan's sponsorship
          of the Personhood Amendment that would criminalize abortion, some forms of
          contraception and in-vitro fertilization.
     7.   Dream Act. Biden: Now, Paul, I know you admired Ronald Reagan and I watched your
          tireless support for George W. Bush. Ronald Reagan was for the equivalent of the Dream
          Act in his time. George W. Bush was for the Dream Act. But you and Romney think
          Reagan and Bush were wrong, don't you?
     8.   In foreign policy, Ryan will run through the talking points about U.S. weakness and
          decline under Obama. Biden: You know, I was a member of the Senate Foreign Relations
          Committee, which I chaired, for decades before I became Vice President. And I want to
          say as strongly as I can, demagogy about domestic policy is dishonest but demagogy
          about foreign policy is dangerous.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792461 Date: 01/29/2016
