      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761384 Date: 01/29/2016



                                                                             RELEASE IN
                                                                             PART B6


From:                              PIR
Sent:                              Tuesday, May 19, 2009 9:27 PM
To:
Subject:                           Pirates



I realized from you asking earlier about the pirate photo in the WH that you probably didn't see or read the President's
speech. Jon was lead writer on it and responsible for the best stuff (though I have to plead guilty to the joke about
you/him/Mexico). Sitting there I remember you saying once that it was one of the huge downsides of the job, having to
attend and speak at four of these a year.



Remarks of President Barack Obama
White House Correspondents Association Dinner Saturday, May 9th, 2009

Good evening. You know, I had an entire speech prepared for this occasion. But now that I'm here, I think I want to try
something a little different. Tonight, I want to speak from the heart. So, I'm not going to use this script. I'm going to
speak off the cuff.

[Puts script down. Prompters slowly rise from the ground]

Good evening. Pause for laughter.

I'd like to welcome you all to the ten-day anniversary of my first one hundred days. I'm Barack Obama. Most of you
covered me. All of you voted for me. Apologies to the Fox table.

I have to confess I really didn't want to be here tonight, but I knew I had to come. Just one more problem I inherited
from George Bush.

But now that I am here, it's great to see you all. Michelle Obama is here. Hasn't she been an outstanding First Lady?
She's even begun to help bridge the differences that have divided us. Because no matter which party you belong to, we
can all agree on Michelle's right to bear arms.

Sasha and Malia aren't here tonight because they are grounded. You can't just take Air Force One on a joyride around
Manhattan. I don't care whose kids you are.

And that reminds me, tomorrow is Mother's Day. This is a tough holiday for Rahm. He's not used to saying the word
"day" after "mother".

David Axelrod is here. We've been together a long time. I can still remember when I called Ax a few years ago and said,
"You and I can do wonderful things together." And he said to me the same thing that partners across America are saying
to one another right now: "Let's go to Iowa and make it official."

Michael Steele is in the house tonight. Or as he would say, "in the heezy." For the last time, Mike, the Republican Party
does not qualify for a bailout. And Rush Limbaugh does not count as a troubled asset.

And Dick Cheney was supposed to be here, but he's very busy working on his memoirs, tentatively titled, "How to Shoot
Friends and Interrogate People."

You know, it's been a whirlwind of activity, these first one hundred days.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761384 Date: 01/29/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761384 Date: 01/29/2016




We've enacted an economic recovery package. We've passed a budget. We've forged a new path in Iraq. And no
President in history has named three Commerce secretaries this quickly.

By the way, if Judd Gregg is here, your business cards are ready.

On top of that, I've also reversed the ban on stem cell research, signed an expansion of children's health insurance, and
just last week, Car and Driver magazine named me Auto Executive of the Year!

We've also begun to change the culture in Washington. We've even made the White House a place where people can
learn and grow. Just yesterday, Larry Summers asked if he could chair the White House Council on Women and Girls.

And I do appreciate Larry coming tonight, because it is seven hours past his bedtime.

In the last hundred days, we've also grown the Democratic Party by infusing it with new energy and bringing in fresh,
young faces — like Arlen Specter.

Now, Joe Biden rightly deserves a lot of credit for convincing Senator Specter to make the switch. But Secretary Clinton
actually had a lot do with it, too. One day she just pulled him aside and said, "Arlen, you know what I always say — 'If
you can't beat 'em, join 'em."

That brings me to another thing that's changed — my relationship with Hillary. We may have been rivals during the
campaign, but these days we couldn't be closer. In fact, the second she got back from Mexico she greeted me with a big
hug and a kiss — told me I really oughta get down there myself.

And of course, we've also begun to change America's image in the world. We've renewed our alliances with important
partners and old friends.

[Image of POTUS with Japanese Prime Minister.]

There I am with Japanese Prime Minister Taro Aso.

[Image of POTUS with British Prime Minister.]

There's Gordon Brown.

But as I said during the campaign, we can't just talk to our friends. As hard as it is, we have to talk with our enemies. And
I've begun to do exactly that.

[Image of POTUS in Oval Office shaking hands with pirate.]

But let me be clear: just because he handed me a copy of Peter Pan, doesn't mean I'm gonna read it.
All this change hasn't been easy. Change never is. So I've cut the tension by bringing a new friend into the White House.
He's warm, loyal, and enthusiastic. You just have to keep him on a tight leash because every once in a while, he goes
charging off in the wrong direction and gets himself into trouble. But enough about Joe Biden.

All in all, we're proud of the change we've brought to Washington in these first hundred days-. But we have a lot of work
left to do. So I'd also like to talk about what my administration plans to achieve in the next hundred days.

During the second hundred days, we will design, build, and open a library dedicated to my first hundred days.

In the next hundred days, I will learn to go off prompter — and Joe Biden will learn to stay on it.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761384 Date: 01/29/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761384 Date: 01/29/2016



In the next hundred days, our bipartisan outreach will be so successful that even John Boehner will consider becoming a
Democrat. After all, we have a lot in common. He is a person of color. Although not a color that appears in the natural
world.

In the next hundred days, I will meet with a leader who rules over millions with an iron fist; who owns the airwaves and
uses his power to crush all who would challenge his authority at the ballot box. It's good to see you, Mayor Bloomberg.

In the next hundred days, we will house train our dog Bo — because the last thing Tim Geithner needs is someone else
treating him like a fire hydrant.

In the next hundred days, I will also strongly consider losing my cool.

Finally, I believe that my next hundred days will be so successful, I will be able to complete them in 72 days.

And on the 73rd day... I will rest.

###




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761384 Date: 01/29/2016
