        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781686 Date: 01/29/2016



                                                                                                           RELEASE IN
                                                                                                           PART B6


From:                               Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                               Saturday, July 30, 2011 6:41 PM
To:
Subject:                            Fw: Results of the Extraordinary Parliamentary Session on Kosovo
Attachments:                        Declaration on Kosovo 073011.docx; Declaration on Kosovo 073011.docx




From: Countryman, Thomas
Sent: Saturday, July 30, 2011 06:04 PM
To: Abedin, Huma
Subject: Fw: Results of the Extraordinary Parliamentary Session on Kosovo

In case S wants to glance at this before the call to Tadic
Tom Countryman, DAS, EUR


From: Palmer, Matthew A (Belgrade)
Sent: Saturday, July 30, 2011 05:52 PM                                                                                     B6
To: Countryman, Thomas; Dell, Christopher W; Litzenberger, Earle D (Belgrade); Sheehan, Donald M; Warlick, Mary B
(Belgrade); Daalder, No H; Glick, Ethan L; Gordon, Philip H; Brush, Jennifer L; Murphy, Michael J; Palmer, Matthew A
(Belgrade); alexander.vershbow                                              Elizabeth_D._Sherwood-Randall
<Elizabeth_D._Sherwood-Randall                   >; Meyer, Eugene (Belgrade); Ginkel, John P; Fleming, Mark L; Pfeuffer,
Paul; Toussaint, Marianne S; Burger, David; Kaidanow, Tina S; Keefe, Nicolas P; Sexton, Stephen M (Belgrade);
Holtzapple, Richard A; Lawrence_R_Silvermar                   <Lawrence_R_Silverman                    Degnan, Kelly C;
Bell, Robert G; Blackstone, Robert C; Manso, Joseph X; Shirtz, Carrie A; Alejandro_Baez
<Alejandro_Bae;                  ; Holtzapple, Richard A; Zahner, Luke V; RHoltzapple
<RHoltzapple                 ; White, Thomas J; Pomoer, Joseph M; Rowlands, Ryan :e gra•e
                                                        >; EUR-SCE-SERBIA-DL
Subject: Results of the Extraordinary Parliamentary Session on Kosovo

    •    Although the Extraordinary session of the Serbian Parliament will likely last for
         several more hours, the parameters of the discussion and debate are clear and a
         friendly MP has passed us a copy of the final text that is expected to emerge after the
         amendments are voted on (attached).     Caveat: While we do not expect the text to
         change, it is possible that the final version will differ in some way from the attached
         should changes be negotiated in the next hours.

    •    The key point for us in the Declaration is that the GOS has walked back a half-step
         from the specific accusation that international forces in Kosovo were violating UNSCR
         1244 and endangering the survival of the Serb population. The draft version slated for
         adoption notes that "certain international missions deployed in Kosovo based on
         decisions or authorization of the UN, with some of their activities, are violating the
         status-neutral framework mandated by the (UNSC) Resolution 1244 and supporting acts,
         thus endangering the rights and the survival of the Serb population and the interests
         of Serbia in the province."

    •    The Declaration also offers explicit support for the government's continuing the
         dialogue with Pristina in pursuit of a compromise solution.

    •    The government opened the session with prepared statements from the Prime Minister,
         Foreign Minister, Defense Minister, Minister for Kosovo, Finance Minister and the
         Kosovo negotiator (Stefanovic). All were relatively restrained and there was a clear
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781686 Date: 01/29/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781686 Date: 01/29/2016




       effort to take the "more in sorrow than in anger" high road. PM Cvetkovic tried to
       strike a statesmanlike tone and FM Jeremic offered a paean to his own diplomatic
       efforts in support of Serbia's position. Jeremic asserted that Kosovo's decision to
       seize control of Gates 1 and 31 on July 25 reflected Pristina's frustration with
       Serbia's (read: Jeremic's) uniquely successful diplomacy. Jeremic did note, however,
       that "some of the most powerful countries in the world" were backing Kosovo.

   • Presentations by Finance Minister Ciric (on CEFTA), DefMin Sutanovac and Kosovo
     Minister Bogdanovic were largely a chronological recap of the events of the last five
     days. Bogdanovic did say, however, that "it looked to the Kosovo Serbs as though KFOR
     was an instrument of Pristina's policies." Stefanovic offered a call to unity as a
     sign of support for the Kosovo Serbs.

   • None of the speakers from the government mentioned the United States by name.

   • Debate was more heated as the opposition leaders spoke. Somewhat surprisingly,
     however, most of the heat was directed at the government rather than at the United
     States, the international community, the EU, or NATO.   The DSS's Slobodan Samardzic
     was sharply critical of government policy, including in particular the dialogue with
     Pristina. The whole arrangement was skewed in Pristina's, favor, Samardzic argued, and
     should be scrapped in favor of new negotiations under UN auspices.

   • SNS leader Nikolic sought to avoid all responsibility, insisting that management of the
     Kosovo crisis remain with the government and not be transferred to the
     Parliament. Even with 200+ votes for the declaration, Serbia did not know what was
     going to happen tomorrow on the ground in Northern Kosovo.

       Jagodina Mayor and United Serbia MP Dragan Markovic Palma praised Ambassador Warlick's
       recent public statements and stressed the importance of Serbia's maintaining good
       relations with the United States.

   • Serb Radical Party MP Krugovic accused Ambassador Dell and ICR Feith of consenting to
     "the violent operation of the Pristina authorities in northern Kosovo."

   • After• six hours in the Assembly, a friendly MP took pity on us and slipped, us a copy of
     the marked up declaration that the majority will push through in an series of votes
     expected later this evening. We will continue to monitor the debate and apprise those
     copied on this message of any new developments. It is possible that President Tadic
     will speak at the end of the debate and we will report on his comments (if any) early
     Sunday am Belgrade time.




SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781686 Date: 01/29/2016
