    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792287 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL


From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Saturday, April 28, 2012 6:11 AM
To:
Subject:                           Re: Escaped China activist in U.S. protection: rights group (Reuters)


1. He arrs at 1140am edt

2. We have DC at 1pm

3. Calling HK now for an update


From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Saturday, April 28, 2012 06:05 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Re: Escaped China activist in U.S. protection: rights group (Reuters)

Is KC there yet? Any other news?


From: Mills, Cheryl D [mailto:MillsCD@state.gov]
Sent: Saturday, April 28, 2012 05:04 AM
To: H           •
Subject: Fw: Escaped China activist in U.S. protection: rights group (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Saturday, April 28, 2012 03:11 AM
To: NEWS-China; NEWS-EAP; NEWS-L; NEWS-Mahogany; M_All Front Office; DS Command Center
Subject: Escaped China activist in U.S. protection: rights group (Reuters)

BEIJING (Reuters) - Blind Chinese activist Chen Guangcheng is now under U.S. protection in Beijing after
fleeing from house arrest, a U.S.-based rights group said April 28, threatening to open up a new front of
tensions between the two governments.

The United States has not provided any official confirmation of reports from rights activists that Chen, who was
spirited away from house arrest at his home in Shandong province, had fled into the U.S. embassy.

China declined to comment April 28 on the issue, which now threatens to overshadow a top-level China-U.S.
meeting in Beijing next week that will include Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.

Texas-based ChinaAid said it "learned from a source close to the Chen Guangcheng situation that Chen is under
U.S. protection and high level talks are currently under way between U.S. and Chinese officials regarding
Chen's status".
"Because of Chen's wide popularity, the Obama Administration must stand firmly with him or risk losing
credibility as a defender of freedom and the rule of law," Bob Fu, president of the religious and political rights
advocacy group, said in an email.

"If there is a reason why Chinese dissidents revere the U.S., it is for a moment like this."

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792287 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792287 Date: 10/30/2015




Both the U.S. State Department in Washington and the U.S. embassy in Beijing declined to comment.

Two prominent Chen supporters, friend He Peirong and Beijing-based researcher Guo Yushan, remained out of
contact on Saturday, suggesting they had been detained.
Chen's reported escape comes days before China and the United States hold high-level talks in Beijing. The
U.S. government has not commented on Chen's whereabouts.
Chen, a self-schooled legal advocate who campaigned against forced abortions, had been restricted to his
village home in Linyi in eastern Shandong province since September 2010 when he was released from jail.

His confinement and relentless surveillance with his family fanned protests by Chinese sympathizers and
criticism from foreign governments and activist groups.

Chen's reported escape and the furor it has unleashed could add to the headaches of China's ruling Communist
Party, which is striving to ensure stability and authority before a leadership transition later this year.

It also threatens to overshadow a visit by U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Treasury Secretary
Timothy Geithner, who are due to visit Beijing next week for the annual "Strategic and economic dialogue"
between the two countries.

Asked whether any issue could force the meeting to be cancelled or postponed, Chinese Vice Foreign Minister
Cui Tiankai told a news briefing he had already stated the event would be going ahead.

"I don't know why you'd ask the question," he said. "Our holding this briefing today shows that the Strategic
Economic Dialogue will take place as scheduled."

Cui said he had "no information" on where Chen was.
He added the dialogue with the United States would include discussion of human rights, but as part of the broad
array of topics, which are expected to touch on North Korea, the South China Sea and trade, among others.

"I don't think this issue will occupy much time or be a focus," Cui said.

SENSITIVE MOMENT

There was no sign of any greater than normal security around the fort-like U.S. embassy in northeastern Beijing,
though police tried to prevent a Reuters cameraman from filming in front of the building.

If he is sheltering at the U.S. Embassy, it could thrust Washington back into the limelight at a sensitive moment,
recalling the case of dissident Chinese astrophysicist Fang Lizhi who took refuge at the U.S. Embassy with his
wife following the 1989 Tiananmen crackdown, to Beijing's outrage.

Fang eventually settled in the United States and died recently.
"It is the Shandong government that has bungled this by turning a small matter into an international affair. This
is foolish. It is certainly a loss of face for the central government," said Li Datong, a former editor at the China
Youth Daily, a party paper, who was pushed aside for denouncing censorship.

"It is especially a loss of face if a regular Chinese citizen has gone to another government to seek protection."

The United States also found itself in an uncomfortable position in February when a senior Chinese policeman
who implicated the wife of top Chinese official Bo Xilai in a British businessman's murder visited the U.S.
consulate in Chengdu.
U.S. officials say that the policeman, Wang Lijun, did not request asylum and left the consulate of his own
accord. But his trip set in motion a broader scandal that saw Bo removed from his top leadership post in one of
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792287 Date: 10/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792287 Date: 10/30/2015




the most divisive political upheavals in China in decades.

Officials in Shandong said again April 28 they had no comment on Chen's escape.

State media has made no mention of the saga.

But it has been widely discussed on China's popular Twitter-like service Weibo, reflecting his status as a cult
hero, with users reverting to innuendo and word games to get round censorship of his name.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792287 Date: 10/30/2015
