     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790098 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART B5



From:                               Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                               Monday, May 7, 2012 7:07 AM
To:
Subject:                            FW: MFA Previews Tomorrow's Meeting, Asks Us/Chen to "Be Quiet"




From: Kritenbrink, Daniel J (Dan) (Beijing)
Sent: Monday, May 07, 2012 6:52 AM
To: Kritenbrink, Daniel J (Dan) (Beijing); Sciutto, James E (Jim) (Beijing); Buangan, Richard L (Beijing); Moy, Kin W;
Wang, Robert S (Beijing); Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D; Campbell, Kurt M; Koh, Harold Hongju; Posner, Michael H;
Hammer, Michael A; Nuland, Victoria J; Reines, Philippe I; Adams, David S; Locke, Gary F (Beijing); Carlson, Aubrey A
Subject: RE: MFA Previews Tomorrow's Meeting, Asks Us/Chen to "Be Quiet"

Correcting subject line.
Update on efforts to secure meeting with MFA to discuss passport/access issues:

  MFA has agreed to meet with DCM Bob Wang and me tomorrow at 09:30. MFA rep will be DDG Lu Kang, who served
as VFM Cui Tiankai's deputy throughout the Chen negotiations.

  Lu Kang provided a "preview" of China's official message tomorrow: the more we (and Chen) be quiet, the greater our
chances this all works out in a way all sides are pleased with. PRC authorities cannot be seen as moving under US
pressure, I was told.

I'll prOvide a few more details from Lu on the high side, and we'll then do a full write-up tomorrow.

Regards, Dan


From: Sciutto, James E (Jim) (Beijing)
Sent: Monday, May 07, 2012 6:23 PM
To: Buangan, Richard L (Beijing); Moy, Kin W; Wang, Robert S (Beijing); Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D; Campbell, Kurt
M; Koh, Harold Hongju; Posner, Michael H; Hammer, Michael A; Nuland, Victoria J; Reines, Philippe I; Adams, David S;
Locke, Gary F (Beijing); Kritenbrink, Daniel J (Dan) (Beijing); Carlson, Aubrey A
Subject: RE: Core email list

If talking points still needed on your end today, we've been discussing on our end somehow framing today's
incremental progress in a way that puts both sides' efforts in a positive light, mentioning:

- Chinese officials visited Chen for the fourth time today to document his complaints about mistreatment in his
home village in Shandong. He's told us that, in total, they've spoken to him for about three hours.
- US officials were in regular, consistent contact with him today. Amb. Locke spoke to him for 30 minutes.
DCM spoke to him twice. And other officials have been in touch with his wife.



    Original Message
From: Buangan, Richard L (Beijing)
Sent: Monday, May 07, 2012 4:59 PM
To: Moy, Kin W; Wang, Robert S (Beijing); Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D; Campbell, Kurt M; Koh, Harold Hongju; Posner,
Michael H; Hammer, Michael A; Nuland, Victoria J; Reines, Philippe I; Adams, David S; Locke, Gary F (Beijing); Sciutto, James E

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790098 Date: 10/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790098 Date: 10/30/2015



(Jim) (Beijing); Kritenbrink, Daniel J (Dan) (Beijing); Carlson, Aubrey A
Subject: RE: Core email list

All:

For our press posture, it seems that we're still in a holding pattern although there are some positive signs from Chen that may be in our
interest to share with the media.

In the calls I fielded with Beijing-based U.S. media today, they seemed to be anxious for any progress on the following:

- Chen's travel documents and travel plans to the U.S.
- Any substantive readout of discussions between Bob and Chen/wife
- Chinese reaction/movement to facilitating Chen's passports
- Extraordinary steps the Chinese and U.S. are taking to sidestep regulation to permit Chen to travel expeditiously.

CURRENT ACTIONS TAKEN:

On background, I'm confirming meetings and phone calls with Chen as it happens. Perhaps we can discuss taking it a step further to
characterize some of the discussions Chen is having with the Petition Bureau. With respect to what the Chinese gov't is telling Chen
about issuing a passport, we need to be careful how to play that. We obviously don't want to seem overly encouraged.

Off the record, I'm telling trusted journalists that this is not a sprint and that we have to let the process play out, especially as we
continue this delicate dance with the Chinese. Any overreaction publicly may have a negative impact on our efforts to get the Chinese
to move expeditiously. They seem to understand that but they will want tidbits of anything coming from Chen to reinforce his
optimism and good spirits. I'm also telling them that talking on the phone with Chen is just as effective so far as meeting in person
with him.

More and more journalists today are finding Chen's cell number and talking to him.


NEXT STEPS:




Richard

    Original Message
From: Moy, Kin W
Sent: Monday, May 07, 2012 2:52 PM
To: Wang, Robert S (Beijing); Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D; Campbell, Kurt M; Koh, Harold Hongju; Posner, Michael H;
Hammer, Michael A; Nuland, Victoria J; Reines, Philippe I; Adams, David S; Locke, Gary F (Beijing); Sciutto, James E (Jim)
(Beijing); Buangan, Richard L (Beijing); Kritenbrink, Daniel J (Dan) (Beijing); Carlson, Aubrey A
Subject: Re: Core email list

Thanks, Bob. That is indeed very encouraging news.,


For those unfamiliar with Chinese processes, Bob's reference to the Petition Bureau (aka Letters Bureau) means that the Chinese are
taking the initial step in meeting Chen's request for an investigation into his case against local Shandong authorities. VFM Cui
mentioned to me the other day that Petition officials had already met with Chen for several hours on Thursday and he appeared to be
fully engaged in recounting his story in fine detail. Of course, we'll see how seriously the Central Government follows through,
especially if Chen decides to leave China soon. But this is another positive development from our perspective...km




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790098 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790098 Date: 10/30/2015



    Original Message
From: Wang, Robert S (Beijing)
Sent: Monday, May 07, 2012 02:04 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D; Campbell, Kurt M; Moy, Kin W; Koh, Harold Hongju; Posner, Michael H; Hammer, Michael
A; Nuland, Victoria J; Reines, Philippe I; Adams, David S; Locke, Gary F (Beijing); Sciutto, James E' (Jim) (Beijing); Buangan,
Richard L (Beijing); Kritenbrink, Daniel J (Dan) (Beijing); Carlson, Aubrey A
Subject: Re: Core email list

Folks,

Chen just called me with some good news. He said the Chinese official from the Petition Bureau visited him today, and Chen raised
the passport request with him. The official replied that the Chinese are prepared to issue Chen and the family passports but did not
give timeline. Given Chen's condition, he indicate they will help him complete the process at the hospital. Chen sounded optimistic
although he said he didn't know how quickly this could be done.

Chen also said that the hospital told him embassy officials could meet with the family, although not at the Ambassador's level, because
this would be too sensitive. We'll call the hospital directly to see what we can do today.

Best, Bob


     Original Message
From: Sullivan, Jacob J
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Campbell, Kurt M; Moy, Kin W; Koh, Harold Hongju; Posner, Michael H; Hammer, Michael A; Nuland,
Victoria J; Reines, Philippe I; Adams, David S; Locke, Gary F (Beijing);. Wang, Robert S (Beijing); Sciutto, James E (Jim) (Beijing);
Buangan, Richard L (Beijing); Kritenbrink, Daniel J (Dan) (Beijing); Carlson, Aubrey A
Sent: Mon May 07 11:18:41 2012
Subject: Core email list

All-
This is a core email list for all Chen-related reporting. Please only add to this list after consulting with Gary, Kurt, or Cheryl and me.

Thanks.


This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790098 Date: 10/30/2015
