        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784593 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                                                             RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                          Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                          Tuesday, October 25, 2011 7:36 AM
To:
Subject:                                       Fw: China to send envoy to Syria, urges reforms (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Tuesday, October 25, 2011 06:35 AM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: China to send envoy to Syria, urges reforms (Reuters)


BEIJING, Oct 25 (Reuters) - China on Tuesday pressed Syria to heed the "reasonable" demands of its people
and live up to promises of reform, ahead of a visit to Damascus by Beijing's special envoy to. the Middle East.

   China has played a low-key role in the turmoil that has swept the Middle East and North Africa, but it has
also moved swiftly to normalise ties with governments which have been overthrown by popular revolts, such as
in Libya.

   "We hope that all sides in Syria can put the interests of the country and people first, discard violence, avoid
bloodshed and clashes, and resolve differences via dialogue in a peaceful way," said Foreign Ministry
spokeswoman Jiang Yu.

   "We believe that Syria's government should proactively fulfill its promises of reform, and answer the
people's reasonable demands," she told a regular news briefing.

   Chinese envoy Wu Sike would visit Syria, along with Egypt, from Oct. 26-30, Jiang added, without
providing details.

   China, along with Russia, recently resisted a Western push for a United Nations Security Council resolution
condemning the Syrian government's crackdown on pro-reform protests that began over half a year ago.

   The United States said on Monday it had pulled its ambassador out of Syria because of threats to his safety,
prompting Syria to follow suit in a deterioration of ties already battered over President Bashar al-Assad's
crackdown against protesters.

   The United States has called for Assad to step down and, along with European allies, has intensified
sanctions on Syria, including against its small but significant oil sector, a central source of foreign currency for
the government.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784593 Date: 10/30/2015
