       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783149 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL



From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Thursday, November 10, 2011 3:32 PM
To:                              H; Sullivan, Jacob
Subject:                         Fw: MEDIA NOTE - Keystone XL Pipeline Project Review Process: Decision to Seek
                                 Additional Information



Fyi.


From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Thursday, November 10, 2011 03:20 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Reines, Philippe I; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Nuland, Victoria 3
Cc: Toner, Mark C; Klevorick, Caitlin B; Benes, Keith 3
Subject: FW: MEDIA NOTE - Keystone XL Pipeline Project Review Process: Decision to Seek Additional Information

It's out


From: State Department Press Office [mailto:Press@state.gov]
Sent: Thursday, November 10, 2011 3:17 PM
To: State Department Press Office
Subject: MEDIA NOTE - Keystone XL Pipeline Project Review Process: Decision to Seek Additional Information

For Immediate Release and Posting

                                        U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE
                                           Office of the Spokesperson
For Immediate
Release                                                                                                      Novem
ber 10, 2011
2011/1909

                                                  MEDIA NOTE

            Keystone XL Pipeline Project Review Process: Decision to Seek Additional Information

Executive Order 13337 authorizes the Department of State to lead the review of Presidential Permit applications
for transborder pipelines, granting the Department discretion in determining what factors to examine to inform a
determination of whether the proposed project is in the national interest. Since 2008, the Department has been
conducting a transparent, thorough and rigorous review of TransCanada's application for the proposed
Keystone XL Pipeline project. As a result of this process, particularly given the concentration of concerns
regarding the environmental sensitivities of the current proposed route through the Sand Hills area of Nebraska,
the Department has determined it needs to undertake an in-depth assessment of potential alternative routes in
Nebraska.

As part of the National Interest Determination process, the State Department held a public comment period,
including public meetings in the six potentially affected states and Washington, D.C., to increase the
opportunity for public comments. During this time, the Department also received input from state, local, and
tribal officials. We received comments on a wide range of issues including the proposed project's impact on
jobs, pipeline safety, health concerns, the societal impact of the project, the oil extraction in Canada, and the
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783149 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783149 Date: 10/30/2015




proposed route through the Sand Hills area of Nebraska, which was one of the most common issues raised. The
comments were consistent with the information in the final Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) about the
unique combination of characteristics in the Sand Hills (which includes a high concentration of wetlands of
special concern, a sensitive ecosystem, and extensive areas of very shallow groundwater) and provided
additional context and information about those characteristics. The concern about the proposed route's impact
on the Sand Hills of Nebraska has increased significantly over time, and has resulted in the Nebraska legislature
convening a special session to consider the issue.

State law primarily governs routes for interstate petroleum pipelines; however, Nebraska currently has no such
law or regulatory framework authorizing state or local authorities to determine where a pipeline goes. Taken
together with the national concern about the pipeline's route, the Department has determined it is necessary to
examine in-depth alternative routes that would avoid the Sand Hills in Nebraska in order to move forward with
a National interest Determination for the Presidential Permit.

Based on the Department's experience with pipeline project reviews and the time typically required for
environmental reviews of similar scope by other agencies, it is reasonable to expect that this process including a
public comment period on a supplement to the final EIS consistent with NEPA could be completed as early as
the first quarter of 2013. After obtaining the additional information, the Department would determine, in
consultation with the eight other agencies identified in the Executive Order, whether the proposed pipeline was
in the national interest, considering all of the relevant issues together. Among the relevant issues that would be
considered are environmental concerns (including climate change), energy security, economic impacts, and
foreign policy.

                                                       ###




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783149 Date: 10/30/2015
