     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783123 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL


From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Tuesday, November 8, 2011 2:16 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Clinton sets new U.S. global AIDS focus on treatment




From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Tuesday, November 08, 2011 01:55 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Clinton sets new U.S. global AIDS focus on treatment

Reuters
Clinton sets new U.S. global AIDS focus on treatment
1:48pm EST

By Andrew Quinn

WASHINGTON (Reuters) - The United States set a new direction for its global AIDS campaign on Tuesday,
emphasizing HIV-fighting drugs that can prevent new infections to bring the goal of "an AIDS-free generation"
within reach, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said.

Clinton, outlining new priorities for the U.S. global AIDS program started in 2003, said drug treatments,
combined with new efforts to stop mother-to-child transmission of HIV and the preventive effect of expanded
voluntary male circumcision, had changed the AIDS battle plan.

"Creating an AIDS-free generation has never been a policy priority for the United States government -- until
today," Clinton said in a speech at the U.S. National Institutes of Health outside Washington.

"This goal would have been unimaginable just a few years ago," she said. "While the finish line is not yet in
sight, we know we can get there because now we know the route we need to take."

The United States, through its President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) program, has channeled
billions of dollars into the fight against HIV/AIDS, which has infected more than 60 million people and killed
nearly 30 million since it was first reported in 1981.

The PEPFAR program has been a major factor in the global response to HIV. In 2010, nearly $16 billion was
spent on HIV response in low- and middle-income countries, according to the U.N. Program on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) and it estimates that at least $22 billion will be needed to combat the disease by 2015, helping avert
12 million new infections and 7.4 million more deaths in the next decade.

Strides have been made in preventing mother-to-child transmission of HIV, integrating prevention and
treatment efforts with broader health programs to prevent HIV infections, keep children healthy and help
mothers give birth safely.

Voluntary male circumcision also has been shown to cut the risk of female-to-male transmission by more than
60 percent, and since 2007 more than 1 million men have been voluntarily circumcized.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783123 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783123 Date: 10/30/2015




 But drug treatment appears the most promising. A series of studies in the past year have shown that drugs used
 to treat HIV also can dramatically reduce the risk of new infection among heterosexual couples -- fueling
 discussion on whether AIDS money is best spent on drugs or traditional prevention programs; such as condoms,
 counseling, testing and education.

 Clinton said the answer was clear.

 "If we take a comprehensive view of our approach to the pandemic, treatment doesn't take away from
 prevention. It adds to it," she said. "So let's end the old debate over treatment versus prevention and embrace
 treatment as prevention."

 RISING BENEFITS, FALLING COSTS

 With some 34 million people living with HIV around the world today, the new U.S. emphasis on treatment
 could prove costly -- although Clinton noted that the per-patient cost had fallen dramatically as AIDS drugs
 become available as generics in many poor countries.

 "In 2004, the cost to PEPFAR for providing ARVs and services to one patient averaged nearly $1,100 a year;
 today, it's $335 and falling," Clinton said, referring to anti-retroviral drugs. "Continuing to drive down these
 costs is a challenge for all of us."

 Clinton said more people still were becoming infected every year than were starting treatment but that scaling
 up "combination prevention" strategies in hard-hit countries could drive the worldwide rate of new infections
 down by at least 40 percent to 60 percent.

 She said the United States, which already has donated $50 million to fund academic studies on how best to
 ramp up the new model, would spend another $60 million to expand combination-prevention in four sub-
 Saharan African countries to provide more data on the efficacy of the approach.

 Clinton, who has been fighting hard to preserve U.S. spending on overseas aid and development as the U.S.
 Congress grapples with huge U.S. budget deficits, said it was important the United States maintain its
 leadership in the AIDS battle.

 "At a time when people are raising questions about America's role in the world, our leadership in global health
 reminds them who we are and what we do," she said.

 (Editing by Bill Trott)

 © Thomson Reuters 2011. All rights reserved. Users may download and print extracts of content from this
 website for their own personal and non-commercial use only. Republication or redistribution of Thomson
 Reuters content, including by framing or similar means, is expressly prohibited without the prior written
 consent of Thomson Reuters. Thomson Reuters and its logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of the
 Thomson Reuters group of companies around the world.

 Thomson Reuters journalists are subject to an Editorial Handbook which requires fair presentation and
 disclosure of relevant interests.

• This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to
  colleagues, clients or customers, use the Reprints tool at the top of any article or visit: www.reutersreprints.com.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783123 Date: 10/30/2015
