     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789714 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                             Monday, December 12, 2011 7:44 PM
To:                               'sullivanjj@state.gov'; 'millscd@state.gov'
Subject                           Re: USDP Flourony resigns



What's the back story?


From: Sullivan, Jacob J [mailto:SullivanJJ©state.gov]
Sent: Monday, December 12, 2011 07:38 PM
To: H; Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Subject: FW: USDP Flourony resigns



Pentagon's first female policy chief quitting
By ROBERT BURNS
AP National Security Writer
WASHINGTON (AP) -- Michele Flournoy, the most senior female Pentagon official in history, told The
Associated Press on Monday she is stepping down as the chief policy adviser to Defense Secretary Leon
Panetta.
In an interview in her Pentagon office, Flournoy said she feels compelled to "rebalance" her personal life after
three years in one of the most demanding national security jobs in Washington.
"By nature it is an all-consuming job and it does take a toll on the family," she said, adding that she considers
her time as the undersecretary of defense for policy as "probably the highlight of my professional life." She is
the most senior woman ever to hold the post when she started the job in February 2009, two years after co-
founding and serving as the first president of the Center for a New American Security, a prominent think tank.
Flournoy, who turns 51 on Wednesday, said her resignation will be effective in February and that she intends to
play an informal role next year in supporting President Barack Obama's re-election effort.
"I'm very much planning on giving the full measure of support to this president and this campaign, and I'm
going to work as much as I can from the outside to do that," she said. While she has made no specific
arrangements with the Obama campaign, Flournoy ticked off a list of possible informal roles, including public
speaking and private advising.
Flournoy said she hopes to return to government service one day but that at this point her family needs her to
take a break.
Her husband, W. Scott Gould, is the deputy secretary of Veterans Affairs, responsible for a nationwide system
of health care services, benefits programs, and national cemeteries for veterans and their dependents. They have
children aged 14, 12 and 9.
"Right now I need to recalibrate a little bit and invest a little bit more in the family account for a while," she
said. "We've been going flat out for more than three years," including the period after the 2008 election in
which both she and her husband were part of the Obama transition team - she at the Pentagon and he at the
Department of Veterans Affairs.
Flournoy said her children understand that their parents' hard-charging jobs are "once-in-a-lifetime
opportunities" at an important juncture in American history, but it has required difficult trade-offs.
"You can make the sacrifice for a period, but at some point the cost becomes too high and you need to
rebalance," she said.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789714 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789714 Date: 10/30/2015




Flournoy is a widely respected national security thinker. She earned a bachelor's degree in social studies at
Harvard University and a master's degree in international relations at Balliol College at Oxford University. She
served in the Pentagon in the 1990s as deputy assistant secretary of defense for strategy.
In her current job she has kept a relatively low public profile while working on some of the most difficult and
entangled national security problems facing the Pentagon, including concluding the war in Iraq, reinvigorating
the U.S. military campaign in Afghanistan and adjusting American defense strategy as part of the coming
reductions in the national security budget.
While the last U.S. troops are due to depart Iraq before the end of this month, the war's aftermath is likely to be
a prominent issue for Flournoy's successor. During her interview with the AP, Obama was holding a news
conference at the White House with Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki. Obama heralded the end of the war and
cautioned other countries not to interfere with Iraq's sovereignty - a reference to U.S. concerns about undue
Iranian influence. Flournoy said she planned to meet later in the day with Iraqi defense officials to discuss the
way forward.
"I am actually comfortable with where we are" in the relationship with Iraq, she said, adding that one of her first
reports as president of the Center for a New American Security in 2007 was on how to responsibly end the war.
Asked what plans she has made for her life after the Pentagon, Flournoy said, "Absolutely none," other than
catching up on sleep and spending more time with her children.



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789714 Date: 10/30/2015
