UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789172 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL


 POA: The Full text of the All Afghanistan Scholars council

 Praise to Allah and peace be up on the prophet. The regular meeting of the Afghan National Scholars
 council was held from the 8 -11 Hoot -1390[ 27-Feb 2012-March 01-2102]. In this meeting, several
 important and vital subjects issues were discussed thoroughly and following issues and action were
 approved unanimously:

 1- The council has strongly condemned the unforgivable crime, the barbaric and in-humane act of the
 disgracing of the Holy Quran and others religious books by the US forces in Bagram air base. They
 emphasized that this satanic act is not forgivable and the perpetrators of the crime need to be punished
 as soon as possible. The US and NATO guarantee that nobody will insult the Muslims faith and beliefs in
 the future. The Afghanistan Scholars council approved and accepted the Jihadi leaders' and national
 leaders' recent decisions which was led by President Karzai.

 2- The Afghan Scholars and all Afghan government officials are very concerned about the prison which
 has been controlled by the international forces and they are requesting the transfer of the responsibility of
 these prisons and prisoners to Afghan officials. Also, night operation and warrantless [arrest without
 permission] arrests of the Afghan people by the international forces need to be stopped but unfortunately
 the international forces have not replied positively to those questions so far. The Afghanistan Scholars
 council say and believe the disgracing if the Holy Quran in the Bagram prison is due to mismanagement
 of the international forces and they [Council] strongly requests to stop the activities of the prison in
 Bagram and transfer the responsibility of the prison from the international forces to the Islamic
 government of Afghanistan so the repetition of the disgracing of the Islamic faith is prevented in the
 future.

 3- The Council has assessed positively the recent trip of the Afghan president Hamid Karzai to Pakistan
 and meeting with political, religious and military leaders and, all eight articles which have published from
 the presidential palace are a great achievement. Also the request from the Taliban to join to the direct
 peace process talk with Afghan government is another positive aspect of the president's trip to Pakistan.
 The Council has also welcomed the support of the Pakistani government, particularly the Pakistan PM
 Yusuf Raza Gailani for the peace process dialogue lead by the Afghan government. The Council is also
 grateful for the call of the Pakistan PM on Taliban leaders, HIG and all others armed militants to join the
 peace process in Afghanistan which is an Afghani process in order to put and end to all internal problems.

 The Council is optimistically looking at the current peace process development and changes and once
 again requests from the Afghan government opposition groups to join the peace process dialogue and
 give positive answer to the Afghan government invitation, to stop killing of the Afghans and begin the
 direct talks with Afghan government officials.

 4-The Council welcomes HIG's (Hezb-e-lslami Gulbudeen Hekmatyar) readiness to initiate talk and
 negotiation with Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, after the Afghan Presidential declaration and, request of
 the Pakistan PM regarding to, join to the peace process dialogue. Any movement in the peace process to
 bring peace and stability is good news for the Afghan nation and we hope that all Afghan government
 opposition groups will join the process so Almighty Allah will finish all the pain and problems of the
 Afghans.

 5-The religion of Islam is contrary to other nations and human civilizations of the current era and the pas.
 It has a lot of respect for women and Islam believes that women are the foundation of the civil society and
 should be granted respect and human dignity. In the past centuries and before Islam, women had been
 deprived of any respect and human rights. Women were sold like goods and even buried alive under the
 ground. After the appearance of the Islam sunshine, Islamic religion granted a lot of rights to women as
 follow:

  A- The ownership and trade rights




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789172 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789172 Date: 10/30/2015




 B- The inheritance right according to Islam.

 C- The Maher [Islamic dowry] is the specific right of the women and nobody has the right to take over
 that right from the women. Some people have practicing dowry [Toiana and walwar in Dad and Pashto]
 which against the Islamic Sharia.

 D- The right of choosing the husband and nobody can force a woman to marry against her wishes but
 the parents' advice is allowed according to the Islamic principles.

 E- Women have the same dignity and respect as men, no one can give away women as compensation
 for peace, killing any person, it is unlawful in Islam.

 F- No one can get women as inheritance. The women have several rights according to the Islam religion,
 the women beside having many rights in Islam they have some responsibilities and obligation as well
 such as:

 A- Women should follow all Islamic Sharia in faith and practice.

 B- Wearing veil according to the Islamic Sharia which give more respect and dignity to the woman.

 C- Stay away from strangers and unknown men during education, social relation and other interactions.

 D- According to Aia 1 Sora 34 of the Holy Quran which indicate that male is the base [Principal] and
 women is a corollary [Not base]

  E- Multiple marriages is allowed according to Islam.

  F- Avoidance of travel without lawful man

 G- Divorce right according to Mohammadi Sharia

  It is worth mentioning that beating, abuse, harassment of the women is unlawful, any kind of the abuse,
  misconduct and rape against women is illegal and it is unlawful and the Afghanistan requests the
  legislative and judicial institutions to punish and bring to justice according to approved Afghan
  government laws and Mohammadi Shari those who commit crimes against women. In the Islamic
  religious books, a lot of information are published about the women rights and obligation which any one
  can refer to it when there is a need for it.

  Received: 1708 March 2




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789172 Date: 10/30/2015
