UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788318 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                             RELEASE IN FULL




                                              MEMORANDUM



   TO: S
   FROM: ANNE-MARIE
   RE: LEGACY SPEECHES AND SUBSEQUENT BOOK


   As you enter the home stretch of your time in office, you have an opportunity to crystallize some of
   the most important dimensions of your new and distinctive approach to foreign policy in a war that
   will have resonance long beyond your tenure (in addition to the QDDR, of course!). Many of the
   perceptions, concepts, and habits of mind that come naturally to you as you look at the world, and
   that you have done so much to try to institutionalize within the State Department, are still quite a
   reach for the foreign policy establishment.

   lf you were to give three speeches over the next year on a new generation of global problems, a new
   set of solutions, and a new understanding of power and leadership, it would allow you both to sum
   up and reflect on much of what you have accomplished that is often out of the public eye and would
   provide the foundation for a short book that could be published in the year after you step down. It
   would not take the place of your memoirs, should you want to write those as well, but would be
   more like a credo that would help cement your place in American foreign policy not only as one of
   its most successful practitioners, but also as a thinker and visionary.

      1) A. NEW GENERATION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS: This is already part of your mantra in many
         speeches, beginning with your first major policy speech when you declared that the majority
         of 21' century problems areAlobal problems, problems that all nations worry about (non-
         proliferation, counter-terrorism, disease, climate change, resource scarcity, the state of the
         global economy) and that no nation can solve alone. By focusing on that basic point again
         now you could point to all the things you have done to address those problems (new energy
           and CT bureaus, water and food security initiatives, global health, economic statecraft, etc)

       2) A NEW SET OF SOLUTIONS: 'Here is where you emphasize all the solutions that go beyond
           the state as part of government to society and society to society diplomacy. You have
           brought new players into foreign policy through PPPs and outreach to state and local
           governments. You have developed solutions and strategies that focus on different segments
           of society (women, youth, entrepreneurs, civil society, diasporas). You have integrated
           technology into both diplomacy and development as a game-changer (all the was mobile
           technology is helping women, farmers, teachers, etc; Mwomen, Tech at State, etc). ./1// of this
           can be r oiled into 21" century statecraft.

       3) A NEW UNDERSTANDING OF POWER: This speech would be the most conceptual, but I
           think you could bring it down to earth with countless great examples. Essentially you would




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788318 Date: 10/30/2015
