    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770592 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                                        RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                        B5,B6




From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov >
Sent:                              Tuesday, May 18, 2010 8:28 PM
To:
Subject:                           A few items



A few quick things:

   1. Mexico. Looks like we are headed (cross your fingers) for a resolution on the transboundarv issue. The park is
       still up in the air, though we may get there.



    2. Posner/Fox. Pi went on Fox this morning to push back on the Posner statements. They were blown out of
        proportior                         I've pasted them at the bottom of this email.

    3.   Ecuador. Are you still inclined to think about going? I think Huma will discuss with you. I'm intrigued by the
         possibility of you giving your major speech in Ecuador.

    4.   Pakistan. Paul and his team made one recommendation, which I passed on to Matt. I can fill you in tomorrow.

    5.




    6. Nite note. I faxed to your house a nite note prepared by Vali and RCH for your review.
                                                                                                                             B5
                                                                                                                             B6
POSNER excerpt:

QUESTION: Was there any areas in which China sort of turned the tables and raised its own complaints or concerns
about U.S. practices around the globe or at home? Can you give some examples there —

ASSISTANT SECRETARY POSNER: Sure. You know, I think — again, this goes back to Ambassador Huntsman's
comment. Part of a mature relationship is that you have an open discussion where you not only raise the other guy's
problems, but you raise your own, and you have a discussion about it. We did plenty of that. We had experts from the
U.S. side, for example, yesterday, talking about treatment of Muslim Americans in an immigration context. We had a
discussion of racial discrimination. We had a back-and-forth about how each of our societies are dealing with those sorts
of questions. So, throughout the day yesterday and again today, we had a discussion about the relationship of food
safety, law, human rights today. Food safety is an issue, as our experts told us this afternoon, a big issue in the United
States. And it's an issue in China. And in some cases, we're talking about the same thing. We had a discussion
yesterday about labor inspections. Well, it turns out that there aren't enough labor inspectors in factories, either in China
or the United States. Maybe that's something we can work on together. So, I think the tone of the discussions was very
much not "We've got all the answers; we're telling the Chinese how to behave." It was framed in an international context,
international standards. We're both obligated. And let's talk about things that we're both dealing with, and try to figure out
— can we help each other? And where we have differences, how do we mitigate those differences? Yeah.

QUESTION: It's a follow-up about the (inaudible) case. Did you (inaudible) about immediate release to Chinese
(inaudible)?

ASSISTANT SECRETARY POSNER: I'm not going to get into the details. We've expressed in the past our concern
about the nature of the detention, and we certainly continue to be concerned about the fact that he's in prison. Yes.

QUESTION: Did the recently passed Arizona immigration law come up? And, if so, did they bring it up or did you bring it
up?

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770592 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770592 Date: 10/30/2015




ASSISTANT SECRETARY POSNER: We brought it up early and often. It was mentioned in the first session, and as a
troubling trend in our society and an indication that we have to deal with issues of discrimination or potential
discrimination, and that these are issues very much being debated in our own society.

QUESTION: Did they bring it — did they discuss anything about their concerns about Chinese visiting in Arizona, any
concerns raised —

ASSISTANT SECRETARY POSNER: No, that was not raised.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770592 Date: 10/30/2015
