      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789108 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                            RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Monday, February 14, 2011 4:17 PM
To:                                'hanleymr@state.gov'
Subject                            Fw: egypt and china -- something worth reading




    Original Message ----
From: Anne-Marie Slaughter <slaughtr
To: H
Cc: Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>; Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent: Sun Feb 13 11:41:03 2011
Subject: egypt and china -- something worth reading

This is from The Atlantic on line, from one of their reporters in Shanghai. Worth the read, particularly re Chinese efforts
to censor Egypt news. Again, as protests spread to sub-Saharan Africa, the Chinese are going to have real trouble.




Howard French

The View of Cairo from Authoritarian International (Atlantic.com)

FEB 11 2011, 7:04 PM ET




For unsurprising reasons, the people's uprising in Egypt has been widely cast as an epochal event for Arab political
culture, and somewhat more widely, for the entire Middle East.




To limit our understanding of these events in this way, however, is to lose sight of a story playing out against an
immensely larger backdrop. The putative and much discussed decline of the United States in recent years has been cast
against the perceived successes, or at least the argued attractiveness, of an authoritarian other.




In books like When China Rules the World: The End of the Western World and the Birth of a New Global Order, by
Martin Jacques; The Beijing Consensus: How China's Authoritarian Model Will Dominate the Twenty-First Century, by
Stephen Halper; The End of the Free Market: Who Wins the War between States and Corporations, by Ian Bremmer; and
in many other recent writings, we have been warned of an almost unfair unfolding contest between the world's messy
and often paralyzed democracies, and a rising cohort of efficient, businesslike authoritarian states. They portray those
states steadily accounting for more and more of the global GDP, and at the same time convincingly delivering the goods
to their peoples: gleaming new airports, high-speed rail systems, seamless new highways, and dependable and often
free wireless internet, to name just a few of the typical benefits. Citizens, in turn, happily go about the business of
pursuing prosperity and leave the business of government to the mandarin classes to whom such rights and privileges
properly belong. Such is, or so we are given to understand, the nature of a winning social contract.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789108 Date: 10/30/2015
