      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05759769 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                                            RELEASE IN
                                                                                                            PART B6


From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                               Sunday, September 20, 2009 8:22 PM
To:                                 'pverveer                                                                     B6
Subject:                            Re: Follow up



Thx so much for all you're doing.

    Original Message
From: PVerveer
To: H
Sent: Sun Sep 20 19:51:25 2009
Subject: Re: Follow up

I had a long talk with      when I was in Afghanistan. She has very sound advice which we have incorporated in our
approach. She is, however, very dispirited because she sees firsthand the corruption and other problematic actions by
Karzai and his government that impede creating a better future for Afghanistan. She also sees the way very smart
women are marginalized. I raised the issue of the need for Afghanistan's talented women leaders to participate in
decision-making when I met with Karzai, but, as with so much, he wasn't very responsive. He did hold several meetings
with women leaders during the election campaign, but I'm sure it's not led to much of significance. For now,       is
sticking it out in                     I expect to see her when she's at the UN for future meetings or the next time
she's in DC. I don't know how much longer she will be able to keep from being completely disillusioned.

The Fund and Doug H.

We're not planning to announce the Global Women's Fund at UNGA, but want to do a launch later this year at State,
where we will announce it (how do you like "Secretary's Women's Empowerment Fund"?) and the campaign Doug spoke
to you about. We are also hoping to have several public private partnerships that could be announced to show the
commitment of many and their heeding of your call for collaboration.
Doug and his team are working with us on the contours of the launch because it will be the kickoff for the proposed
events to follow. As you said, "let's start and see how the first one goes." We are tentatively thinking about NY in March
when the UN will officially be marking the 15th anniversary of Beijing and a major convening of hundreds of people on
the unfinished agenda would be very relevant.

AID Women's Office

We are intending to use the Fund to provide rapid response resources to significant projects around the globe that
wouldn't typically qualify for the large USAID grants but whose work is critical. These would be small grants that could
make an incredible difference. We are working out a framework criteria and we think it best to relay the funds through
our ambassadors.The Fund will be able to match public resources because our office will soon be overseeing the
disposition of $5m that would have gone to the Women's office at AID, (which is ineffective). I've been told the
congressional appropriators don't want the AID women's office to oversee the money.

I think the Women's office at AID, (the WID office) has to be revamped. WID needs strong and credible leadership which
understands the importance of strategic investments and measuring outcomes and is taken seriously by the new
administrator. I have some ideas on who could do this well.

I had a meeting at MCC last week with the acting head and some of his team. At their request, we are going to set up a
small working group of a few government officials (including someone from AID) with relevant expertise to think how
we might better implement gender in development in a way that really does create better overall outcomes. They are

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05759769 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05759769 Date: 10/30/2015



feeling a bit out of the loop and this could have real value --At least it can't hurt. By the way, they were very impressed
with your comments during the recent Board meeting.

White House Women's Council

I have been working with the WH Council.




UN/Women

As you heard from our friends at lunch, there is no strong women's voice at the UN. In fact, I was told by
                                                that there is no voice for women at the top level of the UN. That's why the
effort we have been making for a new gender architecture for the UN is so important. UNIFEM and a few tiny scattered
offices are basically not up to the job, have been under financed and marginalized. Last week. we were able to get the
votes in the General Assembly to create a new UN entity for women (comparable to UNICEF). There is still a road to go
on this because we have to make sure the SG names an excellent leader and a good list of names from around the world
(that Charlotte Bunch and others have worked on) is circulating. We also need to make sure the resources are there. The
Scandinavian countries, UK, et al have stepped up to the plate and are happy to have us back to be counted on again.
Our USUN mission has been terrific on this. Last weekend, we were worried that the Egyptians (they have a lousy
delegation) were going to scuttle this and given their influence with the G77, it would have been in trouble.I got in touch
with                   and everything worked out. We are on the road now, but there will be a series of upcoming
decisions that have yet to be made. You may hear about this issue next week. The US has been getting thanks for our
leadership.

For Cairo, we are hoping to have an event to mark the anniversary and provide a commitment forward.
We will be working with PRM and the groups and coming back to you with ideas. I read an excellent article put out by
CSIS that takes the family planning issue and roots it in hard policy thinking. I think we do need a less charged way to talk
about why it is so critically important. The stress on countries' social infrastructures and the booming youth population,
let alone the great needs that women confront, are going to create even greater future problems. Maybe your remarks
can create a more compelling frame.

Congress

As I mentioned to you, I had to see Nita Lowey on Pakistan. She had to postpone the meeting from another time so I got
to her during the whole electricity debate. I explained that we weren't losing our focus on education, etc. but if kids can
study at night because of no lights that really doesn't advance our common cause or Pakistan's future. She was
concerned rightly (if you look at where the money is going) that not enough attention is being paid to women's
economic development and education (and as a result of the low status of women -- violence is a terrible problem) in
Pakistan. I told her we were working on a plan of action with SRAP comparable to our Afghanistan efforts. We also had
a trip meeting with Richard, Huma, et al to talk about what you might do on your visit, and everyone agreed that an
event should focus on women's leadership. (I remember asking Benazir shortly before she was assassinated what she
wished she had done differently when she was PM (and hoped to change if she got another chance). She said she should
have invested more in women because they would have been a stabilizing influence and would have contributed to
improved living standards, particularly in the vulnerable areas.)

The Senate appropriators want to give our office an increase in 2010 resources to do our job. I don't know what
amount.The Senate appropriations language has us overseeing the way that gender is being taken into consideration in
the assistance programs and want us to come up with metrics.
They know we will need staff to do what they are asking.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05759769 Date: 10/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05759769 Date: 10/30/2015




Much of the SFRC seems pleased with our office so far, as well as with what you've done on all the issues they've raised
and so pleased about the SC Res that you will be offering on the 30th at the UN.
The follow up issues on the DRC are endless and they are holding us to our commitments.

They are planning a hearing in October on the International Violence vs Women's Act (which you cosponsored as
Senator). It is being reintroduced by Kerry and Lugar in the Senate and Delahunt and others in the House (Berman isn't
going on it because it has mandates for the WID office at AID and since he's going to be holding hearings on his aid
reform bill, he didn't think he should go on other bills that have specifics relating to AID's structure -- even though, in
this case, he agrees with the need for a stronger WID office).

CEDAW

We have been doing a lot on CEDAW. The review of the RUDs has been done by D01 and we have a working group at
State that includes Harold Koh and his team (he did great work in the 90's), H and others. We have also had good
communications with the groups on the outside that Ellen discussed at lunch. I think we should do a meeting, as you
suggest, initially -- with our team at State, led by H, and then move to get together with the WH.I will talk to Rich about a
legislative strategy. Once we have one, it will also be helpful to the groups. They are still in the throes of raising money
for the public education campaign. Ellen has been and will continue to be closely consulted.



WHA

The Pathways to Prosperity program that you announced in El Salvador at the ministerial is going forward. The women's
program will be taking place in DC in a couple weeks and WHA is pleased that this is happening. They convened a
meeting last week with the relevant ambassadors, etc to report on developments. Carmen Lomellin, as you know, has
been nominated to be the US amb to the OAS. For many years she has been head of the OAS women's commission.
There is much that we can do in the Hemisphere which certainly has its share of challenges.

Alec Ross

As you know, Alex and a couple staff from S/P went to DRC last week to do the technology assessment. They are just
back and we are talking about next steps. I know he focused a lot on conflict minerals and we still don't have a real
working group. that I am aware of, on that topic. He's going to tell me what he thinks we can do with tech help to the
providers and victims both.

I believe technology can be used in ways it hasn't even been applied yet to lift women out of poverty and enhance the
contributions they can make around the world ---from mobile banking to literacy training on cell phones, etc. I have
been talking to EEB, Alec and several corporate leaders in Silicon Valley about what we might do collaboratively. We are
going to set up a discussion with our corporate informal advisors in the near future.

MEPI

I think MEPI is on the right track and could be even better. We joined with MEPI and the groups with whom they have
been collaborating on women's programs in the ME and North Africa for an all-day assessment.
We are also running the Iraq widows grants out of our office and working closely with the post and the NEA bureau
generally. Although there are so many challenges for women in the region, there are so many possibilities. I learned so
much over the last few years from the projects Vital Voices has been doing there with women in business and with those
who are leading reforms, like family law. There is much that women leaders can be learning from each other and they
are eager. MEPI is a really important vehicle, much more innovative than our traditional work, and operates in places
like the Gulf where we have no AID programs. We have been working on the Cairo speech follow up with MEPI/NEA. I
have also been talking to Farah about some things we might do with girls and women. I think we've got some good
ideas.

       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05759769 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05759769 Date: 10/30/2015




Staffing

We are getting our final staffer next week. She had been pulled into health care at the WH but finally is able to extricate
herself. In numbers, we are generally where the previous administration was and doing far more.
We are asking for additional slots to be able to do the gender integrative work in assistance programs and oversee the
Fund --that there is general agreement we should be doing.

Alas, I didn't see Kay Warren     sorry to have missed her.

There aren't enough hours in a day to do all that needs to be done.




In a message dated 9/20/2009 10:53:16 A.M. Eastern Daylight Time, HDR22@clintonemail.com writes:

           Here are some matters I haven't raised w you but wanted to get your reaction:

           Was there any followup to                offer to help/advise on Afghan women?

        Re your memo about S/GWI priorities for FY 09 and 10--
          Will we be announcing the global womens fund and/or other partnerships at UNGA?
          Are we closely coordinating w the WH and its Council?
          How can we strengthen the AID Women's office?
          Are the Congress Members ok w our work and priorities so far? What about the 2010 budget?
          Who will be the UN women's voice on the inside and outside?
          How will we mark 15th anniv of Cairo?
          Let's do a thorough review about CEDAW strategy. Should we ask              to be on contract w H to lead
our efforts?
          What's followup w Doug Hattaway?
          Are you working w Alec Ross? ECA?
          Are you working w WHA and Julissa Reynoso on econ issues?
          What are we doing w MEPI?
          Are you staffed up now?

           Did you see Kay Warren when she was in DC for Eric Goosby's swearing in?




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05759769 Date: 10/30/2015
