    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786464 Date: 10/30/2015

                                                                              RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                          H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:.                         Friday, March 11, 2011 1:56 PM
To:                            Huma Abedin
Subject:                       Re: Libya contacts


Pls print.


From: aclb [mailto•
Sent: Thursday, February 24, 2011 12:57 PM
To: H2; H
Cc: 'jake.sullivan                                                       ; Catherine Rimmer
<Catherine.Rimmer
Subject: Libya contacts

The two people I spoke about are:

           he is in Turkey at the moment on a temporary number                                  His
main number is

                                   he is in London and can be reached via                on
                  See article below.

I have spoken to       and will be speaking to                      tomorrow. Catherine, my
Chief of Staff, can help fix if you want anyone in your office to speak to either of them.

This is an update from       on the situation in Libya:
East is fine, and working very hard on legal and structural formations for a transitional
government. Meanwhile, they have made two public declarations. The Free Ulema endorsed
their declarations (attached). This is to give them religious legitimacy and prevent radicals
form hijacking Islamic settlements. They declared Tripoli as capital to remove any doubts
about separatist ideas. We are making sure that liberal democracy emerges. The Ulema
statement is an endorsement of the emerging liberal government. Yesterday, CNN managed
to get in, and important information/images starting to flow. They met with many of our
judges and lawyers in the Benghazi, and have a first-hand impression. The population has
 been very helpful in evacuating the Turks, and Turkish medical help is finally reaching. I
 returned to Istanbul to keep the aid flowing.

West, all interior is in the hands of free Libyans. There are still some units of the regime's
guards still active, most notably the' revolutionary jahfal' of Jubran in Bani Walid, but they are
in the midst of hostile pro-freedom Wirfallah clans. Imbalance in arms has prevented cleaning
them out They are a dangerous dager in the back. They are pinning tribesman down because
they may attack families if everyone marches south. The areas of Mimun and Hamada

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786464 Date: 10/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786464 Date: 10/30/2015



(open platues away from populated areas) are now clear and in trusted hands for any arms
landings.

Zintan are boiling in that three of their youth were killed at a checkpoint, and some of their
formations moving south were hit from the air. They are marching on Tripoli with difficulty,
and are also under armed.

Sabrath and Zawiah witnessed a major battle free army + people vs. regime's forces. The
regime lost and was not able to recapture Zawiah as planned. They retreated. Free army was
too exhusted to make a counter attack last night.

Misrata is completely in the hands of the free, and already made civil government
arrangements. However, they were given an ultimatum last evening, and threatened with
bombings. Families took shelter in the country side.

Tajoura youth are trying to stop Mtiqa airport from functioning but are coming under very
heavy attach by regime forces.

Clearly, the air superiority is giving the regime a huge advantage.

In Tripoli itself roaming mercenaries/thugs are terrorizing people so the do not come out to
the streets to demonstrate.

Also, major propaganda campaign that denies the massive atrocities caused by the air raids.
Bodies and even the wounded are being removed to unknown locations from the. hospitals.
The streets were cleaned and bloodstains painted over. A 'tour' for diplomats was being
arranged!

The international community MUST take action NOW. The easiest is the no-fly zone. Also
unmanned aircraft attack on Bab al-Aziziah and the units blocking the way to Tripoli from the
West would be most helpful.

In light of the lack of international physical action, youth are now working hard on the
attached Plan which has been communicated to them.

That is it for now.



Salams. Here is a message that summarizes situation in Tripoli:

"just saw some low flying bullet hit a wall , the kids he says r out in the street that were
protesting on pills , drunk, and on drugs, he actually has a bunch of kids with cars and guns

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786464 Date: 10/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786464 Date: 10/30/2015



and their on drugs and drunk
[12:31:25 AM] Mazen Nayed: they are the ones driving around tonight"

In light of the speech, and threat of more mercenaries, and loose thugs, the tribes are
converging on Tripoli from East, South. West still blocked, may collapse soon. My Wirfallah has
been moving north to Tripoli in small groups, and will complete its full presence by early
tomorrow.

WE URGENTLY NEED ELIMINATION OF AIR UPRIORTY. Please work on the non-fly zone, or
the other options I mentioned.

Oil prices are rising, markets are down. We have to be decisive.

I have called the Eastern leaders, and they are in full control of the East, and bless our efforts.
Today, they are having a demonstration of support, and have already sent some youth West to
help.

I managed to work with the Turks on getting some medical supply in. It should be entering
Benghazi port tomorrow. We secured the port, and worked out the technical logistics.

I am receiving the documentation of the local set up of the East over the next couple of days.
A committee is working on it.

Things are moving very fast.




Gaddafi nears his end, exiled Libyan prince says

Tue Feb 22, 2011 6:42pm GMT



* Crown Prince Senussi expects imminent end for Gaddafi

* Urges Gaddafi's allies to end support

By Marie-Louise Gumuchian

RABAT, Feb 22 (Reuters) - Muammar Gaddafi's violent struggle to remain in power will not last
long, said the exiled crown prince of Libya, whose family he toppled in a 1969 coup.




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786464 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786464 Date: 10/30/2015




Prince Muhammad as-Senussi, whose father, the former crown prince, and great-uncle King
Idris were overthrown amid a series of revolts in the Arab world, said Libyans protesting
against the leader's long rule would be "victorious in the end".

Gaddafi said on Tuesday he would not step down despite a nationwide revolt against his rule,
vowing to die in Libya as a martyr.

"His fight to stay in power will not last long, because of the desire for freedom by the Libyan
people. This great popular revolution will be victorious in the end, because of the unity of the
Libyan people," 48-year-old Senussi said in a statement from his home in London.

"The Libyan people have now chosen to challenge this regime peacefully until it is gone from
Libya, and the people will not return to their homes until justice is delivered."

After being overthrown by Gaddafi in 1969, the royal family was held under house arrest for a
period. In 1988, they emigrated to Britain.

"The Libyan people have raised their voices in Benghazi and Tripoli and all other cities across
Libya. They have made the whole world listen to them," Senussi said.

He called on the international community to help stop the violence. "I ask especially those
countries which have previously worked with the Gaddafi regime to exert pressure to stop the
bloodshed in Libya," he said. "I also ask them to halt all support for the dictator with
immediate effect."




DISCLAIMER

WARNING — This email is only intended for the person to whom or entity to which it is addressed and, together with any files transmitted with it, is confidential and
may also be privileged. If you are not the intended recipient, you must not copy. forward, use or rely on any part of it or disclose its contents to any person. If you
have received it in error, please notify our system manager on +44 20 7647 7782 and delete all copies immediately.

Except where this email is sent in the usual course of our business, the views expressed in this email are those of the sender and not those of The Office of Tony
Blair.

The Office of Tony Blair accepts no responsibility for software viruses and you should check for viruses before opening any attachments. Internet communications
are not secure and therefore The Office of Tony Blair does not provide any guarantee or warranty that this email or any attachments shall remain confidential.

The Office of Tony. Blair is a trading name of Windrush Ventures Limited and Windrush Ventures No.3 LP Windrush Ventures Limited is a limited company
registered in England and Wales with registered number 06397276. Its reaistered office is 50 Broadway, London SWI H OBL.

Windrush Ventures No. 3 LP is a limited partnership registered in England and Wales with registered number LP012665. Its registered office is 50 Broadway
London SW1H OBL. The members of Windrush Ventures No.3 LP are BDBCO No.819 Limited and Windrush Ventures No.2 LLP and the address at which each of
these can be served is 50 Broadway, London SW1H OBL.

This email may relate to or be sent from other members of the Windrush group.




This email has been scanned by the MessageLabs Email Security System.
For more information please visit http://www.messagelabs.com/email




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786464 Date: 10/30/2015
