      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789546 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                                           RELEASE IN
                                                                                                           FULL




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, March 15, 2012 2:14 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: George Clooney's Crusade for Diplomatic Intervention in Sudan




From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Wednesday, March 14, 2012 05:39 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Valmoro, Lona 3; Reines, Philippe I; Adler, Caroline E
Subject: George Clooney's Crusade for Diplomatic Intervention in Sudan



This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to
colleagues, clients or customers, or to license text, images or graphics, use the Reprints tool at the top of any
article or visit: Reprints


 THE DAILY


 BEAST
George Clooney's Crusade for Diplomatic
Intervention in Sudan
The movie star is using his fame—and an audience with Obama and.
Hillary—to press for diplomatic intervention in the war-torn African
nation. Lloyd Grove on the Hollywood statesman's impassioned plea.
by Lloyd Grove I March 14, 2012 8:33 AM EDT

The horrific genocide of Darfur may have subsided; a so-called peace document between the Arab-dominated
Sudanese government and black African rebels has been the object of prolonged and dithering negotiations; the
country has been formally divided into Sudan and South Sudan; but government-sponsored carnage continues
apace in the Nuba Mountains on the oil-rich border.

George Clooney once again is bearing witness.

The 50-year-old movie star, who for the past decade has taken up the suffering of the Sudanese people as his
personal cause, reported that the situation is as bad and bloody as ever during a panel discussion Tuesday night
at the Council on Foreign Relations.

"There's a difference between two armies fighting and what the Geneva Convention calls war crimes—the
indiscriminate bombing of innocent civilians," Clooney told a packed house at the council's Manhattan
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789546 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789546 Date: 10/30/2015




headquarters. "It's all the same people who were involved in Darfur," Clooney went on, mentioning President
Omar Hassan al-Bashir, Defense Minister Abdelrahim Mohamed Hussein, and former interior minister Ahmad
Haroun, three of the north Sudanese officials charged with Darfur-related war crimes by the International
Criminal Court. "They're scaring the hell out of these people"—the men, women and children of the Nuba
Mountains—"and they're killing them and trying to get them just to leave."

Clooney has just returned from the conflict zone with fellow peace activist John Prendergast, who warned of "a
coming cataclysm" in East Africa. They were scheduled to press their case today and tomorrow in meetings
with President Obama, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, arguing
that the United States should work with China, the biggest customer for Sudan's recently halted oil production,
to get the oil flowing again by prevailing on al-Bashir to stop the violence. They were joined on the panel—
moderated by Today show anchor Ann Curry—by Darfur activist Omer Ismail and exiled Anglican bishop
Andudu Adam Elnail, whose Nuba congregation in Kadugli has suffered rapes and murders; the bishop has
been targeted for assassination.

All of them gave compelling testimony about the 22-year-old Khartoum dictatorship's campaign of house-to-
house "ethnic cleansing," mass rape, and murder (tossing the bodies into mass graves), dropping bombs from
high-flying Antonov planes, firing 300mm rockets into villages, and generally wielding instruments of terror
against the Nuba civilians.

But Clooney—who has long used his star power to aim a spotlight on the mayhem—was the big draw.

"There's a lot of things swallowing up the news right now," Clooney said, describing the difficulty of getting
media attention for Sudan's plight over the past year as the violence has ramped up. "There was the Arab
Spring. Go down the list of the big news stories that were happening at the time. News organizations were
covering them because they're big. Syria is still a big story today. Iran is a big story today. We're in the middle
of an election year ... John [Prendergast] and I are gonna do every press thing in the world in the next three
days, and people will know more and more about it."

Clooney suggested that the strongest argument for the United States taking a leading role in solving the problem
is economic, not altruistic. The South Sudanese government recently shut off oil production to pressure the
north Sudanese (who control pipeline and refining facilities) into stopping the terror, contributing to the hike in
gasoline prices.

Clooney—who has long used his star power to aim a spotlight on the mayhem—was the big draw.

"You can't guilt people into doing the right thing," Clooney argued. "China gets 6 percent of its oil imports
from the Sudan. That's a big number to China. They have $20 billion of oil infrastructure in South Sudan ...
When they can't get their oil, they're going to go somewhere else ... That raises the price of oil. So that gives us
the ability now to say, as advocates, "Every time you put gas in your car, you have reason to be concerned that
these cross-border problems aren't being addressed—because now you're actually paying for it."

Clooney also suggested the U.S. make a concerted effort to track down the Khartoum government's foreign
bank accounts—which they're using to purchase weapons and ammunition. "We should track that down—find
it, freeze it, and make it harder and harder for these guys to spend their money," Clooney said. "Tighten this
noose and make Khartoum a very small place to live."

Clooney and Prendergast are cofounders of the Satellite Sentinel Project, through which they are amassing
photographic evidence of the Sudanese government's crimes against humanity using a satellite hovering over
the region. On Monday, Clooney said, they were able to document an Antonov bombing run, and, using
corroborating testimony on the ground, have also collected evidence of mass-grave sites.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789546 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789546 Date: 10/30/2015




Yet President al-Bashir and his cronies have managed to escape arrest by the International Criminal Court, and
while such countries as South Africa have banned them from visiting, they are still welcome in Saudi Arabia
and Qatar.

An audience member asked how members of the Khartoum government can be brought to justice.

"We could have a surprise party in Lake Como for Omar al-Bashir," Clooney joked, referring to his Italian
vacation home. "Come on over! It's a great party! And have the ICC waiting for them."




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789546 Date: 10/30/2015
