      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783442 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, October 20, 2011 6:45 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: She wants a download on what kayani said in parliament yesterday




    Original Message
From: Feldman, Daniel F
Sent: Thursday, October 20, 2011 04:26 AM
To: Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J; Nuland, Victoria 1
Cc: Pratt, Jonathan G
Subject: Re: She wants a download on what kayani said in parliament yesterday

Here's the press summary. Per a request from Parl several weeks ago, K briefed the senate and assembly committees
on defense —they visited him at GHQ. Jonathan Pratt, our PolCouns, will send a few bullets of analysis this afternoon re
what it means and any potential impact for tonight's discussion, but it's generally being quite downplayed in terms of
significance.



MPs' briefing at GHQ

Published: October 20, 2011

At a briefing for members of the Senate and National Assembly Standing Committees on Defence held at GHQ on
Tuesday, military top brass, including the COAS, DG ISI and DG Military Operations, explained the army's position on
several points of Pakistan's security concerns. As the briefing was in-camera, no formal statement was issued, but press
reports based on disclosures of parliamentarians in attendance, confirm that the army will be acting in line with the
policies laid down by the political leadership on vital issues. This will, for the time being, assuage fears in some circles,
against the backdrop of the country's present situation, about the possibility of armed forces' interference in politics.
COAS General Kayani reaffirmed that the army would follow the guidelines given by the ruling political leadership,
whether they pertained to the launching of an operation against terrorists or dealing with drone attacks. The Standing
Committee members were informed that it was the government's responsibility to implement decisions made at the all
parties' conference about the troublesome Pak-US relationship and develop a consensus on the line of action to be
taken against drones. As US drone attacks continue, unrelented, in our tribal areas, the total disregard of Pakistani pleas
for stopping them is surely an embarrassment for the government and a violation of the sovereignty it and the army is
sworn to defend in letter and spirit.

General Kayani has left it to the government to decide whether to hold talks with the Taliban. He reassured the meeting
that Pakistan had no intention of launching an armed action in North Waziristan and there could be no question of a
compromise on national honour in developing relations with the US. In reply to a question from an MNA, 151 chief Lt-Gen
Pasha said that the army had repeatedly asked ISAF to act against militants, like Fazlullah (who is presently based in
Afghanistan), but it had failed to respond positively. "We are not involved in Afghanistan, but we expect them to
eliminate militants just like they expect us to," he was quoted as saying. This is yet another instance of the US-backed
Karzai government's duplicitous attitude towards Pakistan. General Kayani rejected the perception that Pakistan wanted
to control Afghanistan; rather it was in favour of peace and stability there. He maintained at the meeting that the US
had been informed that Pakistan did not require military aid. As yet, 20 percent of the amount promised under the
Kerry-Lugar Act has been paid.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783442 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783442 Date: 10/30/2015



The ball has now been hit to the government's side of the court. After the army's willingness to forego military aid, it is
up to the government to chalk out a clear and unambiguous policy that is consistent with the demands of dignity and
honour of a sovereign state.




http://nation.com.pk/pakistan-news-newspaper-daily-english-online/Opinions/Editorials/20-Oct-2011/MPs-briefing-at-
GHQ

    Original Message
From: Abedin, Huma
Sent: Thursday, October 20, 2011 03:18 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J; Nuland, Victoria J; Feldman, Daniel F
Subject: She wants a download on what kayani said in parliament yesterday




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783442 Date: 10/30/2015
