UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789357 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL


                              JOINT STATEMENT ON LIBYA BY
        FRENCH PRESIDENT NICOLAS SARKOZY, BRITISH PRIME MINISTER DAVID CAMERON
                       AND THE EMIR OF THE UNITED ARAB EMIRATES


     Tomorrow in London, the international community will come together
     to support a new beginning for Libya. A new beginning in which the
     people of Libya are free from violence and oppression, free to choose
     their own future.

     The world has witnessed momentous events over the last ten days.
     Following an appeal by the Arab League to take action to protect the
     people of Libya, on the 17 of March the United Nations Security
     Council passed an historic resolution to protect civilians from the
     violence unleashed by Qadhafi's war machine.

      Two days later, the Paris Summit emphasized the determination of the
      participants to act collectively and resolutely to give full effect to
      UNSCR 1973.

      The same day, a coalition of countries took action to help break the
      siege of Benghazi and drive back Qadhafi's forces. Hundreds of
      thousands of people have been rescued from the brink of humanitarian
      disaster.

      Our countries are resolved to continue to enforce UNSCR 1973 to
      protect the people of Libya. More countries from Europe and the Arab
      world are joining us. It is only when the civilian population are safe and
      secure from the threat of attack and the objectives of UNSCR 1973 are
      met that military operations will come to an end.

      We emphasize that we do not envisage any military occupation of
      Libya, which would be contrary to the terms of the Resolution. We
      reaffirm our strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
      territorial integrity and national unity of Libya.

      Military action is not an objective as such. A lasting solution can only
      be a political one that belongs to the Libyan people. That is why the
      political process that will begin tomorrow in London is so important.
      The London conference will bring the international community together
      to support Libya's transition from violent dictatorship and to help
      create the conditions where the people of Libya can choose their own
      future.

      In the words of the Arab League resolution, the current regime has
      completely lost its legitimacy. Oadhafi must therefore go immediately.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789357 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789357 Date: 10/30/2015




      We call on all his followers to leave him before it is too late. We call on
      all Libyans who believe that Qadhafi is leading Libya into a disaster to
      take the initiative now to organize a transition process.

      In our view, this could include the Interim National Transitional
      Council, the pioneering role of which we recognise, the civil society
      leaders as well as all those prepared to join the process of transition to
      democracy. We encourage them to begin a national political dialogue,
      leading to a representative process of transition, constitutional reform
      and preparation for free and fair elections.

      To help Libya make this transition, we are today also calling on all the
      participants at the London conference to give their strong support.

      We have averted a humanitarian disaster but Libya still faces a
      humanitarian crisis. In London, our countries will come together with
      the United Nations, the European Union, the African Union, NATO and
      the Arab League to consider how we can bring urgent relief now, and
      how we can support the needs of the people of Libya in the future.

      In the last few weeks, the. Libyan people have demonstrated their
      courage and their determination. Like all other peoples, they have the
      right freely to choose their leaders.

      We must unite to help them make a new beginning.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789357 Date: 10/30/2015
