UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788370 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL

                  United Nations                                                                            A/HRC/16/L. 38

                 General Assembly                                                      Distr.: Limited
                                                                                       21 March 2011

                                                                                       Original: English




   Human Rights Council
   Sixteenth session
   Agenda item 9
   Racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
   form of intolerance, follow-up and implementation
   of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action

                Pakistan (on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference): draft resolution


                16/... Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping and stigmatization
                        of, and discrimination, incitement to violence, and violence
                        against persons based on religion or belief
                          The Human Rights Council,
                       Reaffirming the commitment made by all States under the Charter of the United
                Nations to promote and encourage universal respect for and observance of all human rights
                and fundamental freedoms without distinction as to, inter alia, religion or belief,
                        Reaffirming also the obligation of States to prohibit discrimination on the basis of
                religion or belief and to implement measures to guarantee the equal and effective protection
                of the law,
                        Reaffirming further that the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
                provides, inter alia, that everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
                religion or belief, which shall include freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his
                choice, and freedom, either individually or in community with others and in public or
                private, to manifest his religion or belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching,
                        Reaffirming the positive role that the exercise of the right to freedom of opinion and
                expression and the full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and impart information can
                play in strengthening democracy and combating religious intolerance,
                       Deeply concerned about incidents of intolerance, discrimination and violence
                against persons based on their religion or belief in all regions of the world,
                          Deploring any advocacy of discrimination or violence on the basis of religion or
                belief,
                       Strongly deploring all acts of violence against persons on the basis of their religion
                or belief, as well as any such acts directed against their homes, businesses, properties,
                schools, cultural centres or places of worship,
                       Concerned about actions that wilfully exploit tensions or target individuals on the
                basis of their religion or belief,


  GE.11-12155                                                                                              Please recycle




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788370 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788370 Date: 10/30/2015




  A/HRC/16/L.38


                     Noting with deep concern the instances of intolerance, discrimination and acts of
              violence in many parts of the world, including cases motivated by discrimination against
              persons belonging to religious minorities, in addition to the negative projection of the
              followers of religions and the enforcement of measures that specifically discriminate
              against persons on the basis of religion or belief,
                    Recognizing the valuable contribution of people of all religions or beliefs to
              humanity and the contribution that dialogue among religious groups can make towards
              improved awareness and understanding of the common values shared by all humankind,
                     Recognizing also that working together to enhance implementation of existing legal
              regimes that protect individuals against discrimination and hate crimes, increase interfaith
              and intercultural efforts, and to expand human rights education are important first steps in
              combating incidents of intolerance, discrimination and violence against individuals on the
              basis of religion or belief,
                      1.     Expresses deep concern at the continued serious instances of derogatory
              stereotyping, negative profiling and stigmatization of persons based on their religion or
              beliefs, as well as programmes and agendas pursued by extremist organizations and groups
              aimed at creating and perpetuating negative stereotypes about religious groups, in particular
              when condoned by Governments;
                      2.      Expresses its concern that incidents of religious intolerance, discrimination
              and related violence, as well as of negative stereotyping of individuals on the basis of
              religion or belief continue to rise around the world, and condemns, in this context, any
              advocacy of religious hatred against individuals that constitutes incitement to
              discrimination, hostility or violence, and urges States to take effective measures, as set forth
              in this resolution, consistent with their obligations under international human rights law, to
              address and combat such incidents;
                     3.    Condemns any advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
              discrimination, hostility or violence, whether it involves the use of print, audio-visual or
              electronic media or any other means;
                      4.     Recognizes that the open public debate of ideas, as well as interfait.h and
              intercultural dialogue at the local, national and international levels can be among the best
              protections against religious intolerance, and can play a positive role in strengthening
              democracy and combating religious hatred, and convinced that a continuing dialogue on
              these issues can help overcome existing misperceptions;
                     5.    Notes the speech given by Secretary-General of the Organization of the
              Islamic Conference, Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, at the fifteenth session of the Human Rights
              Council, and draws on his call on States to take the following actions to foster a domestic
              environment of religious tolerance, peace and respect, by:
                     (a)    Encouraging the creation of collaborative networks to build mutual
              understanding, promoting dialogue and inspiring constructive action towards shared policy
              goals and the pursuit of tangible outcomes, such as servicing projects in the fields of
              education, health, conflict prevention, employment, integration and media education;
                     (b)    Creating an appropriate mechanism within the government to, inter alia,
              identify and address potential areas of tension between members of different religious
              communities, and assisting with conflict prevention and mediation;
                     (c)    Encouraging training of government officials in effective outreach strategies;
                     (d)    Encouraging efforts of leaders to discuss within their communities causes of
              discrimination and evolving strategies to counter these causes;



  2




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788370 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788370 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                             A/HRC/16/L.38

                    (e)     Speaking out against intolerance, including advocacy of religious hatred that
             constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence;
                    (J)     Adopting measures to criminalize incitement to imminent violence based on
             religion or belief;
                     (g)    Understanding the need to combat denigration and negative religious
             stereotyping of persons, as well as incitement to religious hatred, by strategizing and
             harmonizing actions at the local, national, regional and international levels through, inter
             alia, education and awareness-building;
                    (h)     Recognizing that the open, constructive and respectful debate of ideas, as
             well as interfaith and intercultural dialogue at the local, national and international levels,
             can play a positive role in combating religious hatred, incitement and violence;
                    6.      Calls upon all States:
                     (a)    To take effective measures to ensure that public functionaries in the conduct
             of their public duties do not discriminate against an individual on the basis of religion or
             belief;
                    (b)   To foster religious freedom and pluralism by promoting the ability of
             members of all religious communities to manifest their religion, and to contribute openly
             and on an equal footing to the society;
                    (c)     To encourage representation and meaningful participation of individuals,
             irrespective of their religion, in all sectors of society;
                    (d)    To undertake a strong effort to counter religious profiling, which is
             understood to be the invidious use of religion as a criterion in conducting questionings,
             searches and other law enforcement investigative procedures;
                    7.      Encourages States to consider providing updates on efforts made in this
             regard as part of ongoing reporting to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
             for Human Rights;
                    8.     Calls upon States to adopt measures and policies to promote the full respect
             and protection for places of worship and religious sites, cemeteries and shrines, and to take
             measures in cases where they are vulnerable to vandalism or destruction;
                     9.       Calls for strengthened international efforts to foster a global dialogue for the
             promotion of a culture of tolerance and peace at all levels, based on respect for human
             rights and diversity of religions and beliefs, and decides to convene a panel discussion on
             this issue at its seventeenth session within existing resources.




                                                                                                                        3




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788370 Date: 10/30/2015
