      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787764 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL


From:                             Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                             Thursday, January 5, 2012 10:48 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Screws tighten on Iran as big buyers shun its oil (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Thursday, January 05, 2012 09:16 PM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Screws tighten on Iran as big buyers shun its oil (Reuters)



TEHRAN (Reuters) - Iran faced the prospect of cutbacks in its oil sales to China and Japan as new measures to
block Tehran's crude exports over its nuclear programme appeared to be driving its economy to the wall.

  The developments in Asia on Thursday followed news 24 hours earlier that EU leaders had agreed to halt
European purchases of Iranian crude.

   China, Iran's biggest trade partner, had already cut its purchases of Iranian oil by more than half this month
and would extend the cuts to February, a Beijing-based trader who deals with Iranian oil said.

   Japan would consider cutbacks in its Iranian oil purchases to secure a waiver from new U.S. sanctions signed
into law on New Year's Eve by President Barack Obama, a government source said.

   Between them, China, the EU and Japan buy about half of Iran's exports of 2.6 million barrels of oil per
day.

    International sanctions that for years had little effect are for the first time having a real impact on day-to-day
life in Iran, where the rial currency has tumbled and people have rushed to convert savings into dollars.

   Most oil traders still expect Iran to find buyers for its crude, but it will have to offer steeper discounts that
will cut the hard currency revenue it needs to import food and other basic supplies for its 74 million people.

  Iran has put on a brave face. Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Salehi said on Thursday the country would
"weather the storm".

    "Iran, with divine assistance, has always been ready to counter such hostile actions and we are not concerned
at all about the sanctions," he told a news conference.

   But in a sign it is seeking to alleviate the pressure, Salehi said Tehran was interested in resuming
negotiations over its nuclear programme with Western powers, who delivered an offer for talks via Turkey.

   Iran's leaders have responded to the sanctions with military sabre-rattling, including a threat to blockade the
Middle East's oil by shutting the Strait of Hormuz that leads to the Gulf, and even challenging a U.S. aircraft
carrier if it sails the strait.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787764 Date: 10/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787764 Date: 10/30/2015




EUROPEAN EMBARGO

    European diplomats said this week they had agreed in principle to impose an EU oil embargo. The bloc -
particularly Italy, Spain and Greece - has collectively bought about 500,000 barrels per day of Iran's oil, making
it Iran's second biggest customer after China.

  EU leaders have yet to agree when the embargo will take effect, but are expected to announce it at a foreign
ministers meeting at the end of this month.

   China, the largest buyer, which imported about 550,000 bpd of Iran's oil last year, has cut its purchases by
more than half for this month and would now extend that cut to February, according to the Beijing-based
trader.

    China is seeking deeper discounts for continuing to do business with Iran in spite of Western sanctions.

  Still, the West needs to balance its determination to isolate Iran with concerns about the impact on a fragile
world economy of measures that might hurt oil supplies.

   So far, the U.S. and EU sanctions have caused a steady rise in oil prices this week. Brent crude futures were
trading at about $114 a barrel on Thursday, up by about $7 a barrel since Obama signed the new sanctions into
law.

    A Saudi government source said Saudi Arabia - the world's largest oil exporter and a foe of Iran - was ready
to fill any supply gaps.

   A Japanese government source said Tokyo, which buys about 250,000 bpd from Iran, would discuss with
U.S. officials how to deal with the new sanctions law. Among options would be cuts in oil purchases to secure a
waiver for its financial institutions.

   Turkey, a U.S. ally which buys almost a third of its oil from Iran, has said it would also try to seek a waiver
from the Obama administration.

NO TRADE IN THE BAZAAR

    In Iran's bazaars, prices for basic foodstuffs and other goods have been rising fast in recent months.

   Much of that inflation has been caused by President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's policy of cutting back on
government subsidies for staples that held prices down, a policy that has been praised by the International
Monetary Fund.

   The government has tried to ease the pain by giving cash payments to families. But the fall in the rial
currency has slashed the value of those payments in dollar terms from about $45 a month to $27.



News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787764 Date: 10/30/2015
