     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792210 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL



From:                               Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                               Tuesday, May 8, 2012 4:51 PM
To:
Subject:                            FW: Minority Leader Pelosi - Chen Guangcheng Telephone Call




From: Mayer, Graham D (Beijing)
Sent: Tuesday, May 08, 2012 12:24 PM
To: Locke, Gary F (Beijing); Wang, Robert S (Beijing); Mills, Cheryl D; Drucker, Joy E; Moy, Kin W; Sullivan, Jacob J;
Carlson, Aubrey A; Sciutto, James E (Jim) (Beijing)
Cc: Kritenbrink, Daniel J (Dan) (Beijing); Mayer, Graham D (Beijing)
Subject: Minority Leader Pelosi - Chen Guangcheng Telephone Call

                                                   DRAFT Readout
                         Telephone call between Minority Leader Pelosi and Chen Guangcheng.
                               Ambassador Locke participating. Jim Brown interpreting



Call begins at 22:52 Beijing time



Chen: Hello.

Rep. Pelosi: Hello, Mr. Chen.

Chen: Hello I am fine. Thank you so much for helping me from so far away.

Rep. Pelosi: Thank you for your courage in fighting for the legal and human rights of the Chinese people. Many people
have been following your efforts since before your arrest and are happy you are now hopefully moving on to more
opportunities to express your opinions.

Chen: Thank you very much. I don't deserve the praise. I was just doing things I should and speaking my conscience.

Rep. Pelosi: I am happy your family is safe and you will have the opportunity to do what you have chosen to do without
interference. I am proud of Secretary Clinton, Ambassador Locke and the Embassy in Beijing for the help they have
provided to you and your family.

Chen: I am also thankful to them. They have done a lot for me.

Rep. Pelosi: I am concerned about those people in China who helped you escape and about your mother, brother and
nephew. I don't know what kind of contact you may have with them or what their current status is or what we can do to
help.

Chen: I was in contact with my family today. My family — my mother and brothers — shared the news that they don't
have freedom, and neither do other relatives in the village who are facing so many restrictions. I spoke with a
correspondent from Reuters who I understand went to my village and reported on these conditions.

 Rep. Pelosi: Do you think the Chinese government will investigate your treatment in Shandong?

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792210 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792210 Date: 10/30/2015




Chen: They said there would be an investigation, but so far I see no stop to the violence and legal actions and harm to
my family. I haven't seen any actions, and I don't know how fast any investigation will proceed or if it will be complete.

Ambassador Locke: Did you speak to the Petition Office today? I understand you have talked to them four times for a
total of approximately three to four hours.

Chen: I did not speak to petition office officials today. I saw them yesterday morning but did not hear back from them
today.

Rep. Pelosi: Do you think you are moving forward on documentation and the process for you and your family to come
to U.S.? Is this process moving forward to your satisfaction?

Chen: I think they are doing it. I am not sure about progress... (Call briefly dropped)...maybe wait few days until Friday.

Rep. Pelosi: As long as the process is moving forward, and the good offices of the Embassy and the Secretary have
certainly been important to progress. I hope it won't be long but I don't know how soon before you can take advantage
of the friendship being extended to you in our country.

(Call dropped for several minutes.)


Rep. Pelosi: How are your wife and family?

Chen: My wife and family are all here with me now.

Rep. Pelosi: That's great.

Chen: We were separated from the children for such a long time. We are so happy.

Rep. Pelosi: How are you? How do you feel? How is your foot? Are you better?

Chen: My foot is not as swollen as before. I have a cast on it now. There was blood in my stool but with medicine it is
under control and not a big medical problem.

Rep. Pelosi: Do you have any requests for help beyond the work of the Embassy?

Chen: I am worried about the security of my family members and restrictions on them. I hope you can show concern.

Rep. Pelosi: We will. Do you mean your mother, brother and nephew?

Chen: Including them.

 Rep. Pelosi: What about your friends?

 Chen: My friends' situation is not good. They are under restrictions and I am also concerned about them. I met many
 times with the central government and told them that the people who helped me violated no law and committed no
 wrongdoing but are still under restrictions. The lawyer Wei Guo who was helping defend me is also under restrictions.

 Rep. Pelosi : The more attention and bright light that is shone on those situations the better, but first we have to make
 sure you and your family are safely in the United States. I don't know how long it will take, but it is our first priority,
 while at the same time we see that your other family members are safe and those who helped you don't pay the price
 for it.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792210 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792210 Date: 10/30/2015




Chen: I agree.


Ambassador Locke: Did you talk with Bob Wang today?


Chen: I talked to him this afternoon at around 3 or 4 pm.


Rep. Pelosi: Who is that?


Ambassador Locke: Bob Wang is our Deputy Chief of Mission who has gotten to know Mr. Chen very well.


Rep. Pelosi: Is there anything else you want us to know at this time?


Chen: Not right now. I have no other news except that many of my friends are outside the hospital but can't come in to
see me.

Rep. Pelosi: I learned of your interest in your in speaking with me from the State Department. If there are any future
communications between us I suggest to Ambassador Locke that the Embassy can be the conduit for that.

Chen: Fine.

Rep. Pelosi: I pray for your health and safety and that of your family. Let me know if I or my colleagues in Congress can
be helpful. I am grateful to those who have been speaking to the Chinese government about you since your arrest,
including the Embassy and the Secretary. Their help has been important in improving your situation. Let's say in
touch. We don't want to do anything to disrupt the process and course of action that we hope for from moving
smoothly. I am praying for you and your family.

Chen: Thank you. I agree.

Rep. Pelosi: I am honored to have had this conversation with you. I look forward speaking with you again.

Chen: I am also honored.



Call ends 23:08



SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792210 Date: 10/30/2015
