UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789636 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL


                          ALI Restatement Meeting June 12, 2012

     The primary objection that has been raised consistently with respect to whether
     there should be some revision of the Restatement (Third) of the Foreign Relations
     Law of the United States has been that the issues are too controversial, and the law
     too contested, for a useful revision to be accomplished. (The second most common
     objection is that it is just too big a job).

     Based on suggestions from the ALI Council, the ASIL panel, the State Department
     Advisory Committee and others, Paul and I therefore thought that the primary goal
     of the June meeting might be to identify less controversial topics in which the law
     has evolved significantly over the last quarter century, and to explore how those
     topics might productively be revised. We thought we could proceed by identifying 4
     or 5 such topics in advance, and ask individual participants or pairs of participants
     to prepare a 5 to 10 page paper on each topic, in advance of the meeting. The
     papers would address how that section of the Restatement might be revised and the
     challenges that a revision would pose. These papers would be circulated to the
     meeting participants in advance, with the expectation that all would be read before
     the meeting. The bulk of the conversation at the meeting would focus on these
     papers. Ideally, the goal would be to demonstrate that at least some sections of the
     Restatement can and should productively be revised, to persuade the skeptics that
     some form of revision can be accomplished. (Or perhaps even we will be convinced
     that it cannot be.) The meeting might also start a conversation about how and
     whether the more controversial topics might be addressed, whether new subjects
     should be included in a revision, and what form a revision of the Restatement might
     take.

     Based on the above approach, the following would be a possible rough outline for
     the day:

     I. Introduction

     Lance, Paul and Sarah address the need for some form of revision of the
     Restatement, the challenges posed, and the goals for the day

     II. Presentation and Discussion of Topics

     Presentation of 4-5 previously assigned and distributed papers discussing how
     particular, less controversial topics from the current Restatement might
     productively be revised.

     Possible topics for the discussion could include:

            a. Status of treaties in US domestic law
            b. Executive and executive/congressional agreements
            c. Federalism and Preemption



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789636 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789636 Date: 10/30/2015




            d. Adjudicative jurisdiction, Comity, [Universal Jurisdiction?] and Forum
               Non Conveniens
            e. State immunities
            f. State responsibility
            g. International trade? Enforcement of foreign judgments? A private
               international law topic?

     III. Discussion of Controversial . Topics and Potential for Revision

     Controversial topics include:

            a. status of customary international law in domestic law
            b. human rights
            c. rights of aliens
            d. official immunity
            e. prescriptive jurisdiction

     IV. New Topics a Revision Might Address?

            a. Presidential-Congressional war powers, AUMFs
            b. Law of armed conflict and post-9/11 issues
                    (detention, interrogation, habeas)
            c. Sanctions; designation of terrorist organizations
            d. Investment treaty protection
            e. Tax treaties
            f. Corruption
            g. Recognition power
            h. International Criminal Law
            i. International Environmental Law

     V. Discussion of the Form a Revision or Supplement Might Take

     VI. Next Steps / Further Work




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789636 Date: 10/30/2015
