      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790130 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Thursday, May 17, 2012 8:51 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: A bold step forward: Assessing the State Department's new J-1 Summer Work Travel
                                  regulations-Economic Policy Institute




From: Sonenshine, Tara D
Sent: Thursday, May 17, 2012 05:59 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: FW: A bold step forward: Assessing the State Department's new 3-1 Summer Work Travel regulations-Economic
Policy Institute

Hi there,
I like sending you GOOD NEWS on Summer Work Travel!
These authors, below, have always been highly critical of State Department on SWT.
This is pretty good stuff.



A bold step forward: Assessing the State Department's new J-1 Summer Work Travel regulations-Economic Policy
Institute
By Daniel Costa and Ross Eisenbrey
On Friday, May 4, the State Department's Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs released a new set of rules for the
Summer Work Travel program, a part of the J-1 visa Exchange Visitor Program originally designed to facilitate cultural
exchange between Americans and citizens of other countries. Despite the original intent of the program, EPI has
documented and explained how the Summer Work Travel (SWT) program has over the past few decades morphed into
the country's largest guest worker program and lacks adequate regulation and oversight by the State Department or any
other governmental body.
Partly in response to inadequacies in the program described by EPI and the abuses revealed by hundreds of J-1 workers
who went on strike in August at a Hershey's chocolate packing plant in Palmyra, Pennsylvania, the State
Department undertook a comprehensive review of the SWT program. The May 2012 regulations are the first installment
of SWT reforms planned by the State Department; another set of rules will be issued before the end of the year.
While not a panacea, the new rules are a significant improvement and go far toward protecting the rights of U.S. and
J-1 workers. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and the State Department deserve to be commended for acting swiftly
to better protect American workers from displacement by SWT participants—and SWT workers from exploitation by
abusive employers, program sponsors, and labor recruiters.
Protecting U.S. workers
The new rules will better protect U.S. workers for several reasons. First, SWT jobs must now be seasonal or temporary..
The State Department now explicitly prohibits employers from filling permanent jobs with temporary workers who are
rotated every few months. This is exactly how Hershey's replaced full-time, decent-paying unionized jobs; the company
essentially outsourced them to a steady stream of SWT workers, while still technically keeping the jobs in the country.
The new rules also define a job as seasonal or temporary by borrowing regulatory language found in the H-2B program,
a temporary labor program intended to fill short-term labor shortages. This consistency between the two programs
makes sense because many SWT jobs are in occupations similar to those filled by H-2B workers.
In addition, new provisions require SWT program "sponsors"—the nongovernmental companies and organizations that
recruit workers and manage the program in practice—to confirm that SWT employers will not displace U.S. workers by
hiring program participants; have not experienced layoffs in the past 120 days; and do not have workers on lockout or
on strike. This will help prevent employers from laying off and replacing U.S. workers with SWT workers or from

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790130 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790130 Date: 10/30/2015



undermining the collective bargaining efforts of their employees. These provisions resemble regulations in other visa
programs in the H category. However, it is unclear whether program sponsors have the ability, expertise, and access to
employer information to determine if U.S. workers might be displaced by the hiring of SWT workers. And from the
perspective of a U.S. worker who has been displaced, he or she still lacks any official avenue to ameliorate the situation
via the sponsor or the State Department.
The State Department has taken another positive step by capping the number of annual participants in the SWT
program at 109,000, a move that will mainly benefit young U.S. workers. For years, the program grew rapidly despite
scathing criticisms of mismanagement from government auditors and inspectors. It expanded from about 21,000
participants in 1996 to a peak of more than 152,000 in 2008. Halting the program's growth is the smart thing to do
considering its inherent weaknesses. But in light of the high unemployment rate among young people in the United
States—which is holding steady at 16.4 percent for 16- to 24-year-olds and 8.5 percent for college graduates under age
25—we recommend the number of participants be reduced further. The size of the SWT program should vary inversely
with the youth unemployment rate.
Protecting SWT participants
In addition to protecting U.S. workers, the new State Department rules will protect SWT participants. For the first time,
there is a mandatory cultural exchange component to the SWT program that strives to achieve the goals and purposes
of the Fulbright-Hays Act, the 1961 law that led to the creation of the SWT program. For decades, the program has
operated as an unregulated temporary labor program with no requirements at all regarding cultural exchange. The new
provisions will go a long way toward refocusing it on facilitating interaction between foreign students and Americans.
They achieve this by requiring that SWT student workers interact with Americans both in and out of the workplace and
that sponsors organize additional cultural activities, as well as by prohibiting jobs that are normally performed during
overnight shifts.
Furthermore, sponsors are now required to assist SWT workers if they wish to switch jobs and "must not pose obstacles
to job changes." This represents real progress on a serious and common issue. SWT workers sometimes arrive at their
jobs and find the conditions differ from what they were promised or from what should reasonably be expected of them,
considering they are participating in a cultural exchange program. Unfortunately, we have heard from multiple sources
that when workers seek to switch jobs, sponsors and employers often respond by threatening SWT workers with
program termination if they do not remain on their assigned job, even if the conditions are unsafe or if the employer has
been abusive or acted unlawfully. In some cases, labor recruiters have traveled from abroad to threaten SWT workers in
person with severe consequences if they fail to stay on the job.
Nevertheless, this rule could have easily been strengthened by more explicitly prohibiting sponsors from forcing a SWT
worker to remain with a particular employer if she has legitimate, substantiated complaints, or from threatening the
worker with program termination if she does not remain on the job. When SWT workers have their program terminated
unjustly and prematurely, the resulting financial loss can be significant. SWT workers typically invest thousands of dollars
to participate in the program and expect to earn that money back after working for four months. If their program is
terminated early because they seek to leave an unacceptable situation, they instantly become deportable and may end
up thousands of dollars in debt through no fault of their own.
The State Department must also be recognizedlor doing an excellent job in determining the occupations that should be
excluded from the SWT program. The expanded list of occupations now excludes jobs that have been declared
hazardous to youth by the Secretary of Labor, as well as numerous other dangerous and difficult jobs in agriculture,
forestry, fishing and hunting, mining, quarrying, oil and gas extraction, construction, and manufacturing. It makes sense
to exclude these jobs for two reasons: First, participants working in a cultural exchange program should not work in
dangerous jobs they are not adequately trained and prepared for. Second, employers with labor shortages in such
occupations have adequate access to foreign temporary workers through the H-2A and H-2B guest worker programs,
which are managed by the departments of Labor and Homeland Security. In fact, these two programs were created
specifically to fill temporary labor shortages in many of the newly prohibited occupations. Although the protections for
 U.S. workers and foreign temporary workers in the H-2A and H-2B programs are minimal (and have been criticized in
 detail by EPI on many occasions), their worker safeguards are much more extensive than those of the SWT program in its
 past or present forms.
While most of the new rules go into effect immediately, the ban on these jobs has been delayed until Nov. 1, 2012. This
 grants employers dependent on SWT workers ample time to modify their workforce by recruiting local workers or
 petitioning for guest workers in the H-2 programs. Because the vast majority of SWT workers are employed in the United


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790130 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790130 Date: 10/30/2015




States during the summer months, most employers with SWT workers in the prohibited industries will not be affected
this calendar year, and have an entire year to plan for next season.
The rules also require that sponsors "use extra caution when placing students in positions at employers in lines of
business that are frequently associated with trafficking persons"—such as "modeling agencies, housekeeping, [and]
janitorial services." Disturbingly, the public has already learned from press reports of multiple cases of SWT participants
victimized by human trafficking as a direct result of their participation in the program. Thus, instead of relying on
sponsors to use "extra caution," the State Department should additionally ban these three occupations. Employers in all
three industries may use the H-1B or H-2B visa programs if they have trouble hiring enough U.S. workers.
The State Department also took an important step by banning staffing agencies that use the program from
subcontracting SWT workers. Before this rule change, staffing agencies were allowed to act as both employers and
subcontractors in the program, making it difficult to distinguish which of the multiple employers is ultimately
responsible for the SWT employee. In the case of Hershey's, for example, there were two staffing agency
subcontractors—Exel and SHS—between the sponsor (CETUSA) and the ultimate employer (Hershey's). These
subcontractors profited from SWT workers earning near the minimum wage by receiving a portion of the (already low)
wages earned by the workers; this share was deducted by the employer or the subcontractor directly (sometimes by
both). This creates an incentive to deduct more of their earnings, which can lead to improper and excessive deductions.
Multiple layers of subcontractors and employers also make it difficult to hold employers liable for legal violations
because companies pass the buck to the sponsor or subcontractor, and vice versa.
Having requested that the State Department make this change, we applaud their consideration and responsiveness on
this important matter. Staffing agencies are still allowed to hire SWT workers if the workers are employed and
controlled by the agencies directly and not subcontracted out to another employer or subcontractor. But by ending the
practice of staffing agencies subcontracting and outsourcing SWT workers to other employers, the State Department has
increased accountability and helped SWT workers who have legitimate claims of minimum wage and overtime
violations.
Important criticisms
Although the rules are generally praiseworthy, we have two important criticisms. While the revised prevailing wage rule
is a slight improvement, it still fails to protect against adverse impacts on the wages of U.S. workers or against the
underpayment of foreign workers, and it is completely unenforceable. The rule should require that a SWT worker be
paid the average wage in the local area for the occupation, and the Department of Labor should be involved by
certifying the wage and auditing employers to ensure workers are paid appropriately.
Next, we were surprised by the State Department's unambiguous statement that it has no jurisdiction over employers
participating in the program. The department puts its faith in nongovernmental companies—the sponsors—and hopes
that they will be able to convince employers to act in good faith and comply with the rules, despite the fact that
employers and sponsors are de facto business partners. Although it may be reasonable for the State Department to shy
away from directly monitoring employers because its staff lacks expertise in labor and employment law, the department
is wrong to conclude that it is powerless. In fact, the department has total authority over the program's rules. It could,
for example, simply require that employers certify that they will comply with all program rules as well as relevant labor
and employment laws, stipulating that if they do not (e.g., if there is a credible, substantiated complaint or if they
commit a legal violation), they will be banned from the program entirely. The State Department could then keep a list of
bad actor employers and prohibit all sponsors from working with these employers.
Conclusion
Overall, the State Department under Secretary Clinton's leadership has boldly made positive changes to improve a
program that was desperately in need of reform and has had identifiable negative consequences for the U.S. labor
 market. Thanks to these efforts, vulnerable foreign workers and young American workers will be better protected from
employers across the country that seek to depress wages and degrade working conditions by using cheap, exploitable
 labor from abroad. While there is still much more to do, we are encouraged by the genuine progress achieved so far.



Karen Schinnerer
Special Assistant
Office of the Under Secretary for Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs (R)
U.S. Department of State
Office: 202-647-9901

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790130 Date: 10/30/2015
