      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785297 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                                              RELEASE IN
                                                                                                                              PART B6
                  1129635311111EROPMES:111.                                                                   41:218122316123151ZIMENIZINGIMUNINEEIRMI


From:                                         H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                                         Friday, April 1, 2011 11:21 AM
To:                                           'ntanden                                                                                     B6
Subject:                                      Re: Ideas on Promote Economic Growth in Egypt



Thx, for your ideas which are among the ones we are considering. I still hope to get to CAP soon! All the best to you and
your family.


From: Neera Tanden [mailto'
Sent: Tuesday, March 22, 2011 03:08 AM
To: H
Subject: Re: Ideas on Promote Economic Growth in Egypt


Thanks Hillary and great announcement in Egypt on an economic agenda!

Quite a whirlwind since this email!

I was in Turkey doing govt/business/think tank meetings for a week, and was really struck by the
effects rising food prices are having on all kinds of areas of life. Rising food prices also may cause a
new look at Africa, given its potential for growth from that source; and given all the change in North
Africa, I think Americans may be open to thinking about Africa in a new way. Pm going to try to
write about this possible convergence of American interests and global trends. I know it's almost
silly to raise these issues with you when you are literally juggling the world on your shoulders, but
given your track record on the issues of food and. Africa, thought it still worth it for down the road.

And of course, we'd still love to get you to CAP.

Thank you for all you're doing,

Neera


From: H <HDR22©clintonemail.com >
To: "ntanden
Sent: Thu, March 3, 2011 7:53:01 PM
Subject: Re: Ideas on Promote Economic Growth in Egypt

Neera-- This    ight on tarizet               somethinz were trying to encourage. Mx for thinking-and writinal All the best,,


From: Neera Tanden [mailto:
Sent: Thursday. February 17, 2011 11:54 PM
To: H
Subject: Ideas on Promote Economic Growth in Egypt

Hi Hillary,

I was at Kris Balderston's swearing in and you both were fabulous and hysterical!


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785297 Date: 10/30/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785297 Date: 10/30/2015




I wrote this column on new ideas to ensure shared economic growth in Egypt - I know, it's kind of off
the beaten track for me, but I got a brain wave about lowering trade barriers and creating a private
sector initiative for investment, and then for good measure, I hit the Republicans for cutting foreign
aid. We sent it to the Hill today and it's getting some good play. I hate to clutter your email, but on
the off-chance you find it useful, I'm sending it along.

  t.tp:Liwww.americanPross
                      r .orglissues/2011102/egypt opportunity.htrni

Democracy Also Means Opportunity
An Economic Growth Agenda to Foster Democracy in Egypt

Egyptians celebrate in Tahrir Square after President Hosni Mubarak resigned in Cairo, Egypt, on February 11, 2011. The United
States can play a critical role in fostering economic growth in Egypt to create jobs and thus more hope for millions of Egyptians.


By Neera Tanden i February 17, 2011

o[ fl'




TEXT-5.25    AA   A



The economic difficulties facing young, well-educated Tunisians and Egyptians fueled, at least in part, their desire
for change and their willingness to risk personal harm to protest their governments. Rising costs coupled with fewer
opportunities perhaps sparked. the revolutionary change Egypt experienced these past several weeks, but just. as
economic pressure can destabilize regimes, broad-based, sustainable economic growth can foster stability.

Now is the time to show the world that democratization can mean expanded economic opportunity, too. The enemies
of democracy—corruption, despotism, oppression—are enemies of economic growth. In contrast, the values of
democracy--openness, transparency, merit, and free movement—propel economic growth. Democratic-led
economic growth, however, sometimes needs a push.

We need a new Marshall Plan for Egypt. The United States can play a critical role in fostering economic growth in
Egypt io create jobs and thus More hope for millions of Egyptians while also fostering an expanded market of U.S.
goods and services. While it is obviously not the role of the United States to tell the Egyptian people what to do, it's
critical that the Obama administration develop a multipronged strategy in conjunction with the private sector to
promote a rapid growth and investment agenda for Egypt that forms a true partnership with the country.

A strategic growth agenda by the United States and allies can have a real impact. Egypt's entire gross domestic
Product in 2009—the sum total of all goods and services produced in the country that year—was a quarter of the
state domestic product of Illinois. And Egypt's young, \veil-educated, and eager workforce is ripe for the kind of

         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785297 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785297 Date: 10/30/2015




growth-oriented economic policies the United States can help them craft—policies that build on the democratic
values the Egyptians embraced in Tahrir Square.


There are three overarching steps the Obama administration and Congress should consider swiftly. First, our trade
policies should reflect a pro-democracy agenda. As part of an initiative to foster economic growth in Egypt, the
United States should lower barriers to trade, which will expand Egypt's export sector and create jobs. This is not a
heavy lift. Currently our trade policies toward Egypt already reflect our foreign policy interests.

The United States today permits products to be imported from Egypt withdut tariffs if they have been produced by
factories registered in so-called "Qualified Industrial Zones," which are regional trade zones that have lower trade
barriers, and if 10.5 percent of the inputs of these products originate from Israel. This policy was initiated as a means
of promoting peace in the Middle East—a worthy goal then and an even more worthy goal today.

We therefore should expand these Industrial Zones to cover more of Egypt itself and create a broader policy of
reducing tariffs in half for those countries in the Middle East and in North Africa that move toward democracy and
continue to support existing peace agreements such as the Camp David Accord. Fostering a real democracy in Egypt
is such a critical national security objective that we should be at least as supportive of that goal in our trade policies.

Second, as my colleague John Norris details in another column today, we should increase U.S. aid to Egypt and
focus those increases toward fostering economic growth. Currently we send roughly $2 billion to Egypt annually, hut
a substantial portion of that aid is to support its military. We should substantially increase funds over the next two
years in development a.renas that promote private investment in job growth.

'Specifically, we should increase the $250 million in economic support we currently provide through the Economic
Support Fund. These new funds. should go toward direct economic assistance to support entrepreneurs as well as
existing. public- and private-sector companies to encourage both business startups and business expansion.

This is why Republicans inthe House of Representatives should abandon their plans to slash the foreign aid budget.
While they are not touching the foreign military assistance for Egypt, they are cutting the Economic Support Fund
bv i 0 percent., which would translate into a $25 million cut to Egypt's eConomic assistance. If the House
Republicans have their way, it 'would mean that just as Egypt moves toward democracy, American foreign aid,
which was a running spigot during the previous regime, would dry up.

That is a message only Al Qaeda would love. We should be expanding economic support for Egypt right now. not
reducing our support.

Finally. the private sector has a role to play. Large-scale philanthropies such as the Clinton Global Inhiative, which
have real credibility in the developing world, should organize the private sector for a rapid investment plan in Egypt.
A coalition of businesses should be harnessed--businesses that do not represent one country or even one continent--
to increase their current investments or start new investments in Egypt, with an eye towards creating new
opportunities for the people.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785297 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785297 Date: 10/30/2015




At the end of the day, our role is not to develop American-style capitalism in Egypt. Indeed, as they are doing for
their country as a whole, it will be up to Egyptians to create the economy they want. But as it stands in partnership
with a soon-to-be democratic government, the United States should stand in partnership to help build an economy
that meets the aspirational goals of Egypt's people.

Sixty years ago, our country used its economic power to help foster growth in a Europe ravaged in the aftermath of
World War II. Our postwar leaders had the vision and foresight to understand that a Europe that was growing
economically would help support stable democracies that were ultimately a bulwark against communism in the
former Soviet Union. While America should not do this alone, that lesson tells us we should use all the levers of our
power—diplomacy and economic power—now to support a new democratic Egypt.

When the people of Egypt as well as the rest of the Arab world see that democracy creates economic opportunity and
raises their standards of living, they will know they are better off when restrictive regimes fall and are replaced by
democracy. That simple but important lesson can unravel a central claim of Al Qaeda: that the United States
supports oppressive Arab dictatorships to thwart the aspirations of Muslims. Ending that lie will make us all safer.

Neera Tanden is Chief Operating Officer at the Center for American Progress.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785297 Date: 10/30/2015
