UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791390 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL


                                      CONFIDENTIAL



                                              February 21, 2011



 For: Hillary
 From: Sid
 Re: No fly zone over Libya


 UK former Foreign Secretary David Owen has called for a no-fly zone over Libya, imposed by
 the United Nations and/or Nato, like the no-fly zone imposed on Saddam' s Iraq. US might
 consider advancing tomorrow. Libyan helicopters and planes are raining terror on cities.

 Article below:



 UN should authorise NATO and Egypt to
 enforce Libyan 'No Fly Zone' to protect
 civilians

 In the wake of reported air attacks on civilian crowds by the Libyan airforce, former Foreign
 Secretary Lord David Owen has called on the UN Security Council to immediately meet in
 emergency session and authorise a 'No Fly Zone' over Libya.

 Speaking on al Jazeera, Lord Owen called for a UN Charter Chapter 7 intervention (meaning the
 authorisation of both military and non-military means to "restore international peace and
 security") to be enforced by NATO air forces with Egyptian military support to demonstrate
 regional backing for the effort.

 Lord Owen said: "The UN Security Council should meet in emergency session tonight and
 declare the situation in Libya as a threat to peace under Chapter 7 of the UN Charter and declare
 a no flight zone for the Libyan air force and ask the regional power, Nato, to enforce it from
 dawn tomorrow. And hopefully other Arab nations, particularly Egypt, might decide to
 participate to demonstrate that this is not just a Western initiative."

 Lord Owen went on to call for "air forces in the region with sufficient range to reach Libya to
 prevent any Libyan air force military action against civilians". The call matches those of human
 rights advocates for actions not just words from the international community. The New York
 Times' Nick Kristof tweeted : "Under "Right to Protect" doctrine, West cld bomb air fields from
 which Qaddafi's warplanes are taking off." And: "Better yet: Egypt & Tunisia could use their air
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791390 Date: 10/30/2015
