      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796183 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Tuesday, April 10, 2012 8:31 AM
To:
Subject:                          Re: A few Thoughts for Consideration regarding the Secretary's trip to Annapolis



I am headed to Haiti so will connect w/ you during the day


From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Tuesday, April 10, 2012 07:02 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Schwerin, Daniel B; Sullivan, Jacob
Subject: Re: A few Thoughts for Consideration regarding the Secretary's trip to Annapolis

Carlos worked in my campaign. His email below makes one of the points I wanted to make about the speech. It needs
more connecting w the midshipmen and what they will do because of the Academy. It is also now too long and
repetitive about Asia- Pacific.

Please come see me when I get in btw 8:15-8:30. Thx.


From: Mills, Cheryl D [mailto:MiIIsCD@state.gov]
Sent: Tuesday, April 10, 2012 02:43 AM
To: H
Subject: Fw: A few Thoughts for Consideartion regarding the Secretary's trip to Annapolis

Fyi - not sure I recall Carlos


From: Carlos Del Toro [mailto:
Sent: Monday, April 09, 2012 10:15 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Balderston, Kris M
Subject: A few Thoughts for Consideartion regarding the Secretary's trip to Annapolis

Dear Cheryl and Kris:

Though perhaps late, I forward these personal thoughts to you both with the best of intentions should you wish to pass
them on to the Secretary. I tried connecting several weeks back, but I failed to do so successfully.

V/r

Carlos




Dear Madam Secretary:

 I pray this e-mail finds you and your family in good health and spirits. I again thank you for your continued extraordinary
 service to our country. In view of your upcoming speech at Annapolis tomorrow night, I thought I would send you a few
 last minute thoughts with the hope they may reach you and inspire you in some small manner. I assume your speech will
 have some major focus related directly to foreign policy as it should, but as a former midshipman (Class of 83) who

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796183 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796183 Date: 10/30/2015




listened to many of those speeches many years ago, I recommend you also connect with those young men and women
in a very personal manner in ways that matter to them.

I cannot think of anyone more capable than you, for example, to relate a story or two about one of my Naval Academy
heroes and my personal mentor while I served in the Navy, ADM Mike Mullen, who exemplifies the naval officer we all
aspired to be in our own careers. I am sure you could say much on that subject alone. As for me, I believe I could best
serve you by suggesting you leave them with one very important message — They will leave Annapolis with the skills
and the power to make a positive difference in the lives of others in ways they cannot even begin to imagine. They
should make the most of that experience to serve our nation and world the best they can. Use Mike Mullen and your
own example to show how two young and perhaps very different individuals changed the lives of millions for the
betterment of mankind.

As for myself, I was one of the first in my generation of Cuban refugees to attend the Naval Academy in 1979. We were
poor in Cuba and immigrated poor to New York City in 1962, settling in a rat-infested tenement building in Hell's
Kitchen. We were fortunate to get out of the country while my father, Raul, was awaiting trial for counter-revolutionary
activities. I never expected to be accepted to Annapolis, but was inspired by my father and my mother Martha, who
both worked two jobs most of their lives, and encouraged me to apply, despite the odds against me. Annapolis changed
my life in ways I could never have then imagined. First and foremost, it gave me the skills I needed to become a good
naval and military officer. It taught me to lead men and women during times of peace and war. I studied electrical
engineering and later became a Space Systems Engineer, managing a satellite ground station that played a role in
NASA's Clementine satellite, mapping the face of the moon. Annapolis gave me the fortitude to stand beside my fellow
Americans at Ground Zero on 9/11 and later commission the USS BULKELEY in NYC against great odds, later that same
year at the Intrepid Museum in honor of those that gave their lives so bravely. Annapolis impassioned me to be a life-
long student of politics and diplomacy, helping me to become White House Fellow to Jack Lew. After retirement from
naval service, Annapolis gave me the confidence to enter the private sector and launch my own engineering company
that today employs fifty Americans. The Academy gave me the moral stability to run for the Virginia House of Delegates
at a time (2007) of much hatred towards Hispanics in the State of Virginia despite knowing it would be an uphill political
battle. Annapolis also taught me to take charge in leading Virginia Hispanics for Hillary and to introduce you at your first
rally in Manassas, during your own campaign for President. My life would not be what it is today if it were not for the
United States Naval Academy. Annapolis taught me to always strive, in my own small way, to make a positive difference
in the lives of others because it is the right thing to do. I do feel like I have made a small difference, and I graduated near
the bottom of my class! Leave those midshipman with a message that they too will be afforded the opportunity to
change the world in positive ways, and they need to embrace that challenge.

I do look forward to your speech tomorrow and will be there with my youngest son, John and wife Betty, as we want our
son to better understand what it means to serve one's country as you and Admiral Mullen have done so well. While I
doubt I will have the opportunity to say hello in person , please know that our prayers and best wishes will be with you
then and always.

With deepest respect,




Carlos Del Toro
President and CEO
SBG Technology Solutions, Inc.
1000 North Payne St., Suite 300
Alexandria, VA 22314
703-299-9093 Office
703-299-9240 Fax
              Cell
                                                                                                                                  B6
www.sbgts.com

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796183 Date: 10/30/2015
