UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787037 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL



 Dear Madam Secretary,

 I'd like to let you know of a huge success for your and the President's focus on entrepreneurship.
 Seventeen top Silicon Valley entrepreneurs just spent almost a week in Kuala Lumpur, working first with
 800 aspiring Malaysian entrepreneurs, both social and business, who gained admission to the program,
 free of charge, from thousands of applicants solely based on their ideas. The Americans began
 intensively developing those with the strongest 100 proposals, which will culminate with the 10 most
 promising Malaysians traveling next June to Silicon Valley to pitch to angel investors.

 Sparks flew on all sides, at the conference and a buzzing reception Catherine and I hosted. The
 American entrepreneurs were impressed and even moved by the pent-up creativity and passion of the
 Malaysians. The Malaysians were themselves blown away that co-founders of Youtube, Linked-In,
 Skype, Priceline and more traveled to Malaysia to mentor them. It became the talk of KL — including
 with Prime Minister Najib and Malaysia's top business community — and a great boon to American-
 Malaysian ties. Some of the Americans had done events like this in other countries, but all say they
 want to do more. They are delighted with their government's enthusiastic support for using
 entrepreneurship to strengthen relationships around the world.

 "StartupMalaysia" was the brainchild of Dakshinamoorthy Balakrishnan — "Dash" — whose inspiration
 came from participating in the Presidential Summit on Entrepreneurship last year. I introduced Dash to
 you briefly after your townterview in Kuala Lumpur last November; he is our partner in several embassy
 programs promoting entrepreneurship. For this project he went big, egged-on, he told me, by a
 conversation with Farah Pandith during her visit in May. He collaborated with a savvy
 entrepreneur/Stanford U teacher, Rebecca Hwang, to develop the proposal, corral Silicon Valley, and
 convince the Malaysian government to fund the first part of it. Now they're enlisting corporate
 sponsors to keep it alive.

 What Dash started will grow and endure, enormously benefitting Malaysia, America and our
 relationship. Several of the Silicon Valley folks tell me they will be back. We'll report all this by cable,
 but I wanted to let you know directly how Startup America has caught on here.

 Best regards from KL,

 Paul

 cc: Jake Sullivan
     Kurt Campbell
     Farah Pandith
     Jose Fernandez




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787037 Date: 10/30/2015
