      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789786 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                               RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                               B6



From:                              Anne-Marie Slaughter
Sent:                              Sunday, March 25, 2012 9:38 PM
To:
Cc:                                Cheryl Mills; Jacob J Sullivan (SullivanJJ@state.gov); Abedin, Huma
Subject:                           You will like this: discussing your "pivot to the people"



I wrote it last week for Project Syndicate, which gets columns translated all over the world. It was great to see you last
week. Best, AM




Slaughter: A pivot to the people
Editor's Note: Anne-Marie Slaughter, a former director of policy planning in the US State Department (2009-
2011), is Professor of Politics and International Affairs at Princeton University. For more from Slaughter, visit
Project Syndicate or follow it on Facebook and Twitter. The views expressed in this article are solely those of
Anne-Marie Slaughter.

By Anne-Marie Slaughter, Project Syndicate

On February 1, the United Nations Security Council met to consider the Arab League's proposal to end the
violence in Syria. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton represented the United States. Midway through her
remarks, she began speaking not to the Syrian ambassador, who was in the room, or even the Syrian
government, but directly to the Syrian people. She said that change in Syria would require Syrians of every faith
and ethnicity to work together, protecting and respecting the rights of minorities.

Addressing those minorities, she continued: "We do hear your fears, and we do honor your aspirations. Do not
let the current regime exploit them to extend this crisis." She told Syria's business, military, and other leaders
that they must recognize that their futures lie with the state, not with the regime. "Syria belongs to its 23 million
citizens, not to one man or his family."

Speaking directly to citizens — seeing a country's people, as well as its government — is not just a rhetorical
device. While many foreign-policy pundits have focused on the US "pivot to Asia," Clinton has also executed a
less-publicized, but no less important, pivot to the people. She has introduced policies, programs, and
institutional reforms designed to support government-to-society and society-to-society diplomacy, alongside
traditional government-to-government relations. These initiatives do not get headlines, but they will gradually
transform much of American foreign policy.

In January, the State Department unveiled a new "super-office" of Civilian Security, Democracy, and Human
Rights, under the leadership of Under-Secretary Maria Otero. The office brings together agencies that focus on
international law enforcement, counter-terrorism, and reconstruction and stabilization with those charged with
advancing democracy, human rights, and humanitarian assistance to refugees and migrants.

Otero explains the logic behind the initiative in terms of "protecting individuals." That, in turn, requires "not
just engaging state to state," but also working "with players and actors outside of the traditional [channels]
we've engaged in."


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789786 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789786 Date: 10/30/2015




Viewed from this perspective, countering terrorism includes rebutting terrorist propaganda with a strategic
communications campaign. Countering narco-gang violence includes working with Mexican
telecommunications mogul Carlos Slim to develop tools that allow ordinary citizens to report violence
anonymously by text message and enable police to map the results. Strengthening democracy means working
with the Kenyan developers of a crisis-mapping platform that allows anyone with a cell phone to text
information about election fraud or violence to a central monitoring station.

On a country-by-country basis, pivoting to the people means engaging with Egypt's bloggers as well as with the
ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces; convening young entrepreneurs in Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco
and connecting them to funding and mentoring; and using social media in Russia to rebut government efforts to
smear the US ambassador. And, working at an official level, it means co-sponsoring with Brazil the Open
Government Partnership, which brings together governments committed to increasing transparency,
accountability, and citizen participation, and uses mutual peer pressure and open reporting to hold them to their
commitments.

Thinking about countries in these comprehensive terms also provides a different strategic perspective. Clinton
has created a raft of new positions at the State Department to spur outreach to different social segments. The
strategies and programs developed by the Ambassador for Global Women's Issues, the Special Adviser for
Global Youth Issues, the Senior Adviser for Civil Society and Emerging Democracies, the Special
Representative for Outreach to Muslim Communities, the Special Representative for Global Partnerships, and
the Special Representative for Commercial and Business Affairs often present a very different face of the US.

As a result, Clinton has launched an actual strategic dialogue with civil society. For example, Ambassador
Melanne Verveer has attended more than 1,000 events around the world focused on empowering women in
areas ranging from peace negotiations to farming. Similarly, she has launched programs such as mWomen,
designed to expand and support mobile technology that increases women's independence, security, and access
to health care and vital knowledge. The Office of Global Youth Affairs is building a local youth council at
every US embassy around the world, to advise and help to implement embassy programming aimed at local
youth.

Much of the programming aimed at youth, women, entrepreneurs, diasporas, technologists, and other social
groups is partly funded and conducted by the private sector. Indeed, the Obama administration's National
Security Strategy mentions "public-private partnerships" more than 30 times. Clinton created the Global
Partnership Initiative to build as many coalitions, networks, and partnerships as possible with corporations,
foundations, NGOs, universities, and other civic organizations.

Here, the pivot to the people includes the American people: the dynamism, creativity, and resources of
American business and non-profit organizations already engaged around the world. One privately-funded
initiative spearheaded by the State Department will send 300 dogwood trees to Japan this spring, to be planted
in the tsunami-affected region and in Tokyo to express the American people's support for the Japanese people;
another will send English teachers throughout Southeast Asia.

After participating in the Friends of Syria conference in Tunis, Clinton convened a town hall meeting with
Tunisian youth. In her opening remarks, she told her audience that "young people are at the heart of today's
great strategic opportunities and challenges." Speaking about her lifetime efforts to put "women's
empowerment on the international agenda," she added, "It's time to put youth empowerment there as well."

The implications of all of this activity, which Clinton calls "twenty-first-century statecraft," are profound. From
now on, US diplomatic relations with other countries will engage directly with their people and connect them to
the American people as much as possible. From the perspective of US diplomats, the people of every country
stand on the same footing as their government. That assumption is the heart of democracy; it is a revolution for
diplomacy.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789786 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789786 Date: 10/30/2015




The views expressed in this article are solely those of Anne-Marie Slaughter.



Anne-Marie Slaughter
Bert G. Kerstetter '66 University Professor of Politics and International Affairs
Princeton University
440 Robertson Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544

Assistant: Terry Murphy
Website: www.princeton.edui—slaughtr




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789786 Date: 10/30/2015
