     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787585 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                          RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                          B6


From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Friday, June 17, 2011 5:51 PM
To:                                'sbwhoeop
Subject:                           Re: H: My small contribution to the current debate, the only one in several years. AL was
                                   cogent. Sid


AL may have been the first and last cogent R.


From: sbwhoeop             [mailto:sbwhoeop
Sent: Wednesday, June 15, 2011 10:06 PM
To: H
Subject: H: My small contribution to the current debate, the only one in several years. AL was cogent. Sid


The New Yorker
June 15, 2011

Respecting Rick Perry, Cont'd (Lincoln Edition)
Posted by Hendrik Hertzberg
The lede of a story by Gromer Jeffers, Jr., in today's Dallas Morning News (emphases mine):
        Gov. Rick Perry on Tuesday told a group of national Republicans that the 2012 presidential election
        would center on state sovereignty and limited intervention from Washington.
        "The federal government was created by the states to be an agent for the states, not the other way
        around," Perry said at the Republican National Committee's state chairmen's meeting in Dallas. "The
        things they supposed to be doing, all too often, they are failures at. All the other things they decided they
        know best in, and are forcing themselves upon the state, they need to get out of."
Governor Perry, you may recall, believes that the U.S.A.—"our federal Union," Daniel Webster called it, "now and forever,
one and inseparable"—is an entity that Texas may "need to get out of." Perry also believes that Texas, if it wishes, can do
so with impunity. After all, as every actor and novelist knows, you can always fire your agent.
Sidney Blumenthal—ex-New Yorker Washington correspondent, ex-Clinton aide, prolific author—is currently completing
an epic book about Abraham Lincoln and the politics of the Civil War. Sid draws my attention to President Lincoln's
special message to Congress on July 4, 1861—perhaps the most ominous of all Glorious Fourths, twelve weeks after Fort
Sumter.
Executive summary: "The Union is older than any of the States; and, in fact, it created them as States." (Also, Rick Perry
is a fool who seems unaware that his country—yours and mine, anyway—is the United, not the Confederate, States of
America.)
Below the fold, some excerpts from Lincoln's message. They're long—longer even than my habitually overlong blog
posts—but very, very much worth reading. What Lincoln has to say is a powerful rebuke not only to Perry but also to the
so-called Tea Party, which shares many of Perry's historical and political delusions.
Mr. President, the floor is yours:
        It might seem, at first thought, to be of little difference whether the present movement at the South be
        called "secession" or "rebellion." The movers, however, well understand the difference. At the beginning,
        they knew they could never raise their treason to any respectable magnitude, by any name which implies
        violation of law. They knew their people possessed as much of moral sense, as much of devotion to law
        and order, and as much pride in, and reverence for, the history, and government, of their common
        country, as any other civilized, and patriotic people. They knew they could make no advancement directly
        in the teeth of these strong and noble sentiments. Accordingly they commenced by an insidious
        debauching of the public mind. They invented an ingenious sophism, which, if conceded, was followed by
        perfectly logical steps, through all the incidents, to the complete destruction of the Union....
        This sophism derives much—perhaps the whole—of its currency, from the assumption, that there is some
        omnipotent, and sacred supremacy, pertaining to a State—to each State of our Federal Union. Our States
        have neither more, nor less power, than that reserved to them, in the Union, by the Constitution—no one

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787585 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787585 Date: 10/30/2015



  of them ever having been a State out of the Union. The original ones passed into the Union even before
  they cast off their British colonial dependence; and the new ones each came into the Union directly from a
  condition of dependence, excepting Texas. And even Texas, in its temporary independence, was never
  designated a State. The new ones only took the designation of States, on coming into the Union, while
  that name was first adopted for the old ones, in, and by, the Declaration of Independence. Therein the
  "United Colonies" were declared to be "Free and Independent States"; but, even then, the object plainly
  was not to declare their independence of one another, or of the Union; but directly the contrary, as their
  mutual pledge, and their mutual action, before, at the time, and afterwards, abundantly show. The
  express plighting of faith, by each and all of the original thirteen, in the Articles of Confederation, two
  years later, that the Union shall be perpetual, is most conclusive. Having never been States, either in
  substance, or in name, outside of the Union, whence this magical omnipotence of "State rights," asserting
  a claim of power to lawfully destroy the Union itself? Much is said about the "sovereignty" of the States;
  but the word, even, is not in the national Constitution; nor, as is believed, in any of the State constitutions.
  What is a "sovereignty," in the political sense of the term? Would it be far wrong to define it "A political
  community, without a political superior"? Tested by this, no one of our States, except Texas, ever was a
  sovereignty. And even Texas gave up the character on coming into the Union; by which act, she
  acknowledged the Constitution of the United States, and the laws and treaties of the United States made
  in pursuance of the Constitution, to be, for her, the supreme law of the land. The States have their status
  IN the Union, and they have no other legal status. If they break from this, they can only do so against law,
  and by revolution. The Union, and not themselves separately, procured their independence, and their
  liberty. By conquest, or purchase, the Union gave each of them, whatever of independence, and liberty, it
  has. The Union is older than any of the States; and, in fact, it created them as States. Originally, some
  dependent colonies made the Union; and, in turn, the Union threw off their old dependence, for them, and
  made them States, such as they are. Not one of them ever had a State constitution, independent of the
  Union. Of course, it is not forgotten that all the new States framed their constitutions, before they entered
  the Union; nevertheless, dependent upon, and preparatory to, coming into the Union.
  Unquestionably the States have the powers, and rights, reserved to them in, and by the National
  Constitution; but among these, surely, are not included all conceivable powers, however mischievous, or
  destructive; but, at most, such only, as were known in the world, at the time, as governmental powers;
  and certainly, a power to destroy the government itself, had never been known as a governmental—as a
  merely administrative power. This relative matter of National power, and State rights, as a principle, is no
  other than the principle of generality, and locality. Whatever concerns the whole, should be confided to
  the whole—to the general government; while, whatever concerns only the State, should be left
  exclusively, to the State. This is all there is of original principle about it. Whether the National Constitution,
  in defining boundaries between the two, has applied the principle with exact accuracy, is not to be
  questioned. We are all bound by that defining, without question.
  What is now combatted, is the position that secession is consistent with the Constitution—is lawful, and
  peaceful. It is not contended that there is any express law for it; and nothing should ever be implied as
  law, which leads to unjust, or absurd consequences. The nation purchased, with money, the countries out
  of which several of these States were formed. Is it just that they shall go off without leave, and without
  refunding? The nation paid very large sums, (in the aggregate, I believe, nearly a hundred millions) to
  relieve Florida of the aboriginal tribes. Is it just that she shall now be off without consent, or without
  making any return? The nation is now in debt for money applied to the benefit of these so-called seceding
   States, in common with the rest. Is it just, either that creditors shall go unpaid, or the remaining States
   pay the whole? A part of the present national debt was contracted to pay the old debts of Texas. Is it just
   that she shall leave, and pay no part of this herself?
  Again, if one State may secede, so may another; and when all shall have seceded, none is left to pay the
   debts. Is this quite just to creditors? Did we notify them of this sage view of ours, when we borrowed their
   money? If we now recognize this doctrine, by allowing the seceders to go in peace, it is difficult to see
   what we can do, if others choose to go, or to extort terms upon which they will promise to remain.
   The seceders insist that our Constitution admits of secession. They have assumed to make a National
   Constitution of their own, in which, of necessity, they have either discarded, or retained, the right of
   secession, as they insist, it exists in ours. If they have discarded it, they thereby admit that, on principle, it
   ought not to be in ours. If they have retained it, by their own construction of ours they show that to be
   consistent they must secede from one another, whenever they shall find it the easiest way of settling their
   debts, or effecting any other selfish, or unjust object. The principle itself is one of disintegration, and upon
   which no government can possibly endure.
   If all the States, save one, should assert the power to drive that one out of the Union, it is presumed the
   whole class of seceder politicians would at once deny the power, and denounce the act as the greatest
   outrage upon State rights. But suppose that precisely the same act, instead of being called "driving the
   one out," should be called "the seceding of the others from that one," it would be exactly what the
   seceders claim to do; unless, indeed, they make the point, that the one, because it is a minority, may
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787585 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787585 Date: 10/30/2015




        rightfully do, what the others, because they are a majority, may not rightfully do. These politicians are
        subtle, and profound, on the rights of minorities. They are not partial to that power which made the
        Constitution, and speaks from the preamble, calling itself "We, the People." ... It may be affirmed, without
        extravagance, that the free institutions we enjoy, have developed the powers, and improved the condition,
        of our whole people, beyond any example in the world. Of this we now have a striking, and an impressive
        illustration. So large an army as the government has now on foot, was never before known, without a
        soldier in it, but who had taken his place there, of his own free choice. But more than this: there are many
        single Regiments whose members, one and another, possess full practical knowledge of all the arts,
        sciences, professions, and whatever else, whether useful or elegant, is known in the world; and there is
        scarcely one, from which there could not be selected, a President, a Cabinet, a Congress, and perhaps a
        Court, abundantly competent to administer the government itself. Nor do I say this is not true, also, in the
        army of our late friends, now adversaries, in this contest; but if it is, so much better the reason why the
        government, which has conferred such benefits on both them and us, should not be broken up. Whoever,
        in any section, proposes to abandon such a government, would do well to consider, in deference to what
        principle it is, that he does it—what better he is likely to get in its stead—whether the substitute will give,
        or be intended to give, so much of good to the people. There are some foreshadowings on this subject.
        Our adversaries have adopted some Declarations of Independence; in which, unlike the good old one,
        penned by Jefferson, they omit the words "all men are created equal." Why? They have adopted a
        temporary national constitution, in the preamble of which, unlike our good old one, signed by Washington,
        they omit "We, the People," and substitute "We, the deputies of the sovereign and independent States."
        Why? Why this deliberate pressing out of view, the rights of men, and the authority of the people?
        This is essentially a People's contest. On the side of the Union, it is a struggle for maintaining in the
        world, that form, and substance of government, whose leading object is, to elevate the condition of men—
        to lift artificial weights from all shoulders—to clear the paths of laudable pursuit for all—to afford all, an
        unfettered start, and a fair chance, in the race of life. Yielding to partial, and temporary departures, from
        necessity, this is the leading object of the government for whose existence we contend....
        Our popular government has often been called an experiment. Two points in it, our people have already
        settled—the successful establishing, and the successful administering of it. One still remains—its
        successful maintenance against a formidable [internal] attempt to overthrow it. It is now for them to
        demonstrate to the world, that those who can fairly carry an election, can also suppress a rebellion—that
        ballots are the rightful, and peaceful, successors of bullets; and that when ballots have fairly, and
        constitutionally, decided, there can be no successful appeal, back to bullets; that there can be no
        successful appeal, except to ballots themselves, at succeeding elections. Such will be a great lesson of
        peace; teaching men that what they cannot take by an election, neither can they take it by a war—
         teaching all, the folly of being the beginners of a war.
The full messa•e can be found here.




Abraham Lincoln was the first Republican President of the United States. If he knew what depths his party has sunk to a
century and a half later—well, Bill Mauldin's great editorial cartoon after the assassination of President Kennedy tells it all.

POSTED IN

    •   Hendrik Hertzberg
    •   I Campaign '12
    •   I Presidential Speeches
    •   I The Constitution

    •
    •
    •   SHARE
    •   PRINT
    •   E-MAIL

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787585 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787585 Date: 10/30/2015




Read more http://vvww.newyorkercom/online/blods/hendrikhertzberd/2011/06/respectind-rick-perry-contd-lincoln-
edition. html?printable=true&currentPaqe=a11#ixzz1POrPatWq




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787585 Date: 10/30/2015
