       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765950 Date: 10/30/2015
                                                                                                        RELEASE
                                                                                                        IN PART B6




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Wednesday, November 25, 2009 11:46 AM
To:
Subject                            FW: President to Attend Copenhagen Climate Talks




From: Milakofsky, Benjamin E. [mailto
Sent: Wednesday, November 25, 2009 11:09 AM
To: Lu, Christopher P.; Smith, Elizabeth S.; Kimball, Astri B.; French, Michael 3.; Greenawalt, Andrei M.; Taylor, Adam R.;
Milakofsiw, Benjamin E.
Subject: President to Attend Copenhagen Climate Talks

Dear Chiefs of Staff:

Please see the below release announcing that the President will attend the United Nationals Climate Change Conference
in Copenhagen.

--Cabinet Affairs



                                                THE WHITE HOUSE
                                             Office of the Press Secretary

          FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE                                                            November 25, 2009

                                 President to Attend Copenhagen Climate Talks
                            Administration Announces U.S. Emission Target for Copenhagen

The White House announced today that President Obama will travel to Copenhagen on Dec. 9 to participate in
the United Nations Climate Change Conference, where he is eager to work with the international community
to drive progress toward a comprehensive and operational Copenhagen accord. The President has worked
steadily on behalf of a positive outcome in Copenhagen throughout the year. Based on the President's work
on climate change over the past 10 months - in the Major Economies Forum, the G20, bilateral discussions and
multilateral consultations - and based on progress made in recent, constructive discussions with China and
India's Leaders, the President believes it is possible to reach a meaningful agreement in Copenhagen. The
President's decision to go is a sign of his continuing commitment and leadership to find a global solution to
the global threat of climate change, and to lay the foundation for a new, sustainable and prosperous clean
energy future.

The White House also announced that, in the context of an overall deal in Copenhagen that includes robust
mitigation contributions from China and the other emerging economies, the President is prepared to put on
the table a U.S. emissions reduction target in the range of 17% below 2005 levels in 2020 and ultimately in line
with final U.S. energy and climate legislation. In light of the President's goal to reduce emissions 83% by 2050,
the expected pathway set forth in this pending legislation would entail a 30% reduction below 2005 levels in
2025 and a 42% reduction below 2005 in 2030. This provisional target is in line with current legislation in both
chambers of Congress and demonstrates a significant contribution to a problem that the U.S. has neglected for
too long. With less than two weeks to go until the beginning of the Copenhagen conference, it is essential that

       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765950 Date: 10/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765950 Date: 10/30/2015




the countries of the world, led by the major economies, do what it takes to produce a strong, operational
agreement that will both launch us on a concerted effort to combat climate change and serve as a stepping
stone to a legally binding treaty. The President is working closely with Congress to pass energy and climate
legislation as soon as possible.

Underscoring President Obama's commitment to American leadership on clean energy and combating climate
change, the White House also announced today that a host of Cabinet secretaries and other top officials from
across the Administration will travel to Copenhagen for the conference. Interior Secretary Ken Salazar,
Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack, Commerce Secretary Gary Locke, Energy Secretary Steven Chu, and
Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Lisa P. Jackson are all scheduled to attend, along with
Council on Environmental Quality Chair Nancy Sutley, and Assistant to the President for Energy and Climate
Change Carol Browner.

For the first time, the U.S. delegation will have a U.S. Center at the conference, providing a unique and
interactive forum to share our story with the world. In addition to working with other countries to advance
American interests, U.S. delegates will keynote a series of events highlighting actions by the Obama
Administration to provide domestic and global leadership in the transition to a clean energy economy. Topics
will range from energy efficiency investments and global commitments to renewables policy and clean energy
jobs. The following keynote events and speakers are currently scheduled:

   •   Wednesday, December 9th: Taking Action at Home, EPA Administrator Lisa P. Jackson
   •   Thursday, December 10th: New Energy Future: the role of public lands in clean energy production and
       carbon capture, Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar
   •   Friday, December 11th: Clean Energy Jobs in a Global Marketplace, Commerce Secretary Gary Locke
   •   Monday, December 14th: Leading in Energy Efficiency and Renewables, Energy Secretary Steven Chu
   •   Tuesday, December 15th: Clean Energy Investments: creating opportunities for rural economies,
       Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack
   •   Thursday, December 17th: Backing Up International Agreement with Domestic Action, CEQ Chair
       Nancy Sutley and Assistant to the President Carol Browner

These events will underline the historic progress the Obama Administration has made to address climate
change and create a new energy future. In addition to passage of the American Clean Energy and Security Act
in the House of Representatives this summer, Administration officials will highlight an impressive resume of
American action and accomplishments over the last 10 months, including:

                                         DOMESTIC LEADERSHIP

   •   Recovery Act: The U.S. is investing more than $80 billion in clean energy through its Recovery Act -
       including the largest-ever investment in renewable energy, which will double our generation of clean
       renewable energy like wind and solar in three years.

   •   Efficiency Standard for Automobiles: President Obama announced the first ever joint fuel
       economy/greenhouse gas emissions standards for cars and trucks in May. The new standards are
       projected to save 1.8 billion barrels of oil over the life of the program with a fuel economy gain
       averaging more than 5 percent per year and a reduction of approximately 900 million metric tons in
       greenhouse gas emissions.

   •   Advancing Comprehensive Energy Legislation: Passing comprehensive energy and climate legislation
       is a top priority for the Administration and significant progress has been made. In June, The U.S.
       House of Representatives passed the American Clean Energy and Security Act that will promote clean
       energy investments and lower U.S. greenhouse gas emissions more than 80 percent by 2050. The
       Senate continues to advance their efforts to pass comprehensive legislation and move the U.S. closer to
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765950 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765950 Date: 10/30/2015




    a system of clean energy incentives that create new energy jobs, reduce our dependence on oil, and cut
    pollution.

o Appliance Efficiency Standards: The Obama Administration has forged more stringent energy
  efficiency standards for commercial and residential appliances, including microwaves, kitchen ranges,
  dishwashers, lightbulbs and other common appliances. This common sense approach makes improved
  efficiency a manufacturing requirement for the everyday appliances used in practically every home
  and business, resulting in a significant reduction in energy use. Altogether, about two dozen new
  energy efficiency standards will be completed in the next few years.

o Offshore Energy Development: Within the Administration's first 100 days, a new regulatory
  framework was established to facilitate the development of alternative energy projects in an economic
  and environmentally sound maruner that allows us to tap into the vast energy potential of the Outer
  Continental Shell (OCS). The National Renewable Energy Lab estimates that development of wind
  energy alone on the OCS may provide an additional 1,900 gigawatts of clean energy to the U.S.

o Emissions Inventory Rule: For the first time, the U.S. will catalogue greenhouse gas emissions from
  large emission sources - an important initial step toward measurable and transparent reductions.

                                  INTERNATIONAL LEADERSHIP

o The Major Economies Forum (MEF): President Obama launched the MEF in March 2009, creating a
  new dialogue among developed and emerging economies to combat climate change and promote clean
  energy. At the July L'Aquila summit, MEF Leaders announced important new agreements to support
  the UN climate talks and launched a new Global Partnership to promote clean energy technologies.

o   Eliminating Fossil Fuel Subsidies: The President spearheaded an agreement at the Pittsburgh G20
    summit for all G20 nations to phase out their fossil fuel subsidies over the medium term and to work
    with other countries to do the same. Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation nations followed the G20 lead
    at their summit in Singapore, expanding the number of countries committing to these
    subsidies. According to the International Energy Agency, this measure alone could reduce global
    greenhouse gas emissions 10 percent or more by 2050.

o Bilateral Energy and Climate Partnerships: The U.S. is accelerating its collaboration with China India
  Mexico, Canada and other key international partners to combat climate change, coordinate clean.
  energy research and development, and support the international climate talks.

o   Energy and Climate Partnership for the Americas: President Obama proposed a partnership with our
    neighbors in the western hemisphere to advance energy security and combat climate change. An early
    product of this cooperation is Chile's Renewable Energy Center, which receives technical support from
    the U.S. Department of Energy.

o Phasing Down HFCs (Hydrofluorocarbons): The U.S. joined Canada and Mexico in proposing to
  phase-down HFC emissions, a very potent greenhouse gas, in developed and developing countries
  under the Montreal Protocol. This represents a down payment of about 10% of the emission reductions
  necessary to cut global greenhouse gas emissions to half their current levels by 2050.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765950 Date: 10/30/2015
