       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785369 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                               Sunday, March 6, 2011 12:32 PM
To:                                 'abedinh@state.gov'
Subject                             Re: Cairo Update 1800 March 6



Yes, let's try to schedule.

Also, are you flying back w us today?


From: Abedin, Huma [mailto:AbedinH@state.gov]
Sent: Sunday, March 06, 2011 12:23 PM
To: H
Subject: Fw: Cairo Update 1800 March 6

Let me know if you want to call new fm.
And aboulgheit.



From: Feltman, Jeffrey D
To: Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma
Sent: Sun Mar 06 11:33:54 2011
Subject: FW: Cairo Update 1800 March 6

As predicted, Aboul-Gheit is out, replaced by a former PermRep to the UN. Aboul-Gheit will run for
the Arab League chair, replacing Moussa, or so that's what I hear from Hossam Zaki.

Jeffrey Feltman
Assistant Secretary
Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs
Department of State
 202-647-7209


  From: Kennedy, David JR
 Sent: Sunday, March 06, 2011 11:26 AM
 To: Boland, Patrick T; Shea, Peter T; Cutrona, Aimee; Berns, David B; Rosenstock, Matthew S; Tueller, Matthew H;
  Wailes, Jacob; Biome, Donald A; 'Daniel_B._Shapiro                   'Sergio_L._Aguirre                  Shampaine, Nicole      B6 1'I
  D; Schedlbauer, Amy W; Kosa, Lauren S; Parrs, Walter; Wittes, Tamara C; Allen, Katherine E; Feltman, Jeffrey D;
  Sullivan, Jacob J; Schlicher, Ronald L; Holtz, Greta C (NEA); Crowley, Philip J; Catalano, Elisa; Schrepel, Dawn M; Sullivan,
 Jacob 3; Pelton, Erin; McHale, Judith A; Hensman, Chris D; NEA-PD-DL;                                          Adams, David
  S; Epping, Jerome N; Randolph, Lawrence M (Algiers); 'Margaret.Keshishian                   Gressel, Jonathan P; 'Chang,
  Benjamin'; NEA-Egypt; Lenert, Adam J; Mahoney, Haynes R; Sanderson, Janet A; Posner, Michael H; Graze, Deborah E;
  Fitzpatrick, Kathleen M; Lieberman, Jessica D (DRL); SES-0; Melia, Thomas 0; Hawthorne, Amy W; Patterson, Anne W
  Cc: Scobey, Margaret; O'Dowd, Stephen; Miller, Bill A; Colton, Elizabeth 0; Newman, Robert B; Singer, Theodore J;
  Walker, Bridgette L; Smith, Dana S; Doyle, Robert F; Marrano, Mark F; Galliker, Andrew S; Turner, IndiaR; NEA-Staff-
  Assistants-DL; Wells, Alice G; Farbeann, Joseph R; Speaks, John T; Crocker, John W; Williams, Eric C; Aguilo, Patricia M;
  Whitmire, Morgan G; Perry, Mark D. Randolph, Lawr                'ers); Carl Yoder, Samantha A; ECPODistribution; Cairo
  Consular Americans; 'gudgeon              ; 'Satterfield          'gerard                             ; Marrano, Mark F;
. Perry, Mark D; Powers, Roberto; Whitmire, Morgan G; Ash, Deborah J (Sofia); Makely, Emily J; Mayer, Paul 0; Meininger,
  Laurie 3; Young, Madelina M; Grandfield, Mary E; Hickey, Matthew B; Amer, Ibtisam; 'Chang, Benjamin'; Hickey, Matthew
  B; Rand, Dafna H;                                                              Frayne, Philip A;
  'Hagar_H._Hajjar                   DS-IP-NEA; DS Command Center; Beighley, Paul S; 'neaduty@state.gov'; 'Gardner,               B6

       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785369 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785369 Date: 10/30/2015




Steve'
Subject: Cairo Update 1800 March 6

Political

Shard's Cabinet Shuffle: Prime Minister Sharaf announced on his official Facebook page today the names
comprising his new transitional cabinet. The names must be presented to and confirmed by the SCAF. Media
report the new ministers will be sworn in tomorrow. The cabinet will unofficially include:
-Yehia al-Gamal, Deputy Prime Minister
-Ambassador Nabil al-Araby, Minister of Foreign Affairs
-Samir Radwan, Minister of Finance
-Fayza Aboul Naga, Minister of International Cooperation
-Atef Abdel Hamid, Minister of Transportation
-Ibrahim Manaa, Minister of Civil Aviation
-Mansour al-Essawi, Minister of Interior
-Mohamed al-Gendy, Minister of Justice
-Fathy El-Baradei, Minister of Housing
-Sayed Meshel, Minister of Military Industries
-Samir Sayad, Minister of Industry and Internal Trade
-Gouda Abdel Khalek, Minister of Social Solidarity
-Mohsen al-Noomany, Minister for National Development
-Maged George, Minister of Environment
-Ashraf Hatem, Minister of Health
-Hassan Younis, Minister of Electricity
-Mounir Fakhry Abdel Nour, Minister of Tourism
-Emad Abou Ghazy, Minister of Culture and Antiquities
-Ahmed el-Brens, Minister of Labour and Migration
-Abdullah al-Husseiny, Minister of Islamic Endowments
-Hussein al-Atfy, Minister of Water Resources and Irrigation
-Ahmed al-Borai, Minister of Manpower

SSIS buildings overrun: The appointment of General Mansour al-Essawi as the new Minister of Interior came
as thousands of protestors stormed at least six State Security Investigative Service (SSIS) buildings across Cairo
and Alexandria on Saturday. Approximately 2,500 protestors swarmed past military forces guarding the SSIS
headquarters in Nasr City, according to state media, where they found rooms full of shredded documents as well
as surviving official documents. The military eventually took control of the building after peacefully removing
protestors and searching them for stolen documents. Reports of security forces burning files at SSIS facilities
led protestors to call for the EAF to intervene and assume control of SSIS buildings in Qena, Port Said, Zagazig,
Domiat and Tanta, according to media reports. The EAF is reported to be in control of the SSIS buildings in
Alexandria and 6th of October, in addition to the Nasr City headquarters.

SCAF responds: Documents taken from SSIS buildings quickly made their way to the web and a new
Facebook page shows several dozen documents alleged to have come from the Nasr City HQ. In response, the
SCAF released Statement 27 on Facebook today, calling on citizens "to immediately hand over any documents
in their possession that belong to the State Security apparatus to the EAF." The statement warns citizens not
circulate the documents via media outlets, "out of a sense of national responsibility, and also to avoid legal
liability," as the documents may endanger national security.

Sharaf to oversee MOI changes: According to Ahram, Sharaf put forward a proposal to separate the state
security apparatus from the MOI and the prosecutor general's office from the ministry of justice. Ahram reports
Sharaf s cabinet will personally oversee a transition of authority from the ministries to the direct oversight of
the cabinet.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785369 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785369 Date: 10/30/2015




Official referendum date: The SCAF decreed on Friday the national referendum on constitutional
amendments will be held on March 19th, as expected. The referendum will take place from 0800 until 1900, and
will be overseen by the Supreme Judicial Committee and "all executive bodies." In the referendum, Egyptians
will vote on amendments to articles 75, 76, 77, 88, 93, 139 and 149, the cancellation of Article 179, and
additions to Article 189.

 Coptic Demonstration Over Church Attack: Egyptian press reported that thousands of Copts, including two
 bishops and many priests, staged an open-ended sit-in in front of the State TV building in Cairo on Sunday,
 calling for the government to immediately re-build the Coptic Church of St. Mina and St. George in Sol Village,
 Helwan governorate. They also called on the EAF to protect and secure Churches and to punish those who
 participated in the destruction of the church. Major General Tarek Mandy told demonstrators he understood
 Copts' anger and announced that the EAF will rebuild the church from its own funds. Qadry Abou Hussein,
 Governor of Helwan, held a meeting on Saturday with the heads of Muslim families of Sol Village. Hussein
 stated to the press that the families decided to permit the Church to remain in its current location, not to build a
 Mosque on the premises, and allow Christians to return to the village. A large number of Muslim youth had
 earlier remained on the site of the destroyed church and had begun calling for building a mosque in its place, as
•well as the emigration of Coptic families from the village. We spoke with the Bishop of Helwan yesterday; he
 told us that Copts in his diocese are extremely nervous about the lack of security.

Government Clarifies Wheat Supply Situation: On Saturday, GASC Vice Chairman Noumani Noumani
clarified statements last week by General Tantawi on the wheat supply situation by stating that while there are
only two months of wheat stocks in country as noted by the General, GASC has a total of five months of wheat
requirements locked in through shipments on the water or under contract. GASC (General Authority for Supply
of Commodities) will also be purchasing wheat from the local crop in May/June which will add about 3 million
tons equivalent to four to five months requirements for subsidized bread production. The recently announced
procurement price of LE 350 to LE 360 per ardeb ($397-$408 per metric ton) is 30% above last year's
procurement price and FAS/Cairo believes should permit GASC to reach their purchasing target. However,
Noumani did note that GASC needs some $400 million in order to open Letters of Credit for shipments of
wheat and vegetable oil in April. He stated the total budgetary outlay on food subsidies will be LE 26 billion
this fiscal year, double the original LE 13 billion allocated in the FY 2010/11 budget.

Government Sector Strikes: Uniformed police in Naga Hammadi, Qena Governorate, demonstrated on March
5 for higher salaries. According to labor blogs they complained about police clerks and officers who only sit in
comfortable offices and "terrorize the citizens." Approximately 50 dismissed employees from the Mobile
Ambulance Service gathered in front of the Giza police station today demanding that they be allowed to return
to work. Temporary hires at the Supreme Council for Antiquities started an open strike today demanding
permanent contracts, a minimum wage, and better bonuses. Fayoum Governorate employees started a strike
today demanding dismissal of Fayoum Governor and all of his advisors, as well as extra-bonuses and permanent
contracts. Employees at the Directorate of Organization and Administration in Marsa Matrouh staged a strike
today demanding higher bonuses and permanent contracts. Local press reported that workers at the state-owned
Damietta Water Company started an open strike today demanding dismissal of the company's board due to
corruption and wasting of public funds. Late last week Military Factory No. 9 employees on temporary
contracts started a hunger strike in Helwan demanding permanent employment.

Education strikes: Hundreds of public school teachers in ten governorates struck today against their low-
standard of living and poor economic conditions. Teachers from 6th of October, Souhag, Ismailia, Aswan,
Damietta, Dakahlia, Giza and Cairo participated. In Cairo 300 teachers participated in Maadi, with 100 more
demonstrating in Zamalek. Egyptian press reported that a few hundred academic staff and employees at the
Suez Canal University started a demonstration today demanding dismissal of all faculty deans who used to
belong to the NDP, as well as increased wages and bonuses. Academic staff at Mansoura University organized
a protest today demanding dismissal of the University President because of his NDP membership. "Al Ahram"
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785369 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785369 Date: 10/30/2015




reported that following protests the President of Zagazig University agreed to pay all University employees a
half-month bonus.

Industry Strikes: A labor blog reported that 2,000 workers at the Shebein el-Koum Spinning and Weaving
Factory in Menoufia went on strikes yesterday demanding a change in factory administration, rehiring of
unfairly dismissed employees, and establishment of an LE 1,500 (USD 250) minimum wage. The "Workers
Coordination Committee" at state-owned Petrotrade Company in Nasr City called for a strike today to protest
delays in implementing ministerial decisions aimed at reforming workers' status. A labor blog reported that
600 early-retired workers at the Tura Cement Factory gathered today to demand health insurance benefits,
threatening to increase the size of demonstrations until demands are met.

SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785369 Date: 10/30/2015
