     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787857 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                               RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                         Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                         Monday, January 9, 2012 8:03 PM
To:                           H
Cc:                           Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:                      FW: MEMO TO ALL ECONOMIC AND ECONOMIC-CONED OFFICERS



This is pretty cool


From: Nides, Thomas R
Sent: Monday, January 09, 2012 5:30 PM
To: Hormats, Robert D; Fernandez, Jose W; McCarthy, Deborah A
Subject: MEMO TO ALL ECONOMIC AND ECONOMIC-CONED OFFICERS

                                                         United States Department of State

                                                          Washington, D.C. 20520



SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED                             January 9, 2012

MEMO TO ALL ECONOMIC AND ECONOMIC-CONED OFFICERS

FROM: D(N) — Thomas Nides

SUBJECT: Launch of Economic Statecraft Task Force

I am constantly impressed by the employees of the State Department. Our foreign and civil
service officers and locally engaged staff are the strength behind the Department. Thank you
for all that you do.

As you know, the Secretary has made economic statecraft a key priority for the coming
year. Following up on her speeches on the topic, on December 2 we launched a Department-
wide Economic Statecraft Task Force that includes Under Secretary Kennedy (M), Under
Secretary Hormats (E), Assistant Secretary Fernandez (EB), Jake Sullivan (S/P), Kris
Balderston (S/GPI), Susan Swart (CIO), and a DAS from each regional bureau.

The main objective of the task force is to elevate economic and commercial diplomacy goals
and to ensure that we have the right people, support tools, engagement platform to maintain our
leadership on these critical 21' century issues. Given this focus, the task force covers four
principal areas of work: human capital, internal tools, external engagement, and policy targets
of opportunity.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787857 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787857 Date: 10/30/2015




  (1) The Human Capital working group will conduct analysis and develop recommendations
      to ensure the Department is hiring, training, deploying, and incentivizing staff in a
      manner consistent with the requirements of effective economic statecraft. (Chaired by
      Under Secretary Kennedy, managed by Kathleen Austin-Ferguson.)

  (2) The Internal Tools working group will develop effective tools and resources (e.g. a
      Commercial Diplomacy Toolkit) for economic officers, other FSOs, and other
      Department staff to support execution of economic statecraft objectives. (Chaired by
      Assistant Secretary Fernandez, managed by Whitney Baird.)

  (3)The External Engagement working group will develop and implement a strategy to
     improve and elevate our engagement with the private sector and the public at large, using
     the State Department's online resources, convening power, and global personnel network
     to increase our impact. (Chaired by Assistant Secretary Fernandez, managed by Whitney
     Baird.)

   (4) The Policy Targets of Opportunity working group will identify priority opportunities
       for USG engagement on key policy issues, such as accession to the WTO Government
       Procurement Agreement, increasing inward investment, and regulatory barriers to
       trade. (Chaired by Under Secretary Hormats, managed by Joel Wiegert.)

HOW YOU CAN PARTICIPATE
We need your help to make this task force and agenda a success.

On January 13th at 10:00 a.m. EST, Assistant Secretary Fernandez and I will host a live webinar
to discuss this effort with all economic officers and economic-coned officers around the
world. EB PDAS Deborah McCarthy will moderate the discussion. This will be an opportunity
for you to raise questions, ideas, or concerns. You can participate in the interactive webinar by
going to http://usdeptofstate.adobeconnect.com/econstrategy (passcode:
                 . Because only 200 computers can connect to this site, we encourage officers to     B6
gather at common terminals to participate. In the event that the chatroom reaches capacity, the
webinar will be streamed at http://conx.state.gov/econstrategy/ (passcode:                  . The
webinar will also be recorded and available for viewing at a later date.

The working groups will utilize surveys and focus groups to ensure our end products include
the input of economic officers around the world. If you would like to participate or have any
other questions or suggestions, please send an email to economicstatecraft@state.gov.

Thank you again for the outstanding work you do every day on behalf of the American people.

Deputy Secretary Tom Nides




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787857 Date: 10/30/2015
