      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790747 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                 RELEASE IN
                                                                                                 PART B6


From:                               Anne-Marie Slaughter <
Sent:                               Friday, February 24, 2012 9:53 AM
To:                                 'Anne-Marie Slaughter'
Subject:                            New York Tiimes Op-Ed by Anne-Marie Slaughter



Please find below the text of an op-ed authored by Anne-Marie Slaughter. The piece appears in today's edition
of the New York Times.

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/24/opinion/how-to-halt-the-butchery-in-syria.html? r=1&hp

OPINION

OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
How to Halt the Butchery in Syria

By ANNE-MARIE SLAUGHTER
Published: February 24, 2012
Princeton, N.J.
FOREIGN military intervention in Syria offers the best hope for curtailing a long, bloody and destabilizing civil war. The
mantra of those opposed to intervention is "Syria is not Libya." In fact, Syria is far more strategically located than Libya,
and a lengthy civil war there would be much more dangerous to our interests. America has a major stake in helping
Syria's neighbors stop the killing.

Simply arming the opposition, in many ways the easiest option, would bring about exactly the scenario the world should
fear most: a proxy war that would spill into Lebanon, Turkey, Iraq and Jordan and fracture Syria along sectarian lines. It
could also allow Al Qaeda and other terrorist groups to gain a foothold in Syria and perhaps gain access to chemical and
biological weapons.

There is an alternative. The Friends of Syria, some 70 countries scheduled to meet in Tunis today, should establish "no-
kill zones" now to protect all Syrians regardless of creed, ethnicity or political allegiance. The Free Syrian Army, a
growing force of defectors from the government's army, would set up these no-kill zones near the Turkish, Lebanese and
Jordanian borders. Each zone should be established as close to the border as possible to allow the creation of short
humanitarian corridors for the Red Cross and other groups to bring food, water and medicine in and take wounded
patients out. The zones would be managed by already active civilian committees.

Establishing these zones would require nations like Turkey, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Jordan to arm the opposition
soldiers with anti-tank, countersniper and portable antiaircraft weapons. Special forces from countries like Qatar, Turkey
and possibly Britain and France could offer tactical and strategic advice to the Free Syrian Army forces. Sending them in
is logistically and politically feasible; some may be there already.

Crucially, these special forces would control the flow of intelligence regarding the government's troop movements and
lines of communication to allow opposition troops to cordon off population centers and rid them of snipers. Once Syrian
government forces were killed, captured or allowed to defect without reprisal, attention would turn to defending and
expanding the no-kill zones.

This next step would require intelligence focused on tank and aircraft movements, the placement of artillery batteries
and communications lines among Syrian government forces. The goal would be to weaken and isolate government units
charged with attacking particular towns; this would allow opposition forces to negotiate directly with army officers on
truces within each zone, which could then expand into a regional, and ultimately national, truce.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790747 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790747 Date: 10/30/2015




The key condition for all such assistance, inside or outside Syria, is that it be used defensively - only to stop attacks by
the Syrian military or to clear out government forces that dare to attack the no-kill zones. Although keeping intervention
limited is always hard, international assistance could be curtailed if the Free Syrian Army took the offensive. The
absolute priority within no-kill zones would be public safety and humanitarian aid; revenge attacks would not be
tolerated.

Syria's president, Bashar al-Assad, is increasingly depending on government-sponsored gangs and on shelling cities with
heavy artillery rather than overrunning them with troops, precisely because he is concerned about the loyalty of soldiers
forced to shoot their fellow citizens at point-blank range. If government troops entered no-kill zones they would have to
face their former comrades. Placing them in this situation, and presenting the option to defect, would show just how
many members of Syria's army - estimated at 300,000 men - were actually willing to fight for Mr. Assad.

Turkey and the Arab League should also help opposition forces inside Syria more actively through the use of remotely
piloted helicopters, either for delivery of cargo and weapons - as America has used them in Afghanistan - or to attack
Syrian air defenses and mortars in order to protect the no-kill zones.

Turkey is rightfully cautious about deploying its ground forces, an act that Mr. Assad could use as grounds to declare war
and retaliate. But Turkey has some of its own drones, and Arab League countries could quickly lease others.

As in Libya, the international community should not act without the approval and the invitation of the countries in the
region that are most directly affected by Mr. Assad's war on his own people. Thus it is up to the Arab League and Turkey
to adopt a plan of action. If Russia and China were willing to abstain rather than exercise another massacre-enabling
veto, then the Arab League could go back to the United Nations Security Council for approval. If not, then Turkey and the
Arab League should act, on their own authority and that of the other 13 members of the Security Council and 137
members of the General Assembly who voted last week to condemn Mr. Assad's brutality.
The power of the Syrian protesters over the past 11 months has arisen from their determination to face down bullets
with chants, signs and their own bodies. The international community can draw on the power of nonviolence and create
zones of peace in what are now zones of death.
The Syrians have the ability to make that happen; the rest of the world must give them the means to do it.

Anne-Marie Slaughter, a professor of politics and international affairs at Princeton, was director of policy planning at the
State Department from 2009 to 2011.



Terry B. Murphy, Ph.D.
Academic Support III (off-site)
Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs
Princeton University
Mobile:
Email:




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790747 Date: 10/30/2015
