UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787829 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                        RELEASE IN PART B5

 SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED                                     January 6, 2012

 NOTE FOR THE SECRETARY

 FROM:                 Ambassador Derek Mitchell
                       Special Representative and Policy Coordinator for Burma

  SUBJECT:             My January 9-12 Trip to Burma and Northern Thailand

 Political Situation

 Burmese authorities have sent mixed signals early in the new year. Failure to
 release significant political prisoners, and persistent conflict with ethnic minorities,
 has energized skeptics about the credibility of change, although it is too early to
 draw conclusions. The government has continued strong reformist rhetoric,
 granted visas to many "blacklisted" critics, allowed UN access to some conflicts
 zones, and permitted further space for civic activity.

  There is clear evidence of an on-going debate within the government about the
  pace of reform. We may be seeing a slowing down based on conservative
  concerns after a rapid run over the past four months. The role of the military, and
  former regime chief Than Shwe in turn, has come under greater scrutiny in recent
  weeks. President Thein Sein issued a direct order to cease hostilities in Kachin
  State, but it was ignored. It is nonetheless evident that commitment to reform
  remains strong among many key figures, including the president.

  ASSK for her part has counseled patience and has registered her party as she drives
  forward toward April 1 by-elections. However, she will be under increasing
  pressure from political prisoner families and others should the government fail to
  meet expectations. She runs the risk of losing their confidence, along with ethnic
  groups in border areas due to continuing violence there, should she appear to
  collude with a government that has not made any of the fundamental reforms
  necessary to prove sincerity.

  Engagement

  I return to Burma on January 9 to discuss our vision for the next six months,
  including implementation of initiatives you announced in December. I will
  preview upcoming CODELs (Senators McConnell, McCain, Lieberman,
  Whitehouse and Ayotte; and Congressman Crowley) and a plethora of USG visits

                            SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787829 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787829 Date: 10/30/2015




                           SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIF I ED
                                       -2-

 (ISN A/S Countryman in particular, who will visit to discuss North Korea). I will
 seek to encourage continuation of the momentum and mutually reinforcing
 dynamic that has served us well over the past several months. In Naypyitaw, I
 have asked for meetings with the President, 1st Vice President, Defense Minister,
 Commander in Chief, Foreign Minister, and Railways Minister (who doubles as a
 key figure in ethnic dialogues). G/TIP's Amb CdeBaca will be in-country at the
 same time and joining some of my meetings. His visit is important to start the
 process of moving Burma off TIP Tier 3 status, which leads to the most rigid legal
 constraints on multilateral engagement.

 In Rangoon, I will meet with ASSK to discuss follow-up to your visit, and get her
 take on developments both within her party and in the country writ large. I intend
 to have similar conversations with other key civil society stakeholders. I will also
 travel up-country, to inspect micro-finance projects and show appreciation for a
 broader sector of Burmese society, as well as to northern Thailand where refugee
 assistance groups along the border are at risk of declining attention given positive
 trends inside the country. My intention is to send a message that we will not forget
 them, as well as to have quiet meetings with key ethnic leaders from both inside
 and outside Burma to gauge how we can best play a role in national reconciliation.

  Programming

  Together with EAP, I have been working with USAID and others in the
  interagency to conduct a February scoping mission to Burma to assess conditions
  on the ground, to inform development of a new USG assistance strategy, and to
  shape how others internationally will set their engagement priorities. Our effort
  will comprise a "core team" to conduct the mission itself, as well as an "extended
  field team" and "informal advisory board" made up of U.S. and international
  specialists to assist the study.

  I will raise the notion of a USG scoping mission with interlocutors in Naypyitaw
  next week to seek their cooperation and participation. The results of our efforts
  will be a central inject to an eventual international coordination meeting we hope
  you can host, when and if conditions permit. ASSK has expressed strong support
  for such a USG-led coordination event, and even signaled her desire to come to the
  United States to take part personally.




                            SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIF I ED
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787829 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787829 Date: 10/30/2015




                           SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
                                       -3-

 Next Steps




                           SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787829 Date: 10/30/2015
