    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790006 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                                RELEASE IN
                                                                                                FULL



From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Friday, May 4, 2012 10:32 AM
To:
Subject:                         FW: Matt Daly, AP Story on New KXL Application




From: Klevorick, Caitlin B
Sent: Friday, May 04, 2012 10:27 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Toiv, Nora F; Laszczych, Joanne
Subject: Fw: Matt Daly, AP Story on New KXL Application




From: Masonis, Melinda J
Sent: Friday, May 04, 2012 10:13 AM
To: Hammer, Michael A; Klevorick, Caitlin B; Benes, Keith 3; Jones, Kerri-Ann; Nassmacher, Wendy L; Toner, Mark C;
Ventrell, Patrick H
Subject: Matt Daly, AP Story on New KXL Application

US: TransCanada reapplies for oil pipeline

By MATTHEW DALY, Associated Press –

WASHINGTON (AP) — The Canadian company that wants to build the disputed Keystone XL pipeline in the
U.S. submitted a new application for the project Friday after changing the route to avoid environmentally
sensitive land in Nebraska.

TransCanada said it applied again to the State Department for permission to build the pipeline to carry oil from
so-called tar sands in western Canada to a company hub in Steele City, Neb. From there, the project would link
up with other pipelines operated by the company to carry oil to refineries on the Texas Gulf Coast.

President Barack Obama blocked the pipeline earlier this year, citing uncertainty over the Nebraska route — a
decision that drew fire from Republicans. TransCanada initially proposed a new route last month that would
veer east around the groundwater-rich Sandhills region before looping back to the original route.

State Department approval is needed because the $7 billion pipeline would cross a U.S. border. The department
confirmed Friday the application for the new route had been received.

The pipeline filing came on the same day as a disappointing report on U.S. job growth. The Labor Department
said employers pulled back on hiring in April for the second straight month, evidence of an economy still
growing only sluggishly, though the overall jobless rate slipped to 8.1 percent as more people gave up looking
for work.

Obama is under pressure to support the pipeline from Republicans and business and labor leaders who argue it
would create jobs; the State Department estimates it could result in up to 6,000 new jobs.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790006 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790006 Date: 10/30/2015




"The multi-billion dollar Keystone XL pipeline project will reduce the United States' dependence on foreign oil
and support job growth by putting thousands of Americans to work," said Russ Girling, TransCanada's president
and chief executive officer. "Keystone XL will transport U.S. crude oil from the very large Bakken supply basin
in Montana and North Dakota, along with Canadian oil, to U.S. refineries."

"Our application for a presidential permit builds on more than three years of environmental review already
conducted for Keystone XL," Girling added. "It was the most comprehensive process ever for a cross-border
pipeline and that work should allow our cross border permit to be processed expeditiously and a decision made
once a new route in Nebraska is determined."

The pipeline's opponents, including Democrats and environmental groups, say it would transport "dirty oil"
from tar sands in Alberta, Canada, that would require huge amounts of energy to extract. They also worry about
a possible spill. The pipeline would travel through Montana, South Dakota, Kansas and Oklahoma, in addition
to Nebraska.

In bloCking the pipeline in January, Obama said there was not enough time for a fair review before a looming
deadline forced on him by congressional Republicans. The action did not kill the project but put off a tough
choice on the once-obscure pipeline, which has become a flashpoint in the bitter partisan political fight over
jobs and the environment and a focus of the presidential campaign between Obama his likely Republican
opponent, Mitt Romney.

Nebraska Gov. Dave Heineman signed a bill last month that allows the state to proceed with its review of the
proposed pipeline through his state, regardless of what happens at the federal level.

A senior State Department official said U.S. officials would conduct a thorough review of the new application,
with a final decision not expected until early next year — well after the presidential election.

Officials will use previous studies to the extent possible, the official said, but will need to complete a new
environmental assessment, especially since the route has changed since TransCanada first applied for the
pipeline in 2008.

The State Department review is likely to include hiring an outside consultant, a point of contention in the
original review conducted by the agency. Democratic lawmakers complained that the firm that conducted the
review, Cardno Entrix, had a conflict of interest because of previous work with TransCanada.

The department's acting inspector general found no conflict of interest or improper political influence but said
the State Department could have done a better job evaluating some concerns about the project and should
improve its oversight of contractors.

Copyright © 2012 The Associated Press. All rights reserved.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790006 Date: 10/30/2015
