UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789981 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL




   NYU:poly
   POLYTECHNIC INSTITUTE OF NEW YORK UNIVERSITY



   March 28, 2012



   MEMORANDUM


   TO:              The NYU-Poly Community


   FROM:            Ralph Alexander, Chair, NYU-Poly Board of Trustees
                    John Sexton, President, NYU


   RE:              A New Role for Jerry Hultin, and a Search for His Successor


   After seven years as President of NYU-Poly, Jerry Hultin has decided to step down from that post by the
   summer of 2013. We are pleased to announce that we will continue to be able to avail ourselves after
   that, of Jerry's energy, intelligence, experience, and strategic insights: Jerry has agreed to serve as a
   Senior Presidential Fellow for New York University, following the appointment of his successor. As a
   Fellow, Jerry will work on key strategic priorities for the entire University, and expand on the role of
   innovation and entrepreneurship through the research and teaching programs of NYU's global network.


   Jerry's record, as President of Polytechnic Institute of NYU, is one of real achievement. Of greatest
   significance has been his leadership in forging the historic agreement between NYU-Poly and NYU; this
   restored to NYU an engineering capacity, an absence keenly felt over the years, and created a
   connection between Poly and a major research university — a partnership that will continue to be
   enormously advantageous to both institutions. Jerry's record of successes at NYU-Poly; his emphasis on
   invention, innovation, and entrepreneurship; his personal passion and dedication; his good counsel and
   his vision were critical to NYU and Poly coming together. And since the beginning of the partnership, he
   has championed the expanded role of science, technology, and engineering across the entire NYU
   community, both in New York and increasingly, around the world.


   Jerry has been an important influence in our development as 'a global university, having been a key
   partner in the formation of our Abu Dhabi campus, and increasingly involved in the build-out of our
   portal campus in Shanghai.


   And he has been key to important local partnerships, including those with New York City and New York
   State where he has demonstrated leadership around a number of significant projects. These include
   NYU's proposal to create a new applied science institute, the Center for Urban Science and Progress,
   which will be located adjacent to NYU-Poly's campus; start-up business incubators in Brooklyn and




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789981 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789981 Date: 10/30/2015




   Manhattan in partnership with the New York City Economic Development Corporation; a renewable and
   clean technology initiative in partnership with the New York State Energy Research and Development
   Authority; and the New York State-supported Game Innovation Lab.


   He has charted an important course for NYU-Poly's future, leading a strategic planning process to
   articulate a vision for NYU-Poly that has re-shaped the institution's ambitions and abilities to meet the
   then and future challenges: "i2e," a philosophy of invention, innovation, and entrepreneurship which
   informs a new approach to academics and research by providing the necessary tools and resources to
   students and faculty to turn research into products and services.


   He has led and overseen the implementation of a new recruitment and enrollment strategy that has
   resulted in an enrollment increase together with a rise in the quality of the student body as indicated by
   a significant increase in an average SAT score to 1305 for this year's freshman class. NYU-Poly has made
   five exceptional new faculty hires just this year. And NYU-Poly has expanded its research expenditures
   by 42 percent over the past three years. NYU-Poly's campus and facilities continue to be expanded and
   renewed with new faculty labs, classrooms, and offices at 2 Metro Tech; new administrative offices at 15
   Metro Tech; the continued renovation of Rogers Hall, which will include additional faculty labs; and the
   soon-to-begin renovations and re-use of many other parts of NYU-Poly's Brooklyn campus.


   Along with these achievements, he has also been a careful and successful steward of NYU-Poly's
   resources, improving its finances and absorbing the costs of major new commitments while restoring
   many of the financial cutbacks instituted in prior years. During the past few years, NYU-Poly has
   significantly expanded its fundraising — engaging many new and past supporters including the alumni
   and adding seven new Trustees to its Board of Directors in just the past two years.


   In recognition of the growing importance of engineering and sciences to NYU's research and teaching
   agenda, the new president for NYU-Poly will carry the additional title of Dean of Engineering for all of
   NYU. We have engaged the services of the internationally-renown executive search firm, Heidrick &
   Struggles, to aid us in finding a suitable successor. NYU-Poly Provost Katepalli Sreenivasan has
   graciously agreed to serve as head of the search committee, whose members will be drawn from the
   Trustees of both NYU and NYU-Poly, the faculty of both NYU and NYU-Poly, top administrators, and
   external leaders with important expertise to bring to this effort. Membership of the committee will be
   announced in the coming weeks.


   Although we will have ample opportunity to celebrate Jerry's accomplishments, I do hope you will join
   us in thanking him for his service thus far and in congratulating him on the new role he will play for all of
   NYU.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789981 Date: 10/30/2015
