    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788413 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                              B6

From:                             Anne-Marie Slaughter
Sent:                             Friday, January 27, 2012 6:29 PM
To:
Cc:                               Abedin, Huma; Cheryl Mills; Jacob J Sullivan (SullivanJJ@state.gov)
Subject:                          a few ideas for Munich speech



As we discussed yesterday, I think an important theme of your speech could be to take on directly European fears about
the pivot to Asia by pointing out that the more the US focuses on Asia, the more it will need to rely on our partnership
with Europe; we have to know that they have our back when crises erupt in the Middle East, North Africa (as w/ Libya),
sub-Saharan Africa (as w/ the French in Ivory Coast or the British in Sierra Leone a number of years ago or EU help
fighting piracy off Somalia). Our forces should become ever more inter-operable in this regard, as indeed French and
British forces are proposing to be in the wake of the need to fight together and take the lead in Libya.

Equally important, we have Europe's back, and they know it, and that won't change.

We also know that Europe is engaging China and indeed Asia in lots of useful ways; the EU and China are each other's
largest trading partners; many individual European governments are reaching trade and investment deals with China
(china just bought a stake in Britain's largest water utility; they have deals with Denmark, France). And of course many
European powers have old ties in Asia — colonial ties (France in Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos); the British in Singapore; the
Dutch in Indonesia, the Spanish in the Philippines. Those ties have left their cultural, economic, and demographic marks
(look at the large Vietnamese community in Paris, the Indonesians in Amsterdam) etc.

So rather than thinking about the US turning away from the Atlantic toward the Pacific, we should think about the
countries that make up the Atlantic basin (North America, South America, Europe, West Africa), all of which share
cultural, historical and demographic ties, political values, and intensifying economic relations in various directions all
taking account of the rise of Asia in the 21st century and engaging different Asian countries in many different ways while
strengthening and developing our own transatlantic neighborhood.

I'm happy to review drafts or help in any other way.
Best,
AM

Anne-Marie Slaughter
Bert G. Kerstetter '66 University Professor of Politics and International Affairs
Princeton University
440 Robertson Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544

Assistant: Terry Murphy

Website: www.princeton.edui—slaughtr




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788413 Date: 10/30/2015
