UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767219 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                              RELEASE IN PART B5


  Thoughts and Ideas for the Week from AMS
  Feb 1-5 2010

  For the QDDR: As I noted earlier, I had a great meeting with Andrew Steer and Nick Dyer,
  director general and head of policy planning at DFID. They recounted how originally it had been
  necessary to declare DFID's complete independence and separation from FCO, moving DFID
  offices out of British embassies around the world. Today, however, Andrew said that DFID and
  FCO were once again co-locating, due to the cost-savings and efficiency of combining the
  back-office functions and the complementary skills that development experts and diplomats
  bring to common tasks, especially in areas like developing governance strategies. As Andrew put
  it, development in the 21" century is not only about "immunizing children," but rather about
  convincing presidents and prime ministers themselves to see childhood epidemics and maternal
  mortality as national crises that must be addressed. Development issues must be worked "at
  both ends," operationally and politically. Diplomats must convince national governments of the
  priority and inter-connectedness of development issues for all ministers; development experts must
  ensure the availability and effectiveness of actual delivery systems.

  Equally interesting, individual DFID officers gain power "from being plugged into a global
  knowledge and access network." (I promise that I did not prompt them on this.) They argued
  that their field offices are "engines rooms for international dialogue," providing on the ground
  expertise and credibility in larger national, regional and international discussions. But the key to
  people listening to DFID is knowing that a DFID official has control over his or her own budget,
  diplomatic access back to the FCO and hence to the UN and regional organizations, access to the
  rest of the British government through an independent voice in Cabinet, financial international
  access to British representatives in the IFIs and MDBs, and access to the expertise and leverage of a
  global network of NG0s, foundations, corporations, international alliances such as GAVI, and
  other actors in the global development space. DFID's aim, in Steer's words, is to be "a networked,
  global organization," part of a larger global development system.

  To achieve these goals, DFID and apparently the British government generally have made major
  changes in both management and institutional culture. Each higher official is evaluated on a points
  system in which points are awarded partly for how well s/he has managed his own staff,
  partly for how well s/he has worked across the ministry, and partly for how well s/he has
  worked across government. Further, if you are in-country, your evaluation depends in part on
  how good a report you get from the chief of mission. The point is to create a team-focused,
  problem-solving culture that emphasizes the value of cultivating and using connections for a
  common purpose.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767219 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767219 Date: 10/30/2015




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767219 Date: 10/30/2015
