      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788950 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Tuesday, January 31, 2012 5:48 PM
To:
Subject:                           FW: New York Times, CETUSA and Alaska



fyi

From: Stock, Ann
Sent: Tuesday, January 31, 2012 3:25 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Noyes, Julieta Valls; Adams, David S; Macmanus, Joseph E; Peay, T Michael; Hammer, Michael A;
Smith, Dana S (PA); Klevorick, Caitlin B
Cc: Whitaker, Elizabeth A; Ruth, Rick A; Noyes, Julieta Valls; Maughan, Chelsea V; Giacobbe, Nicholas J; Sergent, Talley
R; Schinnerer, Karen P; Ereli, Joseph A; Toiv, Nora F; Laszczych, Joanne
Subject: RE: New York Times, CETUSA and Alaska

As you know, CETUSA's status as a SWT sponsor was terminated yesterday, largely as a result of the findings of our
Investigation into the Palmyra situation in August. Julia Preston, the Times reporter who broke the story, just learned
of the termination and left a voice mail to discuss the story.

We have conferred w/PA, L, H and CA and believe it is important to speak with Julia. PA will call Julia today for more
details about storyline, deadlines, etc. Also, we will brief Hill committees and interagency colleagues so that they
hear the news directly from us before reading it in the Times.

Our plan is to have ECA DAS Rick Ruth speak with the Domestic Policy Council, NSS and Labor representatives today.
Each has asked that we alert them as soon as action has been taken. Tomorrow, H and Rick will speak with key
staffers from Sen. Casey's office and our oversight committees. Once we have made those calls, and at PA's direction,
we will be available to speak with Julia.

Should she raise the topic, we are prepared to speak to the events concerning the six CETUSA-sponsored SWT students
in Alaska. Weather has delayed their departure from Sand Point, but they are due to arrive in Anchorage today and
will be assigned to other places of employment. We are in contact with all of them to ensure their health and
safety. We are also reaching out to the other 41 SWT students in Alaska (30 of them under CETUSA sponsorship) to
ascertain their welfare. We are taking all necessary measures to ensure their safety and well-being as well.

As we have more information, we will be sending updates.

Ann




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788950 Date: 10/30/2015
