        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783768 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                                          RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Friday, November 18, 2011 9:14 AM
To:
Subject:                                       Fw: Philippine ex-president Arroyo arrested in hospital (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Friday, November 18, 2011 06:47 AM
To: NEWS-EAP; NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0_0S; SES-O_Shift-I; SES-O_Shift-II
Subject: Philippine ex-president Arroyo arrested in hospital (Reuters)

MANILA (Reuters) - Former Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo was arrested on Friday for
electoral fraud, which carries a life sentence, at a Manila hospital, preventing her departure from the country to
seek medical treatment.

   President Benigno Aquino and his government have long accused Arroyo of corruption during her two terms
in office, from 2001-2010, though until Friday, authorities had not formally charged her.

    "She is now under our control, under our custody," Senior Superintendent Franklin Bucayu, head of the
Southern Police District, told a news briefing outside St Luke's Hospital.

   "The arrest warrant has been served. We tried to read her rights but her lawyers waived it because of her
conditions. She smiled at us and she was expecting it."

  The arrest warrant had been issued earlier in the day, just after the government lost a bid to reverse a
Supreme Court ruling allowing Arroyo to travel abroad.

    Arroyo denies any wrongdoing.

  Police said Arroyo's family, her lawyers and some members of her cabinet were at her side in the hospital
when the warrant was served. Her photograph would be taken and booking done over the weekend.

   "We posted two police officers outside her room and there are more officers down here to protect," Bucayu
said, adding the former president was wearing a neck brace when the warrant was served. "She just nodded and
did not say any word."

   Both military and police leaders promised to maintain law and order, dismissing rumours of unrest within
their ranks.

    "That is the real triumph of justice," said Justice Secretary Leila de Lima.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783768 Date: 10/30/2015
