      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786452 Date: 10/30/2015

                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                              B6




From:                           H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                           Friday, March 11, 2011 1:20 PM
To:                             Huma Abedin
Subject:                        Fw: to empower women, we have to find better ways to validate men
Attachments:                    Blog Post Womens tech del 3 8.doc



Pls print.


From: Anne-Marie Slaughter [mailto:
Sent: Wednesday, March 09, 2011 10:28 AM
To: H
Cc: Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Subject: to empower women, we have to find better ways to validate men




I thought you might like this — although I don't think it necessarily applies in DC, where men still
seem to me to be plenty empowered. On a completely different subject, nb the following point
from Christopher Dickey this Morning, which echoes your speeches — "If we Westerners are
worried about popular sentiment in the Arab world, which would be something novel for us, then
the opinion we need to satisfy should be that of the young people in the streets who have risen
against their dictators. They represent, after all, some two-thirds of the region's population." I think
we should be making every effort to find out what leaders of the April 6 movement in Egypt, the
Tunisian protesters, the Bahrainis etc. think re a NFZ, or other military action in Libya. AM




International Men's Day
If we are going to empower women and girls around the world, we have to find new and better roles for men.
Last week I led a State Department-sponsored delegation of women tech leaders to Liberia and Sierra Leone to
meet with government officials, entrepreneurs, activists, telecommunication and banking executives, and
university administrators to explore ways that technology, particularly mobile technology, can help improve the
health, education, and livelihoods of women and girls in both countries. Women are doing amazing things in
both countries, from Preident Ellen Johnson Sirleaf in Liberia to First Lady Sia Koroma in Sierra Leone to
countless local women and women returning from the diaspora that fled during horrific civil wars in both
countries. But as a successful businesswoman was telling me that "women do all the farming" in Sierra Leone,
as well as most of the market trading, and as I watched the groups of unemployed young men on every street
corner, I kept wondering what men were supposed to be doing. It finally dawned on me that farming was
women's work because it was domestic work -- tending family crops. Men were the hunters and the warriors,
essential providers of protein and protection. Yet neither of those roles exist today, beyond the option of serving
in small national military forces.

When I used to teach civil procedure as a law professor, I would begin the year by telling my students that "civil
procedure is the etiquette of ritualized battle." The phrase, which did not originate with me, captured the point
that peaceful, developed societies resolve disputes by law rather than by force. Litigation thus becomes
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786452 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786452 Date: 10/30/2015




"ritualized battle." It is not hard to imagine many litigators as modern warriors, just as it is not hard to imagine
many investment bankers as competitive hunters -- of deals rather than game. But in societies that have just
recently emerged from actual battle, where men fought each other and raped and captured women and that have
only rudimentary legal and finance professions, what's the professional alternative to hunting and fighting?

The point of these admittedly loose sociological musings is that women's roles have expanded while men's have
contracted. Over my lifetime, women have demonstrated repeatedly that they can do anything that men can do,
while still managing traditional women's work at the same time. But the same expansion of roles has not been
available to men. Yes, men can do housework and take care of children -- my husband proves that every day,
and I love him for it. But those roles are not celebrated in our society, even though they should be, which is one
reason so many women have wanted more. So what is it that men are distinctively good at? Legal Analyst Dan
Abrams has just written a book called Man Down: Proof Beyond a Reasonable Doubt That Women Are Better
Cops, Drivers, Gamblers, Spies, World Leaders, Beer Tasters, Hedge Fund Managers, and Just About
Everything Else. The book is based on over 100 gender-based studies. It is wonderfully timed for International
Women's Day and ideal talk show fodder. But the implications are actually quite serious -- not only in terms of
increasing the number of women in these professions, but also in terms of asking ourselves how we can better
value and validate men.

I ask these questions every day as the mother of two sons, aged 12 and 14. Two sons who matter-of-factly say,
as though it is indeed an unquestioned matter of fact, that "girls are smarter than boys" and thus do better in
school. They are of course trying to curry favor with their feminist mother while explaining why their own
grades aren't higher, but at a time when many colleges are starting to put a thumb on the scale for male
applicants to ensure a roughly balanced class, I worry that they really believe it. As much as I want them to treat
their wives as equals and value all that women can do and be, I also want them to value themselves.

Because in the end girls are not smarter than boys, any more than boys are smarter than girls. A healthy society
has to honor and respect women and men. We know that rising unemployment correlates with rising domestic
violence; frustrated, unhappy men who cannot control their lives all too often exercise violent control over their
wives. Women should not validate men in ways that diminish themselves, such as cooing over a strong
protector in a way that reinforces the idea of the weaker sex. But we must take to heart the idea that women's
equality does not in fact mean women's superiority. It means what it says: equality. So our task for International
Women's Day is to figure out, at least in part, how we can celebrate men.

Anne-Marie Slaughter, Bert G. Kerstetter '66 University Professor of Politics and International Affairs,
Princeton University; Director of Policy Planning at the U.S. Department of State, 2009-2011; Dean of the
Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton University, 2002-2009.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786452 Date: 10/30/2015
