     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786763 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                            RELEASE IN
                                                                                            FULL


From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                             Friday, August 19, 2011 4:15 PM
To:                               'millscd@state.gov'
Subject                           Re: Do You Suffer From Decision Fatigue? (worth a read)


Wow that is spooky descriptive.


From: Mills, Cheryl D [mailto:MillsCD@state.gov]
Sent: Friday, August 19, 2011 03:28 PM
To: H
Subject: FW: Do You Suffer From Decision Fatigue? (worth a read)




From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Friday, August 19, 2011 3:04 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Do You Suffer From Decision Fatigue? (worth a read)

Clic Zcty Uork Times
August 17, 2011



Do You Suffer From Decision Fatigue?
By JOHN TIERNEY


Three men doing time in Israeli prisons recently appeared before a parole board consisting of a judge, a
criminologist and a social worker. The three prisoners had completed at least two-thirds of their sentences, but
the parole board granted freedom to only one of them. Guess which one:

Case 1 (heard at 8:50 a.m.): An Arab Israeli serving a 30-month sentence for fraud.

Case 2 (heard at 3:10 p.m.): A Jewish Israeli serving a 16-month sentence for assault.

Case 3 (heard at 4:25 p.m.): An Arab Israeli serving a 30-month sentence for fraud.

There was a pattern to the parole board's decisions, but it wasn't related to the men's ethnic backgrounds,
crimes or sentences. It was all about timing, as researchers discovered by analyzing more than 1,100 decisions
over the course of a year. Judges, who would hear the prisoners' appeals and then get advice from the other
members of the board, approved parole in about a third of the cases, but the probability of being paroled
fluctuated wildly throughout the day. Prisoners who appeared early in the morning received parole about 70
percent of the time, while those who appeared late in the day were paroled less than 10 percent of the time.

The odds favored the prisoner who appeared at 8:50 a.m. — and he did in fact receive parole. But even though
the other Arab Israeli prisoner was serving the same sentence for the same crime — fraud — the odds were
against him when he appeared (on a different day) at 4:25 in the afternoon. He was denied parole, as was the

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786763 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786763 Date: 10/30/2015




Jewish Israeli prisoner at 3:10 p.m, whose sentence was shorter than that of the man who was released. They
were just asking for parole at the wrong time of day.

There was nothing malicious or even unusual about the judges' behavior, which was reported earlier this year
by Jonathan Levav of Stanford and Shai Danziger of Ben-Gurion University. The judges' erratic judgment was
due to the occupational hazard of being, as George W. Bush once put it, "the decider." The mental work of
ruling on case after case, whatever the individual merits, wore them down. This sort of decision fatigue can
make quarterbacks prone to dubious choices late in the game and C.F.O.'s prone to disastrous dalliances late in
the evening. It routinely warps the judgment of everyone, executive and nonexecutive, rich and poor — in fact,
it can take a special toll on the poor. Yet few people are even aware of it, and researchers are only beginning to
understand why it happens and how to counteract it.

Decision fatigue helps explain why ordinarily sensible people get angry at colleagues and families, splurge on
clothes, buy junk food at the supermarket and can't resist the dealer's offer to rustproof their new car. No matter
how rational and high-minded you try to be, you can't make decision after decision without paying a biological
price. It's different from ordinary physical fatigue — you're not consciously aware of being tired — but you're
low on mental energy. The more choices you make throughout the day, the harder each one becomes for your
brain, and eventually it looks for shortcuts, usually in either of two very different ways. One shortcut is to
become reckless: to act impulsively instead of expending the energy to first think through the consequences.
(Sure, tweet that photo! What could go wrong?) The other shortcut is the ultimate energy saver: do nothing.
Instead of agonizing over decisions, avoid any choice. Ducking a decision often creates bigger problems in the
long run, but for the moment, it eases the mental strain. You start to resist any change, any potentially risky
move — like releasing a prisoner who might commit a crime. So the fatigued judge on a parole board takes the
easy way out, and the prisoner keeps doing time.

Decision fatigue is the newest discovery involving a phenomenon called ego depletion, a term coined by the
social psychologist Roy F. Baumeister in homage to a Freudian hypothesis. Freud speculated that the self, or
ego, depended on mental activities involving the transfer of energy. He was vague about the details, though, and
quite wrong about some of them (like his idea that artists "sublimate" sexual energy into their work, which
would imply that adultery should be especially rare at artists' colonies). Freud's energy model of the self was
generally ignored until the end of the century, when Baumeister began studying mental discipline in a series of
experiments, first at Case Western and then at Florida State University.

These experiments demonstrated that there is a finite store of mental energy for exerting self-control.' When
people fended off the temptation to scarf down M&M's or freshly baked chocolate-chip cookies, they were then
less able to resist other temptations. When they forced themselves to remain stoic during a tearjerker movie,
afterward they gave up more quickly on lab tasks requiring self-discipline, like working on a geometry puzzle
or squeezing a hand-grip exerciser. Willpower turned out to be more than a folk concept or a metaphor. It really
was a form of mental energy that could be exhausted. The experiments confirmed the 19th-century notion of
willpower being like a muscle that was fatigued with use, a force that could be conserved by avoiding
temptation. To study the process of ego depletion, researchers concentrated initially on acts involving self-
control — the kind of self-discipline popularly associated with willpower, like resisting a bowl of ice cream.
They weren't concerned with routine decision-making, like choosing between chocolate and vanilla, a mental
process that they assumed was quite distinct and much less strenuous. Intuitively, the chocolate-vanilla choice
didn't appear to require willpower.

But then a postdoctoral fellow, Jean Twenge, started working at Baumeister's laboratory right after planning her
wedding. As Twenge studied the results of the lab's ego-depletion experiments, she remembered how exhausted
she felt the evening she and her fiancé went through the ritual of registering for gifts. Did they want plain white
china or something with a pattern? Which brand of knives? How many towels? What kind of sheets? Precisely
how many threads per square inch?

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786763 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786763 Date: 10/30/2015




"By the end, you could have talked me into anything," Twenge told her new colleagues. The symptoms sounded
familiar to them too, and gave them an idea. A nearby department store was holding a going-out-of-business
sale, so researchers from the lab went off to fill their car trunks with simple products — not exactly wedding-
quality gifts, but sufficiently appealing to interest college students. When they came to the lab, the students
were told they would get to keep one item at the end of the experiment, but first they had to make a series of
choices. Would they prefer a pen or a candle? A vanilla-scented candle or an almond-scented one? A candle or
a T-shirt? A black T-shirt or a red T-shirt? A control group, meanwhile — let's call them the nondeciders -
spent an equally long period contemplating all these same products without having to make any choices. They
were asked just to give their opinion of each product and report how often they had used such a product in the
last six months.

Afterward, all the participants were given one of the classic tests of self-control: holding your hand in ice water
for as long as you can. The impulse is to pull your hand out, so self-discipline is needed to keep the hand
underwater. The deciders gave up much faster; they lasted 28 seconds, less than half the 67-second average of
the nondeciders. Making all those choices had apparently sapped their willpower, and it wasn't an isolated
effect. It was confirmed in other experiments testing students after they went through exercises like choosing
courses from the college catalog.

For a real-world test of their theory, the lab's researchers went into that great modern arena of decision making:
the suburban mall. They interviewed shoppers about their experiences in the stores that day and then asked them
to solve some simple arithmetic problems. The researchers politely asked them to do as many as possible but
said they could quit at any time. Sure enough, the shoppers who had already made the most decisions in the
stores gave up the quickest on the math problems. When you shop till you drop, your willpower drops, too.

Any decision, whether it's what pants to buy or whether to start a war, can be broken down into what
psychologists call the Rubicon model of action phases, in honor of the river that separated Italy from the Roman
province of Gaul. When Caesar reached it in 49 B.C., on his way home after conquering the Gauls, he knew that
a general returning to Rome was forbidden to take his legions across the river with him, lest it be considered an
invasion of Rome. Waiting on the Gaul side of the river, he was in the "predecisional phase" as he contemplated
the risks and benefits of starting a civil war. Then he stopped calculating and crossed the Rubicon, reaching the
"postdecisional phase," which Caesar defined much more felicitously: "The die is cast."

The whole process could deplete anyone's willpower, but which phase of the decision-making process was most
fatiguing? To find out, Kathleen Vohs, a former colleague of Baumeister's now at the University of Minnesota,
performed an experiment using the self-service Web site of Dell Computers. One group in the experiment
carefully studied the advantages and disadvantages of various features available for a computer — the type of
screen, the size of the hard drive, etc. — without actually making a final decision on which ones to choose. A
second group was given a list of predetermined specifications and told to configure a computer by going
through the laborious, step-by-step process of locating the specified features among the arrays of options and
then clicking on the right ones. The purpose of this was to duplicate everything that happens in the
postdecisional phase, when the choice is implemented. The third group had to figure out for themselves which
features they wanted on their computers and go through the process of choosing them; they didn't simply
ponder options (like the first group) or implement others' choices (like the second group). They had to cast the
die, and that turned out to be the most fatiguing task of all. When self-control was measured, they were the one
who were most depleted, by far.

The experiment showed that crossing the Rubicon is more tiring than anything that happens on either bank -
more mentally fatiguing than sitting on the Gaul side contemplating your options or marching on Rome once
you've crossed. As a result, someone without Caesar's willpower is liable to stay put. To a fatigued judge,
denying parole seems like the easier call not only because it preserves the status quo and eliminates the risk of a
parolee going on a crime spree but also because it leaves more options open: the judge retains the option of
paroling the prisoner at a future date without sacrificing the option of keeping him securely in prison right now.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786763 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786763 Date: 10/30/2015




Part of the resistance against making decisions comes from our fear of giving up options. The word "decide"
shares an etymological root with "homicide," the Latin word "caedere," meaning "to cut down" or "to kill," and
that loss looms especially large when decision fatigue sets in.

Once you're mentally depleted, you become reluctant to make trade-offs, which involve a particularly advanced
and taxing form of decision making. In the rest of the animal kingdom, there aren't a lot of protracted
negotiations between predators and prey. To compromise is a complex human ability and therefore one of the
first to decline when willpower is depleted. You become what researchers call a cognitive miser, hoarding your
energy. If you're shopping, you're liable to look at only one dimension, like price: just give me the cheapest. Or
you indulge yourself by looking at quality: I want the very best (an especially easy strategy if someone else is
paying). Decision fatigue leaves you vulnerable to marketers who know how to time their sales, as Jonathan
Levav, the Stanford professor, demonstrated in experiments involving tailored suits and new cars.

The idea for these experiments also happened to come in the preparations for a wedding, a ritual that seems to
be the decision-fatigue equivalent of Hell Week. At his fiancée's suggestion, Levav visited a tailor to have a
bespoke suit made and began going through the choices of fabric, type of lining and style of buttons, lapels,
cuffs and so forth.

"By the time I got through the third pile of fabric swatches, I wanted to kill myself," Levav recalls. "I couldn't
tell the choices apart anymore. After a while my only response to the tailor became 'What do you recommend?'
I just couldn't take it."

Levav ended up not buying any kind of bespoke suit (the $2,000 price made that decision easy enough), but he
put the experience to use in a pair of experiments conducted with Mark Heitmann, then at Christian-Albrechts
University in Germany; Andreas Herrmann, at the University of St. Gallen in Switzerland; and Sheena Iyengar,
of Columbia. One involved asking M.B.A. students in Switzerland to choose a bespoke suit; the other was
conducted at German car dealerships, where customers ordered options for their new sedans. The car buyers -
and these were real customers spending their own money — had to choose, for instance, among 4 styles of
gearshift knobs, 13 kinds of wheel rims, 25 configurations of the engine and gearbox and a palette of 56 colors
for the interior.

As they started picking features, customers would carefully weigh the choices, but as decision fatigue set in,
they would start settling for whatever the default option was. And the more tough choices they encountered
early in the process — like going through those 56 colors to choose the precise shade of gray or brown — the
quicker people became fatigued and settled for the path of least resistance by taking the default option. By
manipulating the order of the car buyers' choices, the researchers found that the customers would end up
settling for different kinds of options, and the average difference totaled more than 1,500 euros per car (about
$2,000 at the time). Whether the customers paid a little extra for fancy wheel rims or a lot extra for a more
powerful engine depended on when the choice was offered and how much willpower was left in the customer.

Similar results were found in the experiment with custom-made suits: once decision fatigue set in, people
tended to settle for the recommended option. When they were confronted early on with the toughest decisions
— the ones with the most options, like the 100 fabrics for the suit — they became fatigued more quickly and
also reported enjoying the shopping experience less.

Shopping can be especially tiring for the poor, who have to struggle continually with trade-offs. Most of us in
America won't spend a lot of time agonizing over whether we can afford to buy soap, but it can be a depleting
choice in rural India. Dean Spears, an economist at Princeton, offered people in 20 villages in Rajasthan in
northwestern India the chance to buy a couple of bars of brand-name soap for the equivalent of less than 20
cents. It was a steep discount off the regular price, yet even that sum was a strain for the people in the 10
poorest villages. Whether or not they bought the soap, the act of making the decision left them with less
winnower_ as measured afterward in a test of how long they could soueeze a hand grin. In the slightly more
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786763 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786763 Date: 10/30/2015




affluent villages, people's willpower wasn't affected significantly. Because they had more money, they didn't
have to spend as much effort weighing the merits of the soap versus, say, food or medicine.

Spears and other researchers argue that this sort of decision fatigue is a major — and hitherto ignored — factor
in trapping people in poverty. Because their financial situation forces them to make so many trade-offs, they
have less willpower to devote to school, work and other activities that might get them into the middle class. It's
hard to know exactly how important this factor is, but there's no doubt that willpower is a special problem for
poor people. Study after study has shown that low self-control correlates with low income as well as with a host
of other problems, including poor achievement in school, divorce, crime, alcoholism and poor health. Lapses in
self-control have led to the notion of the "undeserving poor" — epitomized by the image of the welfare mom
using food stamps to buy junk food — but Spears urges sympathy for someone who makes decisions all day on
a tight budget. In one study, he found that when the poor and the rich go shopping, the poor are much more
likely to eat during the shopping trip. This might seem like confirmation of their weak character — after all,
they could presumably save money and improve their nutrition by eating meals at home instead of buying
ready-to-eat snacks like Cinnabons, which contribute to the higher rate of obesity among the poor. But if a trip
to the supermarket induces more decision fatigue in the poor than in the rich — because each purchase requires
more mental trade-offs — by the time they reach the cash register, they'll have less willpower left to resist the
Mars bars and Skittles. Not for nothing are these items called impulse purchases.

And this isn't the only reason that sweet snacks are featured prominently at the cash register, just when
shoppers are depleted after all their decisions in the aisles. With their willpower reduced, they're more likely to
yield to any kind of temptation, but they're especially vulnerable to candy and soda and anything else offering a
quick hit of sugar. While supermarkets figured this out a long time ago, only recently did researchers discover
why.

The discovery was an accident resulting from a failed experiment at Baumeister's lab. The researchers set out
to test something called the Mardi Gras theory — the notion that you could build up willpower by first
indulging yourself in pleasure, the way Mardi Gras feasters do just before the rigors of Lent. In place of a Fat
Tuesday breakfast, the chefs in the lab at Florida State whipped up lusciously thick milkshakes for a group of
subjects who were resting in between two laboratory tasks requiring willpower. Sure enough, the delicious
shakes seemed to strengthen willpower by helping people perform better than expected on the next task. So far,
so good. But the experiment also included a control group of people who were fed a tasteless concoction of low-
fat dairy glop. It provided them with no pleasure, yet it produced similar improvements in self-control. The
Mardi Gras theory looked wrong. Besides tragically removing an excuse for romping down the streets of New
Orleans, the result was embarrassing for the researchers. Matthew Gailliot, the graduate student who ran the
study, stood looking down at his shoes as he told Baumeister about the fiasco.

Baumeister tried to be optimistic. Maybe the study wasn't a failure. Something had happened, after all. Even the
tasteless glop had done the job, but how? If it wasn't the pleasure, could it be the calories? At first the idea
seemed a bit daft. For decades, psychologists had been studying performance on mental tasks without worrying
much about the results being affected by dairy-product consumption. They liked to envision the human mind as
a computer, focusing on the way it processed information. In their eagerness to chart the human equivalent of
the computer's chips and circuits, most psychologists neglected one mundane but essential part of the machine:
the power supply. The brain, like the rest of the body, derived energy from glucose, the simple sugar
manufactured from all kinds of foods. To establish cause and effect, researchers at Baumeister's lab tried
refueling the brain in a series of experiments involving lemonade mixed either with sugar or with a diet
sweetener. The sugary lemonade provided a burst of glucose, the effects of which could be observed right away
in the lab; the sugarless variety tasted quite similar without providing the same burst of glucose. Again and
again, the sugar restored willpower, but the artificial sweetener had no effect. The glucose would at least
mitigate the ego depletion and sometimes completely reverse it. The restored willpower improved people's self-
control as well as the quality of their decisions: they resisted irrational bias when making choices, and when
asked to make financial decisions, they were more likely to choose the better long-term strategy instead of
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786763 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786763 Date: 10/30/2015




going for a quick payoff. The ego-depletion effect was even demonstrated with dogs in two studies by Holly
Miller and Nathan DeWall at the University of Kentucky. After obeying sit and stay commands for 10 minutes,
the dogs performed worse on self-control tests and were also more likely to make the dangerous decision to
challenge another dog's turf. But a dose of glucose restored their willpower.

Despite this series of findings, brain researchers still had some reservations about the glucose connection.
Skeptics pointed out that the brain's overall use of energy remains about the same regardless of what a person is
doing, which doesn't square easily with the notion of depleted energy affecting willpower. Among the skeptics
was Todd Heatherton, who worked with Baumeister early in his career and eventually wound up at Dartmouth,
where he became a pioneer of what is called social neuroscience: the study of links between brain processes and
social behavior. He believed in ego depletion, but he didn't see how this neural process could be caused simply
by variations in glucose levels. To observe the process — and to see if it could be reversed by glucose — he and
his colleagues recruited 45 female dieters and recorded images of their brains as they reacted to pictures of
food. Next the dieters watched a comedy video while forcing themselves to suppress their laughter — a
standard if cruel way to drain mental energy and induce ego depletion. Then they were again shown pictures of
food, and the new round of brain scans revealed the effects of ego depletion: more activity in the nucleus
accumbens, the brain's reward center, and a corresponding decrease in the amygdala, which ordinarily helps
control impulses. The food's appeal registered more strongly while impulse control weakened — not a good
combination for anyone on a diet. But suppose people in this ego-depleted state got a quick dose of glucose?
What would a scan of their brains reveal?

The results of the experiment were announced in January, during Heatherton's speech accepting the leadership
of the Society for Personality and Social Psychology, the world's largest group of social psychologists. In his
presidential address at the annual meeting in San Antonio, Heatherton reported that administering glucose
completely reversed the brain changes wrought by depletion — a finding, he said, that thoroughly surprised
him. Heatherton's results did much more than provide additional confirmation that glucose is a vital part of
willpower; they helped solve the puzzle over how glucose could work without global changes in the brain's
total energy use. Apparently ego depletion causes activity to rise in some parts of the brain and to decline in
others. Your brain does not stop working when glucose is low. It stops doing some things and starts doing
others. It responds more strongly to immediate rewards and pays less attention to long-term prospects.

The discoveries about glucose help explain why dieting is a uniquely difficult test of self-control — and why
even people with phenomenally strong willpower in the rest of their lives can have such a hard time losing
weight. They start out the day with virtuous intentions, resisting croissants at breakfast and dessert at lunch, but
each act of resistance further lowers their willpower. As their willpower weakens late in the day, they need to
replenish it. But to resupply that energy, they need to give the body glucose. They're trapped in a nutritional
catch-22:

1.In order not to eat, a dieter needs willpower.

2. In order to have willpower, a dieter needs to eat.

As the body uses up glucose, it looks for a quick way to replenish the fuel, leading to a craving for sugar. After
performing a lab task requiring self-control, people tend to eat more candy but not other kinds of snacks, like
salty, fatty potato chips. The mere expectation of having to exert self-control makes people hunger for sweets. A
similar effect helps explain why many women yearn for chocolate and other sugary treats just before
menstruation: their bodies are seeking a quick replacement as glucose levels fluctuate. A sugar-filled snack or
drink will provide a quick improvement in self-control (that's why it's convenient to use in experiments), but
it's just a temporary solution. The problem is that what we identify as sugar doesn't help as much over the
course of the day as the steadier supply of glucose we would get from eating proteins and other more nutritious
foods.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786763 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786763 Date: 10/30/2015




The benefits of glucose were unmistakable in the study of the Israeli parole board. In midmorning, usually a
little before 10:30, the parole board would take a break, and the judges would be served a sandwich and a piece
of fruit. The prisoners who appeared just before the break had only about a 20 percent chance of getting parole,
but the ones appearing right after had around a 65 percent chance. The odds dropped again as the morning wore
on, and prisoners really didn't want to appear just before lunch: the chance of getting parole at that time was
only 10 percent. After lunch it soared up to 60 percent, but only briefly. Remember that Jewish Israeli prisoner
who appeared at 3:10 p.m. and was denied parole from his sentence for assault? He had the misfortune of being
the sixth case heard after lunch. But another Jewish Israeli prisoner serving the same sentence for the same
crime was lucky enough to appear at 1:27 p.m., the first case after lunch, and he was rewarded with parole. It
must have seemed to him like a fine example of the justice system at work, but it probably had more to do with
the judge's glucose levels.

It's simple enough to imagine reforms for the parole board in Israel — like, say, restricting each judge's shift
to half a day, preferably in the morning, interspersed with frequent breaks for food and rest. But it's not so
obvious what to do with the decision fatigue affecting the rest of society. Even if we could all afford to work
half-days, we would still end up depleting our willpower all day long, as Baumeister and his colleagues found
when they went into the field in Wurzburg in central Germany. The psychologists gave preprogrammed
BlackBerrys to more than 200 people going about their daily routines for a week. The phones went off at
random intervals, prompting the people to report whether they were currently experiencing some sort of desire
or had recently felt a desire. The painstaking study, led by Wilhelm Hofmann, then at the University of
Wurzburg, collected more than 10,000 momentary reports from morning until midnight.

Desire turned out to be the norm, not the exception. Half the people were feeling some desire when their phones
went off— to snack, to goof off, to express their true feelings to their bosses — and another quarter said they
had felt a desire in the past half-hour. Many of these desires were ones that the men and women were trying to
resist, and the more willpower people expended, the more likely they became to yield to the next temptation that
came along. When faced with a new desire that produced some I-want-to-but-I-really-shouldn't sort of inner
conflict, they gave in more readily if they had already fended off earlier temptations, particularly if the new
temptation came soon after a previously reported one.

The results suggested that people spend between three and four hours a day resisting desire. Put another way, if
you tapped four or five people at any random moment of the day, one of them would be using willpower to
resist a desire. The most commonly resisted desires in the phone study were the urges to eat and sleep, followed
by the urge for leisure, like taking a break from work by doing a puzzle or playing a game instead of writing a
memo. Sexual urges were next on the list of most-resisted desires, a little ahead of urges for other kinds of
interactions, like checking Facebook. To ward off temptation, people reported using various strategies. The
most popular was to look for a distraction or to undertake a new activity, although sometimes they tried
suppressing it directly or simply toughing their way through it. Their success was decidedly mixed. They were
pretty good at avoiding sleep, sex and the urge to spend money, but not so good at resisting the lure of
television or the Web or the general temptation to relax instead of work.

We have no way of knowing how much our ancestors exercised self-control in the days before BlackBerrys and
social psychologists, but it seems likely that many of them were under less ego-depleting strain. When there
were fewer decisions, there was less decision fatigue. Today we feel overwhelmed because there are so many
choices. Your body may have dutifully reported to work on time, but your mind can escape at any instant. A
typical computer user looks at more than three dozen Web sites a day and gets fatigued by the continual
decision making — whether to keep working on a project, check out TMZ, follow a link to YouTube or buy
something on Amazon. You can do enough damage in a 10-minute online shopping spree to wreck your budget
for the rest of the year.

The cumulative effect of these temptations and decisions isn't intuitively obvious. Virtually no one has a gut-
level sense of just how tiring it is to decide. Big decisions, small decisions, they all add un. Choosing what to
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786763 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786763 Date: 10/30/2015




have for breakfast, where to go on vacation, whom to hire, how much to spend — these all deplete willpower,
and there's no telltale symptom of when that willpower is low. It's not like getting winded or hitting the wall
during a marathon. Ego depletion manifests itself not as one feeling but rather as a propensity to experience
everything more intensely. When the brain's regulatory powers weaken, frustrations seem more irritating than
usual. Impulses to eat, drink, spend and say stupid things feel more powerful (and alcohol causes self-control to
decline further). Like those dogs in the experiment, ego-depleted humans become more likely to get into
needless fights over turf. In making decisions, they take illogical shortcuts and tend to favor short-term gains
and delayed costs. Like the depleted parole judges, they become inclined to take the safer, easier option even
when that option hurts someone else.

"Good decision making is not a trait of the person, in the sense that it's always there," Baumeister says. "It's a
state that fluctuates." His studies show that people with the best self-control are the ones who structure their
lives so as to conserve willpower. They don't schedule endless back-to-back meetings. They avoid temptations
like all-you-can-eat buffets, and they establish habits that eliminate the mental effort of making choices. Instead
of deciding every morning whether or not to force themselves to exercise, they set up regular appointments to
work out with a friend. Instead of counting on willpower to remain robust all day, they conserve it so that it's
available for emergencies and important decisions.

"Even the wisest people won't make good choices when they're not rested and their glucose is low,"
Baumeister points out. That's why the truly wise don't restructure the company at 4 p.m. They don't make
major commitments during the cocktail hour. And if a decision must be made late in the day, they know not to
do it on an empty stomach. "The best decision makers," Baumeister says, "are the ones who know when not to
trust themselves."

John Tierney (tierneylab@nytimes.com) is a science columnist for The Times. His essay is adapted from a book
he wrote with Roy F. Baumeister, "Willpower: Rediscovering the Greatest Human Strength," which comes out
next month.

Editor: Aaron Retica (a.retica-MagGroup@nytimes.com)




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786763 Date: 10/30/2015
