    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784031 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                               RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                       Anne-Marie Slaughter <
Sent:                       Wednesday, November 16, 2011 10:26 AM
To:                         "Hunter, Robert"; AdamSmith7                  Ali Wyne; Amanda Sloat; Amy McIntosh;
                            Andrew Moravcsik; anr                        antonia chayes; Antony Blinken
                                                      Benedict Kingsbury; Bernhard Lorentz;
                            bethneckmankleir                    Bill Butler; Bill_Burke-White                        Bruce
                            Jentleson; Bryan Hehir; Cait Clarke                                 Carl Bildt; Carlos Lozada;
                            cbruderl                        CharlesworthH                        charlie; Christian Joerges;
                            David Bosco; David Boyd; David Held; David Petraeus; David Rieff; Debora Spar; Elena
                            Kagan; Elizabeth Sullivan; elsnyc06                emma rothschild; Ernst-
                            Ulrich.Petersmann               Evan W. Thomas; FENCHELS                              fred hiatt;
                            fred_schauer; G.Teubner                             Gareth Evans; Gary J Bass
                                                        gblum; George Bermann; Gerhard Casper; Charles C. Gillispie;
                            Gordon Smith; raham_allisor                        Gregory Craig; g-stone
                            harold.elis              hauser; hbhabha                         Helene van Rossum;
                            Hoke.Slaughte                              honorable_michael_boudin; honorable_Patti_Saris;
                            Honorable_Sandra_Lynch                            ian_malcolrn                               vo
                            Daalder; jacqueline_bhabha                      James   Crawford;
                            James Der Deriar                   Jan Lodal                               jane; Janie
                                                         JEdersheim                Jeff Toobin; Jeffrey Walker;
                            Jeffrey_Frankel                      Jennifer Raab; Jennifer Slaughter; jess.bravin; Jill
                            Tobey; Joe Gatto; John Ikenberry; john mearsheimer; John Sexton; john.cogan;
                            john_ruggie                   Jonathan Fried; Julius Coles; kadenl                       Kal
                            Raustiala; Kalvaria, Leon ; kalypso.nicolaidis; karl.ladeur           kat; Katherine Sikkink;
                            Kermal Dervis; Kishore_MAHBUBANI                        ; koskenniemi;
                            kpisto                       Kraus, Michael; KUMMM
                             Larry.Helfer          lee feinstein; ljbs22                 Lorne Craner; Margaret Cannella;
                            Marisa McAuliffe; Mark Malloch-Brown; mhirsh                                   michael barnett;
                            Michael Froman; Michael Klein; mohanlon O'Hanlon; Nannerl 0. Keohane; Neil Shister;
                             nelish               Niall Ferguson; ninmanigo                    ; Oberdorfer
                                                       omichael; Paul Brest; Paula Dobriansky; Peter J. Katzenstein; Phil
                             Bobbitt; r_goldstone; Ramamurthy, Pradeep; Rebecca Stone; Richard A. Falk;
                             rkeohanE               Robert Silvers; Ron Bloom; Simon Chesterman;
                            stanger                              stephen_walt                    Steven Biddle; Strobe
                            Talbott; Susan Johnson; Suzanne Nossell; tlewis                        Warren Strobel; William
                             Gerrity; Zakaria Fareed; Abraham Sofaer; Alan Blinder; Alan Brinkley; Alan Wang; Amb.
                             J.D. Bindenagel; Ana Bickford; Andi Bernstein; Andrew Cooper; Anika Binnendijk; Ann
                             Corwin; Anthony Carty; Barbara B me; Barbara Cassani; Barbara Crossette; Barry Bloom;
                             Barry Carter; barrynewswee                 Benjamin Rhodes; Bill Burke-White; Brett Dakin;
                             Catherine                Charles Brower; Charles C. Gillispie; Cherie Blair; Christian Brose;
                             Christopher Buja; Christopher Chyba; dar                        Daniel Bradlow; Daniel
                             Coquillette; Daniel Halbertstam; Danny Goldhagen; David Brooks; David Christy; David
                             Dessler; David Dobkin; David Loevner; David Martin;
                             dbittermar                                    Dennis Townley; Derek Chollet; Dorinda
                             Dallmeyer; Eduardo Bhatia; Edward Djerejian; Eli Whitney Debevoise II; Elizabeth Bangs;
                             Elizabeth Colagiuri; Emma Dunch; Fouad Ajami; George Davitt; Georgean Ciocca; Hans
                             Correll; Hasan Colakoglu; hcho79                     H; Henry Bienen; Henry Wing Chan;
                             Holly Burkhalter; Hovey Brock; Huma Abedin; Jackson Diehl; James Cunningham; James
                             H. Carter; Jewell Bickford; Joe Cari; John Dickerson; Jose Cutileiro; Karen Alter; Katherine
                              Benesch; Katherine Bradley; Kathy Bushkin; Kendell Crolius; Kennette Benedict; Kim
                             Arnold; Lea Carpenter Brokaw; Lee Cullum; Lisa Belkin; Lori Fisler Damrosch; Malik
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784031 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784031 Date: 10/30/2015




To:                               Dahlan; Mary Boyd; Mel Blake; Michael Boudin; Miguel Centeno; Miltos Catomeris;
                                  Nicolette Cavaleros; Patrizia Chen; Peter Beinart; Philip Bennett; Philip Burling; R.
                                  Douglas Bernheim; Rand Beers; Ray Close; Rebecca Brubaker; Renaud Dehousse; Richard
                                  A. Clarke; Richard Bilder; Richard Danzig; Robert Bernstein; Rudy De Leon; Samantha
                                  Power; Sarah Chayes; Scott Delman; Sean Carberry; sewell                     Shen Dingli;   B6
                                  Sidney Drell; Stephen G. Breyer; Steve Bergen; Steve Clemons; Steve Coll; Steven Barnes;
                                  Steven Charnovitz; Strother Bunting; Terry Cone; Thomas Carothers; Tim Clark; Tina
                                  Brown; Tom Bernstein; Tom Christensen; Tom Craig; Wendy Benchley; Wesley Clark;
                                  Wolfgang Danspeckgruber
Subject:                          Two articles on Iran and Syria



Dear all,
I published the first of these in the Financial Times and the second for my Atlantic column on line last week. Best, AM

High quality global journalism requires investment. Please share this article with others using the link below, do
not cut & paste the article. See our Ts&Cs and Copyright Policy for more detail. Email ftsales.support@ft.com
to buy additional rights. http://blogs.ft.com/the-a-list/2011/11/09/diplomacy-is-the-least-damaqinq-option-with-
iran/#ixzz1 dsgAZkUB

Diplomacy is the least damaging option with Iran
Anne-Marie Slaughter

When it comes to Iran, the best is consistently the enemy of the good. The International Atomic
Energy Agency report issued on Tuesday on Iran's nuclear programme uses strong language relative
to earlier reports, but essentially affirms what western governments already know or believe. Parsing
the bureaucratese, the IAEA details information that it believes to be "credible", indicating "that Iran
has carried out activities to the development of a nuclear explosive device"; that before 2004 "these
activities took place under a structured program"; and "that some activities may still be ongoing."

In short, for all the sanctions and diplomacy, Iran continues to make steady progress toward
producing a nuclear weapon. We might be able to make a deal that would at least bring some Iranian
stocks of low-enriched uranium into the custody of a third country — starting a process of multilateral
cooperation to meet Iran's legitimate needs for nuclear fuel, while constraining its illicit activities. This
would still leave Iran enough LEU to produce a bomb, and could legitimise its enrichment efforts,
allowing them to continue contrary to UN demands. That would be bad. But continuing with a policy of
sanctions and pressure that is not working is worse.

The IAEA report documents repeated Iranian violations of UN obligations and IAEA requests. It
catalogues Iranian military efforts to obtain nuclear-related and dual-use equipment, to ramp up
production of nuclear fuel by "undeclared pathways," to acquire nuclear weapons development
information from a "clandestine nuclear supply network," and to design an actual weapon, including
testing of components. Harvard Professor Graham Allison, a leading expert on nuclear proliferation,
has a more direct approach. He has a chart showing a nuclear football field, with the endzone being
the possession of enough highly-enriched uranium to create a bomb. It shows that Iran has enough
low-enriched uranium (5 per cent) to create four bombs, but that the time needed to upgrade this

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784031 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784031 Date: 10/30/2015




keeps Iran 30 yards from the endzone. In addition, though, Iran is building a large stockpile of
medium-enriched uranium (20 per cent), which takes much less effort to convert to bomb-grade
material. That puts it on the 10-yard line — a very short distance from its goal.

The Stuxnet worm does appear to have set Iran back by perhaps two years, but that is being
overcome. New generations of cyber-viruses may be harder to insert and easier to defend against.
Military action will remain an option, but would run counter to the Obama administration's entire
strategy of integrating rising powers into a strong international order. It is also not certain to work, and
would have deeply counter-productive political effects inside Iran and probably across the Muslim
world.

That leaves diplomacy. In late 2009 the US, France and Russia proposed a deal whereby Iran would
give up its own stocks of LEU in return for international provision of sufficient nuclear fuel to run a
medical research reactor in Tehran. Mahmoud Ahmadi-Nejad originally seemed receptive, but Iran
then backed out quickly. In the spring of 2011, Brazil and Turkey reached a weaker version of the
same deal, in which Iran would transfer 1,200kg of LEU to Turkey in return for the same quantity of
nuclear fuel for the Tehran reactor. That move widely was seen as an Iranian ploy to blunt another
round of UN sanctions. The US pointed out, rightly, that Tehran was not committing to stop
enrichment, and secured agreement on more and stronger sanctions. Meanwhile, it made its
displeasure clear in Ankara and Brasilia; the deal fell through; and Tehran continued its programme.
What was lost was any opportunity to establish a precedent of keeping Iranian fuel outside Iran, and
working within a cooperative rather than a coercive frame that would allow Iran to save face.

Today, if Barack Obama were to put that deal on the table, he would be hammered by his Republican
opponents, in Congress and on the presidential campaign trail, for giving away the store, negotiating
from weakness, affirming US decline, and so on. But if we are really as worried about an Iranian
bomb as we claim, results should trump political perceptions.

The IAEA report has the dual advantage of expressing global concern over Iranian behavior and of
focusing attention on Iran's violation of its international obligations. Western governments should now
turn back to Turkey and Brazil. Turkish-Iranian frictions are on the rise, particularly over Syria and
Arab uprisings across the region. But Turkey has a direct stake in avoiding an outcome in which Iran
upstages it as the region's only nuclear power besides Israel; and Iran has a stake in working with
Turkey at least some of the time in the complex triangular politics emerging among Turkey, Iran, and
Saudi Arabia. Dilma Rousseff, Brazil's new president, has a stake in doing something that Lula was
unable to accomplish; Brazil also has a strong incentive as a nation that flirted with developing
nuclear weapons but then renounced its programme. Let them initiate a new round of negotiations
under UN auspices — with full backing from the US, France, Russia and other powers concerned. At
the least, it deprives the Iranian government of its familiar US whipping boy. At most, we might
succeed in halting play on the 10-yard line and then changing the game.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784031 Date: 10/30/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784031 Date: 10/30/2015




President Obama is riding high in national security matters these days, largely as a result of following
his own instincts. He can afford a return to his initial policy of pragmatic engagement, particularly on
an issue that does not pit the Iranian government against his own people. He may fail, but he has
proved himself to be a leader willing to risk failure to get results. Given the price of continuing our
current policy, it's time to change course.

The writer is a professor at Princeton University and former director of policy planning at the US State
department


How the World Can Peacefully Intervene in Syria
By Anne-Marie Slaughter
Nov 112011, 11:02 AM ET 48
Preparing for civil war may be the only remaining way to avert it




A protester faces riot police at Khalidia, near Horns / Reuters


U.N. Ambassador Susan Rice tweeted yesterday, "Most immediate civ. protection issue confronting the #UNSC is #Syria.
We will not rest until the Council rises to meet its responsibilities." Civilian protection is going to require a buffer zone
and safe routes for wounded Syrians and refugees fleeing violence to reach sanctuary either in that buffer zone or in
neighboring countries. According to Salam Hafez, an editor at the Institute for War and Peace reporting, the anti-regime
Free Syrian Army (FSA) is protecting "some villages in Dera, Jebal Al-Zawya and Idlib and some districts in Hama and
Horns," a strategic belt in northwest Syria close to the Turkish border. That is precisely where the Syrian army is
intensifying its assault, likely because if the FSA can hold and expand this area it will have a clear base of operations. The
Syrian government is massacring soldiers and civilians in Homs to prevent that city from becoming something like a
Syrian version of Libya's Benghazi, the stronghold of the opposition and their base of operations in a country-wide
conflict. But such a base could and should also become a safe zone for hundreds if not thousands of wounded civilians
who can no longer seek medical assistance in Syrian hospitals, numbers that will increase dramatically, accompanied by
massive streams of refugees, if civil war breaks out in earnest.




            On Saturday, the Arab Leagues will meet again in an emergency session called to review Syrian leader Bashar
al-Assad's flagrant violation of his agreement to the League's plan to end the violence, a plan that required the Syrian
government to with draw its military from cities and residential areas, release all political prisoners, and allow Arab
League monitors, human rights groups, and foreign journalists into the country, none of which he has done. Instead, the
Syrian government has ratcheted up its assault in places like Horns. The opposition predicted immediately and correctly
that the Syrian government would never abide by the agreement. Ausama Monaied, an adviser to the president of
Syrian National Council, said in an interview that Assad had agreed only because he "has realized that Russia and China
will no longer protect him at the United Nations. The only thing saving the regime so far has been that Russia and China
were prepared to block any resolution against Syria at the Security Council. But now it has become clear that the Arab
League will use its leverage with Russia and China to persuade them to back their position and not use their veto power,
and it is clear that neither Russia nor China would compromise their position with the Arab League, particularly Saudi
Arabia, just to save Assad."


        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784031 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784031 Date: 10/30/2015




That's an optimistic view; many other commentators argue that Assad likely believes he has the upper hand and is just
playing for time while he steadily increases the level of force and brutality necessary to crush the opposition outright. In
cities such as Aleppo, much like in many Libyan cities after Qaddafi struck back, supporters of the opposition are
sufficiently cowed that they will not take to the streets and start the cycle of protest, killings, and renewed
determination to vindicate those deaths. Thus the balance of power that will determine whether the Syrian government
will be forced out of power or a full-fledged civil war will break out lies with two major swing institutions: the Syrian
business community and the army, whose calculations must largely rest on their predictions as to whether Assad can
hold on or not.

That's where U.S. diplomacy can help, by forcing both the members of the Arab League (particularly Syria's neighbors)
and Syrian supporters of the regime to confront and absorb what a civil war would mean. The U.S. should encourage the
Arab League to ask the UN for a resolution supporting the creation and defense of a buffer zone on the Turkish-Syrian
border and the subsequent creation of safe corridors to that zone from cities where the Syrian government has
concentrated its assault. Turkey would have to take the lead, along with the FSA, in implementing this resolution, but
NATO could provide logistical support. At the same time, the U.S. should immediately begin organizing a medical and
disaster relief response. If a government will not protect its own citizens, the doctrine of responsibility to protect allows
the international community to step in, but not necessarily with soldiers.

What is happening in Syria is a humanitarian disaster equivalent to any earthquake or flood. Thousands of battered
civilians need help in ways that members of the international community -- governments, NGOs, international
organizations, militaries, even corporations -- know how to provide. The U.S. navy should prepare to send hospital ships
off the Turkish coast. Indeed, Dave Takaki, a U.S. vet, points out that the Global Logistics Cluster, a center of operations
for disaster relief and humanitarian assistance endorsed by a UN-sponsored forum of UN and non-UN partners, includes
UNHCR, UNDP, United Nations Department of Peace Keeping Operations, WHO, United Nations Department of Safety
and Security, Swedish Rescue Services Agency, NRC, Danish Refugee Council, United Nations Institute for Training and
Research/Operational Satellite Applications Programme, RedR Australia, Telecoms Sans Frontieres, Ericsson Response,
Global VSAT Forum, and NetHope, a consortium of 18 international NGOs. The International Red Cross and Crescent are
also connected. These partners are already working through the cluster approach in 11 countries ranging from Panama
to Sudan to Yemen.

Activating an international humanitarian assistance response now will not only put the international community in a far
better place to respond to a Syrian civil war faster and better than we responded in Libya, but it will also force all the
parties involved to start thinking through the real implications of what is about to happen. Turkey, Jordan, Lebanon, and
Iraq will start seeing streams of refugees and active destabilization of their own politics as ethnic and religious groups
connected to different factions in a Syrian conflict take sides. Iran is supporting the Syrian government; the Saudi king
has called for Assad to step down. The Iraqi government has supported Assad, albeit tepidly; the Iraqi opposition is
supporting the Syrian opposition. At worst, Syria could become the site of a proxy war between Turkey and Saudi Arabia
on one side with Iran and Iraq on the other. Instead of making predictions and placing bets, it's time for all countries
involved to start responding and planning based on worst case scenarios.

Preparing for civil war may be the only remaining way to avert it




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784031 Date: 10/30/2015
