        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787993 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                        RELEASE IN PART B6


From:                                H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                                Wednesday, May 25, 2011 5:44 PM
To:                                  'verveerms©state.gov'
Subject:                             Fw: Mana al-Sharif



Fyi


From: Anne-Marie Slaughter [mailto:
Sent: Monday, May 23, 2011 05:56 PM
To: H
Cc: Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>; Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>; Sullivan, Jacob J
<SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Subject: Mana al-Sharif

I'm sure you are following the case of Mana al-Sharif, who has been leading the protest in Saudi Arabia re women
driving. I reprint a short piece from Human Rights Watch below. I have been following this young woman on Twitter -
she tweets under the moniker "The Manalyst." She is smart, brave, funny, and strong — everything we should be
supporting. I obviously understand the sensitivities re Saudi, but this is again government to society diplomacy — re
women, re driving — a basic dimension of independence in a motorized society, and re the interpretation of Islam that
even the Saudi king endorses. I am certain that lots of experts are saying that "if the U.S. says anything it will make it
tougher for the reformists to win," but if the U.S. does not, women around the world will draw their own conclusions re
what our real interests are. It seems to me that we could say that "the United States notes the courage and spirit of
Mana al-Sharif in drawing attention to a fundamental right that the Saudi kingdom recognizes as part of its international
obligations and trusts that the Saudi government will uphold those obligations." Note that al-Sharif herself is playing this
very smart, appealing to the desire of Saudi men to protect and honor the women in their family —that it puts women in
uncomfortable and even dangerous situations without recourse. Note also that women in Saudi rural areas drive
regularly (I've been reading up) — this is an issue for the cities.

Best,
AM


Saudi Arabia: Free Woman Who Dared to Drive
Stop Enforcing Ban on Women Behind the Wheel
May 23, 2011



(Beirut) - King Abdullah should immediately order the release of Manal al-Sharif, who was arrested on the morning of May 22, 2011,
after she defied the kingdom's de facto ban on driving by women, Human Rights Watch said today.

She had posted a video on YouTube showing herself behind the wheel and describing the inconveniences not being able to drive
causes women. Prosecutors charged al-Sharif with besmirching the kingdom's reputation abroad and stirring up public opinion,
according to Saudi press reports. King Abdullah should lift the de facto ban, Human Rights Watch said.

"Arresting a woman who drove her family around in a car and then showed it online opens Saudi Arabia to condemnation - and, in
fact, to mockery - around the world," said Christoph Wilcke, senior Middle East researcher at Human Rights Watch. "The longer she
stays in prison, the more the kingdom will have to answer for."



        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787993 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787993 Date: 10/30/2015




Saudi women have begun a "women2drive" campaign, seeking the right to drive cars, and say they are planning a symbolic protest
drive on June 17. Public transportation is sparse and gender segregated, and women have to rely on taxis, expensive full-time drivers,
or their families to drive them around, severely impeding their ability to study, work, and participate in public life.

Traffic officers and religious policemen first arrested al-Sharif while she was driving in the eastern city of Khobar on May 21, but
released her a few hours later. Around 2 a.m. on May 22, al-Sharif was rearrested at her home, after she posted the video on YouTube.
The video is no longer available. She is being held in Dammam prison, a fellow prisoner told Human Rights Watch.

There is no law barring women from driving in Saudi Arabia, but senior government clerics have issued several fatwas, or religious
rulings, saying women are prohibited from driving. In practice, Saudi officials bar women from driving and refuse to issue them
driver's licenses, although women occasionally do drive without being arrested. Al-Sharif drove with her international driving license,
which is recognized in the kingdom.

Al-Sharif, with two other persons in the car, first drove on May 19, and was not stopped or arrested, a person with knowledge of the
affair told Human Rights Watch. On May 21, she drove family members around town again, but traffic police stopped her and called
the religious police to the scene. The officials then arrested her and her brother, Muhammad al-Sharif, who was in the car, and took
them to the police station. They were released a few hours later.

At around 2 a.m. on May 22, however, criminal investigation officers appeared at al-Sharifs home. She did not let them in, but called
her brother, who arrived and let them in. The police immediately arrested both of them, and brought her to Dammam prison, but took
Muhammad to the traffic department, the sources said.

The Eastern Province branch of the Bureau of Investigations and Public Prosecutions did not respond to calls by Human Rights
Watch, which sought confirmation of the nature of the charges against al-Sharif.

Al-Sharif, a 32-year old information technology specialist at Aramco, the Saudi oil conglomerate, had posted on YouTube a video of
her driving a car around town on May 19. In the video, she said that one day she left work very late and was unable to find a taxi to
drive her home. She called her brother to pick her up, but he did not answer his phone. Al-Sharif said that she hired a chauffeur, but
that it was an awkward experience for her. She added that not all Saudi women can afford to hire drivers.

Several attempts have been made to ease the ban on women driving in Saudi Arabia. Senior ruling Saudi princes, including King
Abdullah, Crown Prince Sultan, and Foreign Minister Prince Sa'ud, have supported removing the ban in principle, and members of the
advisory Shura Council, an appointed body with some functions of parliament, have discussed proposals to ease the ban.

These proposals have included providing driver education for women, employing women as traffic police so women drivers would not
have to interact with men, and certain prohibitions such as not allowing women under 30 to drive and not allowing women to drive at
night or outside of towns and cities. These proposals were never formulated into a draft law.

Enforcing a policy against women driving violates Saudi Arabia's obligations under international law, in particular article 2 of the
Convention Against All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), which Saudi Arabia ratified in 2001. The article obliges
the kingdom "to pursue by all appropriate means and without delay a policy of eliminating discrimination against women," including
"any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition,
enjoyment or exercise by women [...] of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or
any other field." Article 15(4) of CEDAW obliges states to "accord to men and women the same rights with regard to the law relating
to the movement of persons."

"King Abdullah should end Saudi Arabia's pariah status in the world as the sole country banning women from driving," Wilcke said.
"Just as his predecessors made their mark by introducing education for girls, King Abdullah can shape his legacy by opening the roads
to women drivers."

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787993 Date: 10/30/2015
