     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784003 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                  B6




From:                            bstrider
Sent:                            Sunday, November 20, 2011 8:37 AM
To:                              H
Subject:                         See Opening Session on Super Committee...



Sent from my Verizon Wireless BlackBerry

From: "Mike Allen"
Date: Sun, 20 Nov 2011 07:21:25 -0600—
To: <bstriderL       _
ReplyTo: "POLITICO subscriptions" <reply-fecd1c707660047e-65915_HTML-240939517-1041082-
0@politicoemail.com>
Subject: POLITICO Playbook, presented by Americans to Protect Family Security --SUPERCOMMITTEE
PLANS TO ADMIT FAILURE MONDAY, LIKELY WITH TERSE STATEMENT: 'This marriage is over' --
ALL 12 MEMBERS HAVEN'T MET IN WEEKS: Hail Mary offers continue today -- Biden bday


BACKSTAGE - HOW THE SUPERCOMMITTEE FLUNKED : The supercommittee last met Nov. 1 -
three weeks ago! It was a public hearing featuring a history lesson, "Overview of Previous Debt Proposals,"
with Alan Simpson, Erskine Bowles, Pete Domenici and Alice Rivlin. The last PRIVATE meeting was Oct. 26.
You might as well stop reading right there: The 12 members (6 House, 6 Senate; 6 R, 6 D) were never going to
strike a bargain, grand or otherwise, if they weren't talking to each other. Yes, we get that real deal-making
occurs in small groups. But there never WAS a functioning supercommittee: There was Republican posturing
and Democratic posturing, with some side conversations across the aisle.

Playbook was a superoptimist: We thought that human factors would prod ambitious members to crack the
code, and that the committee would take on its own ecology, regardless of pressures from above or below. But
we were punk'd: The supercommittee - one of the most fascinating government experiments of this generation --
never existed as a dynamic political organism.

The official deadline for action by the Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction is Wednesday, the day
before Thanksgiving. The real deadline is Monday night, since any plan has to be posted for 48 hours
before it's voted on. So conversations this weekend revolved around how to shut this turkey down. Aides
expect some "Hail Mary" offers on Sunday, and there's something on the stove that could be inoffensive to both
sides. But the committee may not even have a fig-leaf agreement to announce. Total, embarrassing failure. The
markets and the country will hate it.

The most likely scenario: The co-chairs, Sen. Patty Murray (D-Wash.) and Rep. Jeb Hensarling (R-Texas), on
Monday will issue a short joint statement with the basic message: "This marriage is over." Other possibilities
are to hold a short going-out-of-business hearing, or to vote down a Republican proposal and a Democratic
proposal. But one aide says: "Few, if any, one either side, want a final, ugly food fight ... The chairs are working
to figure out how to put the appropriate period on the sentence and do so in the most dignified manner possible.
... [Don't expect] a showdown of dueling voters and a ton of fingerpointing."

Both sides recognize that the optics are disastrous. The Dem. aide continued: "They don't feel the need to
burn the place down as they turn off the lights."

The concept of the supercommittee, as POLITICO's Jake Sherman articulated in an email: "[I]f you put 12
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784003 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784003 Date: 10/30/2015




serious members in a room, no distractions, easy way through the Senate [direct path for bill], they'd be able to
get something." BUT THAT NEVER HAPPENED: The 12 members never had specific, hot-box, come-to-
Jesus discussions. It was all white noise. Neither side was willing to jump first, and the two didn't have the
capacity to jump together.

One Democrat said Murray "had a really great relationship with Hensarling. They had a very productive
relationship -- well, I guess, not 'productive' in the sense of producing a deal at the end. ... [Senate Foreign
Relations Chairman John] Kerry [D-Mass.] was his diplomatic self: very active in trying to keep the channels of
communication open and feeling the sides out."

A senator told us the supercommittee should have gotten serious sooner - made some tough choices on
parameters at the beginning, then figured out how to get there. But that implies committee members got serious
at the end. Instead, they were sniping about what was an "offer" and what was a "conversation." When one side
claimed a breakthrough, the opposition emailed reporters with the subject line: "<Yawn> Old News Ain't
News."

The supercommittee even fooled itself. "Both sides at various times, after ad hoc conversations, felt like we
were making progress in the evening," recalled a GOP participant, "before coming back in the morning and
finding, 'We can't actually do that.'" A Democratic participant: "It became clear on our end that this all came
down to [insistence on extending] the Bush tax cuts for Republicans, and that was the immovable object at the
end of the day."

How bad was the marriage? Listen to top Republican aide : "You had this dynamic emerge where all six of
our guys were pretty closely in sync -- a little bit because they're sort of ideologically similar and a little bit
because, by design, we had them meeting, like, two or three times a day -- literally every day; if not physically
meeting, at least doing a conference call. So, these guys were in constant communication. Not that anyone was
looking to go rogue, but if anybody wanted to go rogue, there was no chance for that to happen, because you
couldn't hide from the rest of the, group. So, they were pretty tightly coordinated. If they had any kind of
disagreements, they kept internal, they worked it out, and then they moved ahead.

"On the other side, [Rep. Chris] Van Hollen [D-Md.)] actually looked like he was going to participate.
But about three or four weeks ago, he came to the conclusion that we weren't going to get anywhere, and started
throwing cold water on everyone else's ideas. You had Kerry and [Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max]
Baucus [D-Mont.], who seemed to be the only two who were sort of really interested in seeing if there was a
way to cut a deal. Baucus would say things that made you think, 'OK, we can work with this guy.' And then he
would go back to his office and either talk to somebody, or get yanked back, and then he would come back and
would start from ground zero again.

"Kerry's M.O. in this whole thing was basically, 'I'm the smartest guy in the room. I'm so much smarter
than you that I will, through sheer force of intellect, be able to convince you to accept something that you
already said "no" to.' He would try to drudge up old ideas that had already been rejected: 'If you will just let me
talk to you for an hour, you will see the wisdom of my way.' ... Baucus clearly tried, and if Baucus had been
willing to be the only one to vote ['yes'], we could have gotten a deal. But he was never willing to break from
the rest of his group. ... [Kerry] was not going to be the seventh vote. It's not even clear to me that if Baucus and
Kerry had jointly made an agreement, that the two of them would have done it, either. I think they either wanted
Murray, or they wanted a House Democrat."

Democrats have almost the same beefs, and even express them similarly. A top Dem. aide : "The
Democrats on the committee didn't feel like they had a willing partner in negotiations because revenue was
never a serious component of discussion. ... [W]e've seen offers, and none of those offers are legitimate or are
plans that would require the wealthiest Americans to sacrifice along with everybody else. ... Democrats came
into this in the spirit of, 'We can make some hard choices around entitlements. We can make some painful
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784003 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784003 Date: 10/30/2015




decisions and we can take some guff from the left.' And I think that throughout the process, they did that. If you
look at MoveOn and AARP and even the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, we took a lot of hits from the
left on the entitlement reforms that we put forward ."

One Democrat said the supercommittee structure "was a kind of diffuse, horizontal ... You had a lot of
folks trying to take initiative and be the one to get the deal done."

Republicans usually met in the Cannon House Office Building, where Hensarling has his office as chair of
the House Republican Conference. The GOP prepared elaborate plans: not just how much the government
could make from auctioning spectrum, but what part would go on the block, and what part would be reserved
for public safety. Hensarling repeatedly told the GOP members: "I'm an old Boy Scout. I like to be prepared."

Democrats usually met in S-116, in one of Kerry's Foreign Relations conference rooms. Murray - the
Democratic chair, who also chairs the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee - was described by one
participant as "the police ... the voice of our base." Another Democrat put it more gently: "She is really
influenced by the constituents that she represents. Throughout this process, she had these conversations with
people about, 'My Social Security is on the line.' So she really felt a very heavy burden to do something, but to
do something in a way that was going to be fair to the people that she's made a career out of representing. She
made some really difficult choices, and she felt like she did enough that if Republicans reciprocated, there was
an opportunity for a deal. ... She's one of those people who believes that while. it certainly seems like
Washington is broken, it has to work."

Two supercommittee members - Reps. Jim Clyburn (D-S.C.) and Xavier Becerra (D-Calif.) -- never
really checked into the conversation, according to numerous participants on both sides. A Democrat
explained: "There's a basic threshold for our guys that any deal has to be better than what would happen with no
deal. There were some folks who never really saw us get close to [that] threshold."

Through all this, the White House was mostly hands-off. One Democrat said President Obama gave the
committee "a lot of autonomy." Another Democrat: "It was kind of the opposite of the debt ceiling. Instead of
really haggling, inserting himself into the actual haggling back-and-forth, he intervened kind of surgically to
draw clear lines at a couple points that we felt put us in a good negotiating position."

Speaker John Boehner, elliptically in public and explicitly in private, had given Republicans top cover to
raise revenues in return for tax reform. "This has always been a question of scale," a top GOP aide
explained. "If they were willing to go a little further on entitlements, we'd see what we can do on revenues. That
was the way it would have to work. What we found was, they needed a trillion-plus in revenues, and weren't
willing to do anywhere near that on entitlements."

Republicans pat themselves on the back for a plan - floated by supercommittee member Sen. Pat Toomey
(R-Pa.), a former president of the Club for Growth - that would, in the GOP euphemism, "lead to additional
revenues." As one aide recalled: "We thought we had found the sweet spot: The right was pissed, but not too
pissed. The mainstream media was giving us credit for getting out of our comfort zone." At Tuesday's regular
meeting of House Republicans, Hensarling gave a detailed description of the plan, and got applause.

But Democrats sensed the Republicans were getting pushback, either from leaders or rank and file. A Dem.
aide: "What you saw was over the course of last weekend was members getting somewhat close to a deal.
[There were] empty Senate office buildings, empty House buildings, members meeting casually to talk about
this. ... Once the House came back into town, the negotiating stance of those House Republicans radically
changed. ... At the end of the day, it was clear that there was nothing that they could say 'yes' to."

A Democratic aide had this eulogy for the supercommittee: "The worm has turned a little bit. The national
conversation now is about income inequality and about jobs, and it's not really about cutting the size of
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784003 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784003 Date: 10/30/2015




government anymore or cutting spending. 2010 gave one answer to that question. But 2012 will give another,
and we've got to see what it is."

A Republican's obit: "With this new crop of Democrats in the Senate, they're big into changing the rules [by
creating a supercommittee]. I think this shows us that that's not it. You had a shot here to do something big, and
to do it in a way that you would never get a chance to do again."

** A message from Americans to Protect Family Security: 75 million American families turn to life insurance,
annuities, long-term care and disability income insurance for peace of mind, long-term savings, and a guarantee
of lifetime income when it's time to retire. Take a closer look: www.securefamily.org. **

JON HUNTSMAN MAKES SURPRISE APPEARANCE on "Saturday Night Live"'s "Weekend Update."
Seth Meyers, who went to high school in N.H., asked if it's true Huntsman is polling in low single digits: "It's
true, Seth. But only a few months ago, I was polling at 'margin of error.' So to have any digit at all is a pretty big
deal." Video http://bit.ly/sDz14G

A SENIOR PENTAGON OFFICIAL emails: "It's stunning, but perhaps unsurprising given the times, that
Congress is perilously close to failure on a budget agreement. We're on a wartime footing overseas and at a
political stalemate on the home front. For our men and women in uniform, and indeed for all Americans, it's
time that we return to the days when people would actually work hard to come together to strike a deal. There's
national strength in making the right kinds of compromises. It's time to demonstrate that kind of resolve."

--Bloomberg Government Special Report, "Defense Spending State-by-State": "Virginia, Hawaii and
Alaska may suffer the most economic harm from defense cuts of as much as $1 trillion during the next decade
... Virginia, home of the Pentagon and the Norfolk naval base, tops the list with 13.9 percent of its gross
domestic product derived from defense spending. Hawaii ranks second, at 13.5 percent, and Alaska is third with
10.7 percent. All other states are in single digits, the study showed."

SNEAK PEEK - Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel hits Mitt Romney in an interview with Christiane Amanpour,
taped for ABCs "This Week." On Obama and the Republicans: "He has offered a grand bargain and they have
refused to bargain. ... [H]e has a plan, they have an ideology. ... They will not move. He has put things on that
are dear to Democrats and said, 'As part of an overall plan, I will make that part of it.' That shows compromise.
That shows interest. They have refused to budge on a single piece of their agenda. That is not how you get to an
agreement. ... There's a clear set of choices. Because when it comes to the decisions in that Oval Office, the
outcome isn't clear. It's filled with fog. And your guideposts are your leadership, your judgment and your
values. Mitt Romney has revealed himself. And I believe as the campaign continues, more and more people will
see who he's willing to stand for and who he ... really turns a blind eye toward. And that's the middle class."

LUCKY #7 ANNIVERSARY today for Amy and Matt McDonald.

BIRTHWEEK: Sophia Nussbaum (daughter of Jeff and Deb) is 1.

BIRTHDAYS: Jenevieve Beavers is 26 (hat tip: Johnny) ... Judy Woodruff! ... Vice President Joe Biden is 69
... Richard Dawson is 79 (h/t AP) ... Beth Foster ... Sandy McNabb ... CHARLIE COOK (h/t Teresa Vilmain).

PAUL LINDSAY, NRCC communications director, celebrated his 30th at Jack Rose Dining Saloon, the scotch
and bourbon palace. SPOTTED: NRCC's Joanna Burgos, Josh Holmes, Blair Latoff, Michael Steel, Alex
Conant,. Caitlin Dunn, Sam Smith, Brittany Bramell, Lori Weberg, Jon Thompson, Chris and Rachel Taylor,
Johnny Destefano, Kirsten Kukowski, Andrew Forbes. A handful ended the night listening to 'Take on Me' at
Bobby Lew's Saloon.

POTUS WAS WHEELS-DOWN ANDREWS at 1:18 a.m. Sunday, and went directly into the White House
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784003 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784003 Date: 10/30/2015




after touching down on the South Lawn at 1:45 a.m. Breakfast lid till 10:30 a.m. The press charter pushed back
from refueling in Hawaii at 1:22 a.m. ET, per Ann Compton.

--WashPost's David Nakamura, "Print press pool #5 departure [from Indonesia, filed 3:35 a.m. ET
Saturday]: POTUS left summit shortly after 4 p.m. and the Beast was waiting to take him to Ngurah Rai
Airport [on Bali]. We're moving at 4:06 p.m. Smattering of people watching as we make our way through town.
No one holding the shep fairey posters or protest signs we're so used to in the States. Some are taking pictures.
Arrived at airport at 4:21 p.m. Loaded quickly. 25 hours scheduled travel time to Andrews Air Base, including
two refuel stops. Arrival early Sunday pre-dawn. It's been fun. Let's do this. Wheels up at 4:35 p.m."

--"Analysis: Obama leaves Asia, but America stays," by AFP's Stephen Collinson : "In a week-long Pacific
odyssey, President Barack Obama tweaked an irked China's tail and sent Asia an unequivocal message that the
United States wants to shape the region's future. He flew home Saturday after having taken in a trio of summits,
weighted America's military punch by announcing a new US Marines force in Australia, and vowed to stoke
flickers of reform in Myanmar. He also declared that a budget crunch in Washington would not see America's
military and diplomatic clout in the region short-changed. 'Let there be no doubt. In the Asia-Pacific of the 21st
century, the United States is all-in,' Obama said.

"His journey to Hawaii, Australia and Indonesia highlighted a US power shift from a decade of war to what he
sees as America's destiny in dynamic Asia. 'I think that we have seen implementation here of a critical,
strategic, reorientating in policy by the United States -- a rebalancing,' said Obama's national security advisor
Tom Donilon. The dominant theme of Obama's travels was the growing US rivalry with China."

ROMNEY OPENS IOWA HQ -- N.Y. Times Al, lower-left corner, "Romney Shifts In Iowa, Playing To Win
Quickly," by Jeff Zeleny in Des Moines: "Romney ... is now playing to win the Iowa caucuses. Television
commercials are on the way, volunteers are arriving and a stealth operation is ready to burst into view ... The
escalation of his effort in Iowa, along with a more aggressive schedule in New Hampshire and an expanding
presence in South Carolina, is the strongest indication yet that Mr. Romney is shifting from a defensive, make-
no-mistakes crouch to an assertive offensive strategy. If he can take command in the three early-voting states,
he could make the nominating battle a swift one. ... [A] former Blockbuster video store [on Ingersoll Avenue in
Des Moines] sprang to life as the nerve center of his Iowa operation. Aides hung maps and charts, turning a
6,289-square-foot storefront into a sprawling office that will be open by the time he visits on Wednesday."
http://nyti.ms/uoJcZa

--"Sen. Ayotte to endorse Mitt Romney for President," by Union Leader Senior Political Reporter John
DiStaso: "Sen. Kelly Ayotte will back Mitt Romney ... Sunday in the first endorsement of a Republican
presidential hopeful by a member of the state's congressional delegation. ... [T]he freshman lawmaker will
formally endorse the former Massachusetts governor Sunday at 2:30 p.m. when she appears with him at a rally
at Nashua City Hall. They will then visit nearby Jackie's Diner to meet with voters. Ayotte, a Nashua native and
resident, is the biggest 'get' so far in the New Hampshire primary sweepstakes." http://bit.ly/tTwOAM

LUNTZ's TOUR DE FORCE - Des Moines Register, "GOP presidential candidates bare souls at emotional
forum in Iowa," by Chief Politics Writer Jennifer Jacobs: "The two-hour Family Leader event felt at times more
like a Christian prayer meeting or a dishy talk show than a campaign event, which made moderator Frank Luntz
exclaim at one point: 'I feel like Dr. Phil!' Organizers with the Family Leader, an influential Iowa-based
evangelical Christian advocacy group, wanted the unconventional event to elicit personal answers that revealed
each candidate's character - with none of the timers and buzzers of typical presidential debates. And Luntz
eventually pried the six - Rick Santorum, Ron Paul, Rick Perry, Newt Gingrich, Herman Cain and Michele
Bachmann - away from their standard talking points. Some 2,500 conservatives, including Iowa Gov. Terry
Branstad, U.S. Sen. Chuck Grassley and U.S. Rep. Steve King, listened from pews at First Federated Church in
Des Moines. With the presidential hopefuls gathered around a Thanksgiving-themed table facing the audience,
the imagery was one of the Last Supper setup - and faith was a central theme. ...
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784003 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784003 Date: 10/30/2015




"Perry ... confessed that his childhood dream was to become a veterinarian. 'But then he (God) introduced me to
organic chemistry,' he said, as the audience cracked up, 'and I became a pilot in the United States Air Force.'
Gingrich, a former U.S. House speaker, laid bare the details of a hopeless time when he was an emerging
national figure, after he'd earned a doctoral degree and was elected to Congress. Although he was successful in
his professional life, he felt hollow inside, he said. 'I wasn't drinking, but I had precisely the symptoms of
somebody who was collapsing from under its weight,' he admitted. A friend gave him a copy of the 'Big Book'
from Alcoholics Anonymous. That and the Bible helped him recover." http://dmreg.co/uamflK

JIM MESSINA, Obama 2012 campaign manager, has a letter in N.Y. Times Magazine responding to
Nate Silver cover story, "Handicapping Obama 2012": "I learned politics going door to door in Missoula,
Mont., organizing low-income families living in mobile homes. Whether in a small town or on a national stage,
politics is always about people - not statistical models or formulas. In performing a cold, mechanical analysis
based on only three variables, Nate Silver discounts the strengths of our values and our organization. His article
assumes that next November's outcome is predetermined, and that our unprecedented grass-roots network of
organizers and volunteers - not to mention the president - play no role. We respectfully disagree. ... More than
one million people have taken ownership of this campaign, most with small contributions - and we reached that
mark six months faster than last time. Volunteers have had more than a million conversations with their
neighbors. Last week, one year from Election Day, more than 10,000 volunteers participated in events around
the country.

"And Silver ignores my favorite number: 270. As he knows, presidential elections are still decided in the
Electoral College. ... Just last year, Silver's formula gave Harry Reid the remotest odds of winning; he was re-
elected by more than five points. ... As a statistician, Silver views politics through a prism of probability. But
what we've all learned from Barack Obama, the unlikeliest of candidates, is that politics isn't about what's
probable - it's about what's possible." http://nyti.ms/w1AGPV

--Chicago Tribune p. 1 tease, "Emanuel: Obama up to challenges": "Mayor Rahm Emanuel told Iowa
Democrats at a fundraiser [in Des Moines] Saturday that President Barack Obama has made choices for the next
generation and not just the next election."

EXCERPTS, "Mayor Rahm Emanuel's Remarks at the Jefferson-Jackson Dinner": "While we meet here
tonight, the Republicans are having a debate across town. I've watched a number of them, and I've got to be
honest, I never thought I'd say this, (pause) I'm beginning to miss Sarah PalM's insights. Their debate was called
the Thanksgiving Family Forum -- which is fitting because I have never seen such a collection of turkeys. Look
at their top candidates: Take Mitt Romney. He said he would be in Iowa tonight. (pause) We should have
known he would change his mind. Newt was at the debate. I heard he had to leave early to spend the holiday
with his loved ones -- the salespeople at Tiffanys.

"And Herman Cain? I was actually hoping Herman would stop by today and see me before the debate, but he
was at his tutorial on Libya. The scary part, his tutor was Rick Perry. In truth, the Republicans do have an
impressive field: Governor Mitch Daniels, Governor Haley Barbour and former Governor Jeb Bush. The only
problem, they're not on the field. I just want you to think about this for a second. Think of our field in 2008. At
our debates in Iowa, we had Vice President Joe Biden, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, former Senator Chris
Dodd, and President Obama. Now think about their field: Michelle Bachman, Rick Perry, Rick Santorum. I'm
beginning to feel sorry for Republican primary voters."

SPEED READ:

--"Captors offer first reconstruction of Gaddafi son's life on run: Anonymous tipster betrayed Gaddafi's
caravan," by Reuters' Marie-Louise Gumuchian in Libya : "Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, doctor of the London
School of Economics, ... scourge of the rebels against his dictator father, was now a prisoner, bundled aboard an
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784003 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784003 Date: 10/30/2015




old Libyan air force transport plane ... deep in the Sahara desert. The interim government's spokesman billed it
as the 'final act of the Libyan drama.' ... A Reuters reporter aboard the flight approached the 39-year-old
prisoner as he huddled on a bench at the rear of the growling, Soviet-era Antonov. ... He sat frowning, silent, ...
nursing his right hand, bandaged around the thumb and two fingers. At other times he chatted calmly with his
captors and even posed for a picture. ... Gaddafi's run had come to an end just a few hours earlier, at dead of
night ... as he and a handful of trusted companions tried to thread their way through patrols of former rebel
fighters intent on blocking their escape."

--"RNC surpasses DNC in October fundraising" - AP/Washington: "The Republican National Committee
raised $8.5 million in October ... The RNC raised slightly more during the month than the Democratic National
Committee, which collected $7.9 million. The RNC ended October with $13.5 million in the bank, while the
DNC's cash on hand fell to $11.1 million. RNC officials said the party's debt was $13.9 million. That's down
from $24 million when RNC Chairman Reince Priebus took over the committee. The DNC had debts of $9
million. The DNC fundraising included $2 million for the Obama Victory Fund, a joint fundraising account by
the DNC and Obama's e-election campaign."

THE PRESIDENT'S WEEK AHEAD : "On Monday, the President and First Lady will invite music legends
and contemporary major artists to the White House for a celebration of country music as part of their "In
Performance at the White House" series. On Tuesday, the President will travel to Manchester, New Hampshire
where he will discuss the American Jobs Act. On Wednesday, the President will pardon the National
Thanksgiving Turkey in a ceremony in the Rose Garden. The President will celebrate the 64th anniversary of
the National Thanksgiving Turkey presentation, reflect upon the time-honored traditions of Thanksgiving, and
wish American families a warm, safe, and healthy holiday. On Thursday, the President will celebrate
Thanksgiving at the White House. There are no public events scheduled. On Friday, the President has no public
events scheduled."

FIRST LADY, DR. JILL BIDEN TO NASCAR : "First Lady Michelle Obama and Dr. Jill Biden [today will]
visit Homestead-Miami Speedway for NASCAR's Sprint Cup finale to honor America's troops and military
families and highlight new commitments ... to hire and train veterans and military spouses. In support of Joining
Forces, representatives from companies committing to hiring 10,000 veterans and military spouses by the end of
2013 will volunteer at a special barbeque lunch for military families in Homestead-Miami Speedway's
Nationwide Garage. ... The following companies will commit a portion of their jobs to veterans and military
spouses in the Miami area: The Beacon Council and their 274 companies will strive to hire 4,000 veterans by
the end of 2013; G4S Secure Solutions (USA), whose workforce is 21% veterans already, will hire 3,000
veterans by 2013; Ryder System, whose workforce is 10% veterans already, expects to hire more than 550
veterans in 2011 and 1,000 additional veterans by the end of 2013; and BAE Systems, which already employs
more than 3,000 veterans, is committed to employing wounded warriors and veterans through their Warrior
Integration services."

** A message from Americans to Protect Family Security: The life insurance industry pays out $1.5 billion in
benefits. Every day. Surprised? Don't be. It's a big reason why 75 million American families turn to the life
insurance industry to protect their financial future. Life insurance. Annuities. Long-term care and disability
income insurance. 2 out of 3 families put their trust in them every day. Because they provide peace of mind,
long-term savings, and a guarantee of lifetime income when it's time to retire. See how families in your state
benefit at www.securefamily.org. **


Go to POLITICO Playbook Now >> http://www.politico.com/playbook




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784003 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784003 Date: 10/30/2015




2011 POLITICO, LLC
POLITICO Playbook.
To unsubscribe, http://dyn.politico.com/unsubscribe.cfm?email=bstridel                &uuid=A699B861-
188B-498D-20198F7FAEO9DF33&alertID=7




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784003 Date: 10/30/2015
