      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791394 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                            H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                            Monday, February 21, 2011 11:12 PM
To:                              'JilotyLC@state.gov'
Subject                          Fw: Secretary Clinton's interview with Christiane Amanpour


Pis print.


From: Cheryl Mills [mailto:
Sent: Sunday, February 20, 2011 03:29 PM
To: H
Subject: Re: Secretary Clinton's interview with Christiane Amanpour

FYI

         Forwarded message
From: Jeannie Kahwajy
Date: Sun, Feb 20, 2011 at 1:27 PM
Subject: Secretary Clinton's interview with Christiane Amanpour
To: Cheryl Mills <

Hi Cheryl,

Hope things are well with you and with Haiti and all of your work and trips (to UVA yet?).

I just saw Secretary Clinton's interview with Christiane Amanpour http://abcnews.go.comanternational/hillary-
clinton-end-violence-bahrain/story?id=12957147, and wondered if you noticed some of the same great things
that I did. I believe I detected HRC being more expressive (channel #2) and less proving (channel #1--also the
channel that I go into when in challenging situations or when asked direct questions with assumptions that I
disagree with). I think the Secretary did a great job especially toward the end--when she asked Christiane if she
followed twitter in Farsi (loved how she got that in in an effortless and genuine way), that was just great; The
atmosphere of the interview changed even before then (when HRC began with "Well,...). HRC was kind and
also very complete and the theory is that one's decision to be kind enables one to be complete and
uncompromising in the message (e.g., not only are we sharing our democratic ideals with the Middle East, but
with all nations; we've tried many different approaches in the Middle East for many decades and will continue
to, and I think it is fair to say that we have all largely been unsuccessful; we can't change other people; we have
twitter in arabic and farsi to be a part of the conversation and to speak directly from us to them.) She used "we
want" many times and very effectively. And I loved HOW she even said that she rejected Christiane's premise
(e.g., one can disagree in a complete way and still connect!). I thought HRC used the questions in this interview
to convey even more information than might have been expected (rather than have defensiveness--a natural and
even justified reaction-- take up some of the time). Anyway, just thought I'd share this with you! What a great
interview!

Jeannie

P.S. I am going to try to think of an alternative to the opening phrase: "You know, name" in this case "You
know, Christiane" that can so easily launch one into a channel 1 focus (which I think it did in the very first
sentence of this interview). In this case I think it functions as a mantra that calls forth a proving response.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791394 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791394 Date: 10/30/2015




Such phrases can give one a moment to gather one's thoughts which is very important and using the name can
be perceived as being a tactic to force it to be more personal. I'm thinking instead of using a tactic to try to be
more personal (trying to change the other person), to have one' s manner do so instead with the intent of trying
to change oneself That is, to focus on my being personal instead of judging something personally. The
consequence of this is that the listener is not paying full attention to what HRC says after that opening as HRC
so derserves: it becomes an inadvertent distraction. More importantly, I think it makes it difficult to arrive at
being modifiable and doesn't get the other person to be in a receiving stance either.

In HRC's second question series, HRC beings with "Well, ..." which I think is more effective--it indicates HRC
being immediately affected by the situation (channel 2/modifiable) with no chance of being judged to
be judging and then I find that I pay more attention the words coming directly after and I think they come out
more easily, in a way that invites others to want to listen and results in higher learning and recall. When HRC
says anything while in a modifiable state, it is just off the scale great. I'd like HRC to be there ALL the time (not
just because it is less costly, but more importantly it is more effective). (Christiane next even commented on
how lovely the spread in Bazaar was with a (beautiful) photo of her in the corner. And HRC was able to joke
about how she did what the photographers told her and that it did not have any hidden meaning being in the
corner!) I think the world needs it!

I was so impressed with HRC when I met her and got to hear her in person. In person, she is just an amazing
combination of brilliant and kind/caring and experienced and down to earth. There is no reason that the world
shouldn't see her this way (i.e., more accurately!).



Jeannie Kahwajy, Ph.D.
Effective Interactions
 eannie@effectiveinteractions.com
www.effectiveinteractions.corn
+1 650 949 5010 office




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791394 Date: 10/30/2015
