      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764047 Date: 10/30/2015

                                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                             Thursday, August 20, 2009 9:40 AM
To:
Subject:                          Kouchner


Purpose of call: Minister Kouchner has asked to speak with you about the letter to President Obama from President
Sarkozy and President Mubarak, proposing a Middle East peace conference this fall.
 •    Middle East Peace Conference: Our aim for any conference is that it be meaningful, advance our shared goal of
comprehensive peace, and be held at a time that is conducive to moving the process forward. At present, we are
focused on encouraging all stakeholders in the region to take meaningful steps to build a positive climate for
negotiations. We intend to conclude this phase as soon as possible, and then resume negotiations. France and Egypt's
work with the parties and other actors in the region to underscore these points is particularly important. •     Our
position remains that the timing is not yet right for a conference this fall. Two UN Security Council Resolutions and
multiple statements of the Quartet have also endorsed a separate international conference on Middle East peace in
Russia in 2009.
 •    I would like Special Envoy Mitchell to brief you after his next meeting with Prime Minister Netanyahu.
Background: In a letter to President Obama, Presidents Sarkozy and Mubarak proposed hosting a Middle East peace
conference this fall, while France and Egypt hold co-presidency of the Union for the Mediterranean (UfM). President
Sarkozy first proposed a conference during the Israeli operation in Gaza this past winter and has raised the idea with
Special Envoy Mitchell and with President Obama. The French and the Egyptians will support any format or approach
that pushes negotiations forward. Sarkozy and Mubarak believe they can shape the UfM agenda, and the UfM has
already brought all the parties to the conflict together. Sarkozy has actively promoted the UfM and notes that it is the
only international organization that managed to persuade former Israeli Prime Minister Olmert and Syrian President
Assad to appear together, which they did at its launch in Paris in July 2008.




                                                     01
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764047 Date: 10/30/2015
