UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765069 Date: 10/30/2015




                  Programme Programa                                                                              a I. ej           f
*) World Food Alirnentaire  Mundial de                                                                                           If

      Programme Mondial Alimentos
             TheYood Aid Organization of the United Nations
                                                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL



             23 October 2009



             Mr Jeff Borns
             Director
             Office of Food for Peace
             USAID/DCHA



                           oms:                           )
              I would like to thank you for our productive meeting of Octoberl'regarding the provision of United
              States humanitarian aid to Somalia. I was grateful for the opportunity to discuss USAID's proposed
              new requirements (the "USG Conditions") with you.

              Let me open by saying that the World Food Programme deeply appreciates the unwavering
              commitment of the United States to alleviating the humanitarian plight of the Somali people.
              American food aid has made it possible to reach many of Somalia's most vulnerable women and
              children, providing vital food and nutrition that has helped stabilize communities and prevent an even
              more catastrophic and destabilizing flow of refugees into neighboring countries: I know we share the
              goal of ensuring the continued flow of life-saving humanitarian aid to communities rocked by the
              multiple shocks of conflict, drought, food and financial crises, and abject poverty.

              Our meeting allowed us to make progress toward a contractual framework that could adequately
              address the requirements of each of our authorizing environments and, in particular, new 'USG
              requirements.

              We agreed that, to facilitate consideration of potential adjustments, WFP would convey its concerns
              and propose solutions to USAID in writing.

              I note that WFP has discussed the USG Conditions with the several other UN entities t that are affected
              by them. These UN entities share in general terms the concerns that are expressed in this letter --
              although their individual operational and regulatory circumstances may require separate consideration
              of some points (for example reporting).

              From the outset, I wish to state that WFP already prohibits assistance to armed combatants, and is
              guided by the core humanitarian principles of impartiality and neutrality. In the case of Somalia, this
              means that WFP makes all reasonable efforts to avoid transactions with:armed groups there, including
              al-Shabaab.




              1 The   United Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Health
              Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organisation, and the International Labour Organization.
              Via Cesare Giulio Viola 68/70, Parc° deMediei 00148 Rome, Italy
              Telephone: +39-06-65131 Fax: +39-06-6590632/6590637
               E-Mail: firstnamelastname@wfp.org Website: www.wfp.org



UNCLASSIFIED U.S.      Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765069 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765069 Date: 10/30/2015




(X)                                                                                                             page 2




             The challenge in Somalia is, of course, that the country is in a deteriorating state of conflict, trapping
             the most vulnerable people in regions that are subject to shifting control by different armed groups. In
             particular, at this time up to 70 per cent of the people requiring urgent assistance in Somalia reside in
             the country's southern and central regions, which are not currently under the control of the
             Transitional Federal Government.

             This makes movements of humanitarian assistance through the country extremely dangerous, requiring
             passage through roads and villages that are far from secure. Indeed the entire population, including the
             political, security and business communities, is currently caught in a battle for control by different
             groups, making it often impossible to know where allegiances and connections lie.

             Nevertheless WFP considers that, even in this highly challenging environment, it would be possible to
             put in place a strengthened framework of measures to prevent assistance from reaching armed groups
             (including al-Shabaab) in Somalia while preserving its ability to deliver humanitarian assistance to the
             most vulnerable throughout the country.

             Proposed Framework and Standard of Dilieence

             First, it is proposed that the new framework refer generally to restrictions on transactions with "armed
             groups", with the understanding that this term would cover all militias and armed groups in Somalia —
             including al-Shabaab. We consider that this more general reference would achieve USAID's objective
             with respect to al-Shabaab without potentially placing in doubt WFP's commitment to the
             humanitarian principle of neutrality (thereby avoiding an increase in the already acute risk of attacks
             on WFP staff and implementing partners and an impairment of our ability to achieve and maintain
             access to the needy).

             In addition, WFP wishes to propose modifications to the standard of diligence that is set forth in the
             USG Conditions that would, in our opinion, make it better suited to the exceptionally challenging and
             dangerous Somalian context.

             In the case of the standard of diligence, WFP would be grateful for your consideration of the following
             language:

                      WFP will take all robust measures possible, in the context of operations in Somalia, to ensure
                      that funds or food contributed by the United States are not used to enter into transactions with
                      armed groups, without unreasonably compromising the safety of humanitarian providers or
                      the ability of WFP to reach persons in need in all regions of the country.

             WFP considers that this more context-specific standard of diligence would allow it to adopt robust
             measures to minimise the probability of transactions with armed groups — including al-Shabaab —
             without substantially affecting its risk exposure and the positive impact of its operations on vulnerable
             populations in Somalia.

             Thus WFP could stipulate that its transporters and implementing partners make every effort not to pay
             facilitation fees to armed groups at roadblocks or other transit points, and require that they employ •
             routes that are less likely to involve coerced payments — with the context-specific understanding that
             this not unduly endanger the provider or block the urgent delivery of humanitarian supplies to
             intended beneficiaries.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765069 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765069 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                             . page 3.




             To increase the impact of this measure, WFP would consider it essential to invest in logistical
             arrangements that would allow avoidance of transit points controlled by al-Shabaab. For example„
             humanitarian aid, including food aid delivered through WFP, could reach regions not controlled by al-
             Shabaab such as northern Hiran, Galagud, and Muditg —through the port of Bossaso instead of
             through Mogadishu, thereby avoiding transit points controlled by al-Shabaabalong the way. This
             would require dredging the port of Bossaso, and additional investment to improve the road between
             that town and Beletvveyne. We estimate that these improvements would take at least one year to
             complete at a cost of US$ 2 to US$ 3 million, and would involve a 20 per cent increase in transport
             rates.

             In relation to purchases or procurement of goods and services, WFP would robustly ensure that
             persons or entities that it knows to be affiliated with armed groups are excluded from its procurement
             activities, and that the values of potential contractors and implementing partners are not inconsistent
             with its own.

             Overseeing purchases by country-level implementing partners would be more challenging. However,
             WFP considers that it could, under its proposed standard, establish a de minim is monetary threshold
             above which purchases by partners would need to be pre-approved by WFP's Somalia Country Office,
             This framework would afford WFP the opportunity to recognize and block significant potential
             transactionsNith armed groups.

             Payments to armed groups as the de facto municipal authorities are already not acceptable under WFP
             policies and practices, and indeed the organization has already closed offices in Somalia to,avoid
             paying then'. This approach would continue. In addition, and in line with its approach to purchases of
             goods and services, WFP could require that any payments by implementing partners to an armed
             group claiming to be a de facto municipal authority be subject to WFP approval — and grant approval
             exclusively where indispensable in light of security or humanitarian access considerations.

             Reporting

             In distributing humanitarian aid contributed by the United States, and consistent with the proposed
             approach described above, WFP would report to USAID all cases in which, despite its efforts, a
             transaction with an "armed group" could not be avoided and describe the circumstances of the
             transaction. This would cover all groups, including al-Shabaab.

             WFP would make every effort to report promptly. This could include, in Cases where additional
             investigation is required, providing details of incidents as they become available, over a period of
             time. However, given the difficulty of collecting information in Somalia, we view the proposed short
             time limit for reporting as unrealistic and not enforceable. I note also that any such reporting would be
             provided based on the understanding that it would be employed solely for the purpose of tracking the
             use of humanitarian assistance and not for any non-humanitarian purpose.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765069 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765069 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                              page 4



             Contractual framework

             As discussed at our October 1 meeting, some of the UN entities referenced above would wish to bring
              into operation any conditions that may be agreed to with USAID by inserting the following language:
             in future USA1D contribution agreements for Somalia:'

                     The Grantee confirms that in keeping with its standard operating practice and procedures it
                     will use all reasonable measures, as determined by the Grantee in the circumstances in which
                     the Programme is implemented, to ensure that no part of the Grant is usedto enter int:),
                     transactions with, on behalf of or for the benefit of ‘(a) any individual or entity included on.
                     the list maintained by the committee established by the United Nations Security Council
                     pursuantto United Nations Security Council- resolution 1267 or (b) any individual orentity
                     that does not share its values, principles, and humanitarian or development Mandate or
                     which, in the judgment of the Grantee, would otherwise not be an appropriate beneficiary,
                     partner or contractor of the Grantee. The Parties acknowledge the need for due diligence in
                     this regard, appropriate to the circumstances in which the Programme is implemented.

             To further clarify clause (b) of this provision, WFP is willing to issue a separate document confirming
             its commitment to avoidance of transactions with armed groups in Somalia — and laying out the
             standard of diligence and reporting framework that are described above.

             I note that this approach does not derogate from the established principle that the United Nations shall
             screen individuals or entities solely against the list maintained by the UN Security Council pursuant to
             United Nations Security Council resolution 1267, and that it shall not screen against any national anti-
             terrorism list.

             1 wish to express WFP's appreciation of our positive dialogue — and remain, with my colleagues, at
             your disposal for discussion of any concerns or questions you may have. WFP is committed to
             working with you to identify a solution that will achieve USAID's objectives.


                                      71.k. Li\       \I Dauldb7            er
                        yours


             Ramiro Lopes da Silva




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765069 Date: 10/30/2015
