      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787976 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                        RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                        B5,B6



From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Friday, February 3, 2012 6:50 PM
To:
Subject:                          FW: Russian NTV Program Targeting U.S. Support for Opposition and NGOs


For your situational awareness.

From: Russell, Daniel A
Sent: Saturday, February 04, 2012 12:37 AM
To: Wells, Alice G; Gordon, Philip H; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Kaidanow, Tina S .
Subject: Russian NTV Program Targeting U.S. Support for Opposition and NGOs

From Embassy Moscow's press officer. See his conclusion at the end of the piece in yellow.

From: Joseph Kruzich
Sent: Friday, February 03, 2012 3:28 PM
To: McFaul, Michael A; Gwaltney, Sheila S; Solomon, Howard T; Hurley, Michael
Cc: Harutunian, Ruben; Castillo, Raymond A
Subject: 3arpaHmo NM nomower - NTV Program Tonight

NTV broadcast the documentary hit job we had anticipated tonight and it was the most comprehensive and
outrageous report i have seen in this highly charged media environment. The film had much footage of the
January 17 meeting with civil society and opposition party leaders, showing them entering and exiting the U.S.
Embassy and talking with Nashi supporters posing as NTV reporters. It then switched to several photos of the
Ambassador and his involvement in democracy promotion in Russia and the Color revolutions. Here are the
main themes that were covered:

-- The US government and other western governments are involved in a clever and secretive game to destabilize
and weaken Russia through its support for democracy, civil society and the political opposition in Russia

-- The work of US diplomats to monitor elections is one form of this strategy to discredit Russia's democracy
and elections. It showed film footage of our Consul GeneralSylvia Batuleva and her work in covering the
Russian elections.

-- The report repeated many of the allegations made against Golos in an earlier film in December, but the main
thrust was that it receives large sums of money from the US government to support the destabilization of Russia
under the guise of electoral monitoring. It showed financial documents showing the connection between Golos
and USAID and showed a photo of the head of USAID's democracy and governance shop, pointing out that he
was the manager of these funds used to destabilize Russia.

-- The next attack was on NDI and IRI and showed their connection to former Secretary Albright and Senator
John McCain, two people that it noted were very hostile to Russia's democracy and international interests. It
also pointed out that the Ambassador had close ties to NDI in his earlier work.

- The film then pointed out the longstanding attempt of the US and the UK to keep Russia weak, and how these
two nations had always seen Russia as an opponent in the world. It quoted Zbig Brzenski on the geo-strategic
interests the West had in winning the battle with Russia for influence in its "near abroad" and central asia.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787976 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787976 Date: 10/30/2015




-- at times the film equated the work of US diplomats in Moscow to that of spies, meeting with the opposition
and collecting information on Russia that could be used to weaken Russia

-- a great effort was made to link all the opposition leaders and the current protest leaders to the above-
mentioned groups like NDI and IRI (Nemtsov and Muranov), Freedom House and other human rights groups.

-- the last attack was on Navalny and the time he spent at Yale University and how the US and its education
system served as a training ground for spreading revolution and destabilization in Russia and other parts of the
world. It showed photos of Navalny at protests and then linked them back to pictures of him in the U.S., etc.




Best regards,
Joe

Joseph Kruzich

                 ■
                 7




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787976 Date: 10/30/2015
