     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784415 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                             Sunday, December 4, 2011 7:01 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: US ready to help Syria after Assad falls - Biden (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Sunday, December 04, 2011 06:29 PM
To: Syria Unrest; NEWS-Mahogany; NEWS-EUR
Cc: SES-O
Subject: US ready to help Syria after Assad falls - Biden (Reuters)

Dec 4 (Reuters) - The United States and Turkey are reviewing how to help Syria if pro-democracy protests
drive President Basher al -Assad from power, U.S. Vice President Joe Biden said on Sunday, but the two allies
have not discussed concrete "next steps".

   Washington and Ankara have both called for Assad to go, but both worry it could deepen instability in a
region already rocked by the Arab Spring, and as U.S. troops leave Iraq by the end of the month.

  Biden, in an interview with reporters travelling with him to Athens from Istanbul, said the collapse of the
Assad regime would not necessarily spark a wider regional sectarian conflict, which some see pitting the Sunni-
dominated west of neighbouring Iraq against Shi'ites in that country and in Iran.

   "There was a sense in our discussions that it would be able to be handled without any conflagration going
beyond Syria, and that it could be localized to Syria," said Biden, characterising his meeting with Turkish Prime
Minister Tayyip Erdogan on Saturday.

   Turkey has joined the Arab League in slapping tough sanctions on Syria, once a close friend, in response to
Assad's bloody crackdown on protests, and has talked openly about the need to be ready for any scenario,
including setting up a buffer zone to contain any mass influx of refugees.

    France has separately talked about a "humanitarian corridor" to help civilians caught in the violence that has
killed over 3,500 people.

  Biden, speaking to reporters in his private cabin on Air Force Two, said the issue of a buffer zone had not
come up in his two hour meeting with Erdogan.

   "(To) the extent we talked about any 'what-next' steps, there were generic discussions about having to go in
and provide some help and possibly economic assistance and stability, not militarily, but helping the Syrians,"
Biden said. "We're in this to see Assad come down and then determine what would be the most helpful thing
for the international community to do to establish stability in that country."

   Biden's eight day trip began in Iraq, and he spent much of his time with Erdogan and Turkish President
Abdullah Gul, who he met the day before in Ankara, talking about the country's future after U.S. troops have
pulled out. Biden said his main message was to emphasize that although the American war in Iraq was over, the
United5States remained engaged.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784415 Date: 10/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784415 Date: 10/30/2015




   Washington and Ankara have kept in close touch over Syria but differ in their approach to Iran. Washington
wants Ankara to adopt tougher sanctions against Tehran, but that is hard for the Turks, who get about 30
percent of their imported oil from Iran. Biden said the United States and Turkey might disagree "tactically"
about sanctions on Iran, but shared the same strategic goal.

   "The United States is going to maintain its leadership role in the entire region, from Iraq to Iran, to the Arab
Spring, and it just makes sense we coordinate as closely as we can with our friends and allies who have the
same overall strategic interests we have," he said.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784415 Date: 10/30/2015
