        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786105 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                                 H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                                 Tuesday, April 19, 2011.8:37 PM
To:                                   'Betsy.Ebeling
Subject                               Re: The closing of Jamal Place



What a sad commentary about our values today. I sound more curmudgeonly everyday but it is hard to see the clock
being turned back on so much that matters, especially poor kids. Oh well, I can only hope the tide turns soon.




From: Ebeling, Betsy [mailto
Sent: Wednesday, April 13, 2011 01:13 PM
To: H
Subject: FW: The closing of Jamal Place

HDR: the email below from Ann Deuel just breaks my heart. Our association with Ann and Jamal Place
started in 1995 when she called me asking to invite you and WJC during the '96 convention to attend an ice
cream social for Jamal Place. Maggie and I actually visited the then very new Jamal Place and decided it was
too small for your visit; however, our involvement: Kathy Burgess, Ernie and Katie Ricketts and so many other
friends only increased with time. Department of Human Services and general revenue funding cuts have been
brutal and, I guess, inevitable given the present budget problems (a mild term) in Illinois. Hope you are well,
                         B


Betsy Ebeling
Illinois Department of Human Rights
100 W. Randolph Street Suite 10-100
Chicago, Illinois 60601



CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE: This e-mail (and any attachments) contains information that belongs to the sender and may be
confidential or protected by attorney-client or attorney work product privilege. The information is only for the individual or entity
named above. If you are not the named or intended recipient, please do not disclose, copy, distribute, or use this information. If
have received this transmission in error, please promptly notify the sender of receipt of this e-mail and then destroy all copies of
it. Receipt by unintended recipient does not waive attorney-client privilege or attorney work product privilege or any other
exemption from disclosure.



From: Ann Deuel [mailto
Sent: Wednesday, April 13, 2011 11:18 AM
To: Ebeling, Betsy; 'Bob Alexis'; 'Constable, Burt'; brownmomenint                          'Brian Murphy'; 'Bruce & Suzi Niemi';
bmelman                     'Brian Starr'; 'Phil Jackson'; clagolder                clemens                     'Carol
Staszkiewicz'; 'Cindy Solorzano'; coreydf               'Daniel Facchini'; dtrice                dellicarpint
'D'Anna Pawlenko'; 'Deborah H Telman';. 'Ford, Beth'; gayle                        'George Drost'; 'Joyce Pfennig';
hgrey                 kbehling                  'Lu Bailey'; lindasnyder                     Msimeon
mdv%                     'Michelle - mc2 Communications'; MMartlre                     'Mark Schroeder';
m2wyatt                    'Matthew Wyatt'; m3wyatt                     'Telman, Nigel'; 'Phil Horn';
rmindell                         randy                     repartturner          'Bob Brennan'; 'Sharon Pines'; 'Thomas, SC
(Sherri)'; timalbore$               tracethewaughI                  tiggerrulesl                terry.falk
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786105 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786105 Date: 10/30/2015




'Vipond, Jean'; vabmirage              Jzalukos
Subject: The closing of Jamal Place

Hello everyone,


I wanted to let you know, officially, from me that that Jamal Place closed its TLP program effective 3/21/11.
While we will still be a 501 c 3 organization until I finish closing the programs, no more kids will be served by
our organization. The legislative neglect of appropriate and adequate funding for the past 11 years, combined
with the impact the recession has had on individual and corporate giving, has taken its toll on this small
agency. Over a 16 year time span, Jamal Place has met its mission having helped many young men become
"educated, caring and responsible citizens". I have a hard time telling people because everyone's kind words
make me cry—but I am getting better...it is not an every five minute occurrence anymore—but the kindness of
others can start can start the tears flowing...something that I don't like to do.

The board of directors, staff members, volunteers and I are very proud of the fact that Jamal Place closes with
an 80% high school graduation rate (when the city rate is about 52% and the DCFS ward rate is 40%). Fourteen
percent of our graduated youth have gone to college or the military and we have had a 44% employment rate
of minority teens over the past decade (when 17% is the national average for the same population over the
same time period). Nearly 70% of the youth Jamal Place served were able to move on and grow positively in
their next placements and nearly 80% of those youth remain in contact with the agency for guidance,
resources and just to keep in touch. Lastly, we have been blessed, (over the past 16 years) to have no young
man in our care killed or seriously injured, and there has never been a scandal associated with our
operation. I think these are remarkable achievements (and significant outcomes) which speak to the
dedication, care and commitment of all those involved with the organization. Over the years, I have been
greatly touched by the kindness and generosity so many people have shared on behalf of our kids, and I have
been grateful for your support and encouragement.

I have asked "Where is God in this outcome?" While I know He is present (and carrying me right now) I have
had a tough time letting go and trusting that everything will work out. There has not been a minute in my life
over the past 18 years (from the idea of Jamal Place to the placement of the last young man) that I haven't
given the organization everything I had personally and professionally. So many of the boys have called and
asked if I am o.k...just the fact that they are thinking about someone else means that we succeeded in helping
the kids form healthy attachments to adults who care. I ask that you keep all of the generations of the kids
we served, my staff members and me in an occasional prayer.

For those who made a donation to our Spring Appeal prior to the decision of Jamal Place closing, I have
deposited your gift. Anyone who has sent a donation post our decision, I have notified and asked if they still
wanted to make the donation to help us get our final expenses addressed in the closing. We still have our tax
exempt status until I dissolve the nonprofit corporation, so all gifts are tax deductible as allowed by law.

Lastly, I hope, for the sake of all of the children and young adults in care, that the state legislators start to
understand and fund the essential activities that allow youth to thrive and that DCFS gets a clue about what is
truly important to help an abused or neglected kid have a chance for a future. Without such understanding,
our youth will always struggle with the devastating quartet of mental illness, homelessness, prison and/or
death.

This is my "Footprints" moment...l will let you know when God's miracles intervene!

Take very good care and thank you for all of the support you have shown our mission.
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786105 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786105 Date: 10/30/2015




Ann



Ann G. Deuel
Executive Director
Jamal Place, Inc.


Personal e-mail:




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786105 Date: 10/30/2015
