     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792064 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL



From:                          Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                          Monday, April 23, 2012 10:28 AM
To:
Subject:                        FW: Obama's campaign whisperer




From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Monday, April 23, 2012 10:03 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Obama's campaign whisperer


POLITICO
Obama's campaign whisperer
By: Glenn Thrush and Jonathan Martin
April 23, 2012 04:38 AM EDT
Barack Obama's top advisers are making a mid-"core" correction in their attacks on Mitt
Romney — with a little nudge from Bill Clinton, who is finding a niche as an Obama
campaign whisperer and fundraiser.

Late last year, as Romney galloped to the right, Obama's messaging team hit on what it
assumed would be a durable bumper-sticker attack: Romney, senior advisers David
Plouffe and David Axelrod intoned time and again, was a political shape-shifter who
lacked any real moral or political "core."

 The slogan was the Obama talking point for months. But Clinton, echoing survey data
 presented by Obama's own pollster Joel Benenson, quietly argued that the empty-core
 approach failed to capitalize on what they see as Romney's greatest vulnerability: An
 embrace of a brand of tea party conservatism that turns off Hispanics, women and
 moderate independents.

 A more effective strategy, Clinton has told anyone who would listen, would be to focus
 almost exclusively on Romney's description of himself as a "severe conservative," to deny
 him any chance to tack back to the center, according to three Democrats close to the
 situation.

 "[Clinton] said he thought Romney's positions on the issues would ultimately be the best
 way to attack him," said a Democrat briefed on the details of an amiable Nov. 9 meeting in
 Clinton's Harlem office that included Axelrod, Democratic National Committee Executive
 Director Patrick Gaspard and Obama campaign manager Jim Messina.

 "That's what we are doing, but it doesn't mean we can't and shouldn't do the etch-a-
 sketch, flip-flop moments when they occur and we will," added the operative — who says



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792064 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792064 Date: 10/30/2015




Obama's campaign likely would have emphasized Romney's conservative tilt once the
primary was over, anyway.

But Clinton's advice, buttressed by Benenson's polling, has clearly gained traction
internally since the end of Romney's four-month primary ordeal. "The decision here is that
if you are going to pin a tail on the donkey," says a top Democratic strategist who
supported the Clinton view, "let's make it the conservative tail."

The new line of assault was on display Sunday with both Axelrod and Stephanie Cutter
taking to the network shows to portray Romney as a conservative throwback to the
economic policies of the previous administration.

"He's actually proposing, more massive tax cuts for the wealthy, fewer rules for Wall
Street, deep cuts in the thing we need to grow, education, research and development,
energy," said Axelrod on NBC's "Meet the Press," showing delight in a recent claim by a
junior Republican National Committee aide that the Romney campaign's policies were
"just-updated" versions of Bush-era programs.

"I think people are going to say," Axelrod added. 'We've seen this movie before, and it
didn't work.'"

Last week, senior administration officials surprised reporters in a White House background
briefing by correcting a questioner who suggested that Obama thought Romney had his
"finger in the wind."

The rebuke: Romney's core is now filled in. With craven right-wing craziness.

The backgrounder, in turn, spawned a New York Times story, which allowed Plouffe to
trial-balloon a new line of attack, comparing Romney to the archetypal GOP extremist
loser: "Whether it's tax policy, whether it's his approach to abortion, gay rights,
immigration, he's the most conservative nominee that they've had going back to [1964
Republican candidate Barry] Goldwater."

The episode provides a glimpse into the deliberations of Obama's vaunted message
operation, led by Axelrod and Plouffe, two veteran operatives adept at stoking voters'
aspirations for a better future or hanging sticky "kick me" sign on their enemies.

It also shows the influence retained by Clinton, who will be joining Obama at an April 29
fundraiser in Virginia and raising cash for Obama's cash-poor super PAC.

And of all the news-cycle trifles during the campaign's silly-season April kickoff — 7-
Eleven cookies, dog-meat tweets and Seamus-in-the-box — the "core" shift may be the
least trivial, a rhetorical exercise that is, in the broader context of neck-and-neck contest,
only superficially superficial.

Obama's central mission in the campaign's opening days is to paint the most unflattering
possible portrait of Romney before his protean opponent can redefine himself as a
palatable, nonthreatening moderate.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792064 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792064 Date: 10/30/2015




Yet for all the targets of opportunity Romney presents for them, Obama's team is
struggling with its own core messaging dilemma: Do you throw everything against the wall
to see what sticks — or narrow the narrative to avoid muddling the message?

"I think it's kind of curious that they are now starting to portray him as a right winger as
opposed to a weather vane. ... You can't just keep changing these things around, they
have to have more of consistent message or nobody will buy it," said veteran GOP
consultant John Weaver, who ran Jon Huntsman's unsuccessful bid for the Republican
nomination.

Weaver agrees that extremist core is a more effective approach than no core.

"Both sides only need to care about 8 to 12 percent of the electorate comprised of
switchable Hispanics, working women and independents. So being tied to the extreme
elements on the partisan margins is more harmful than being perceived as a flip-flopper,"
says Weaver, a longtime adviser to 2008 GOP nominee John McCain.

"Being a flip-flopp& might actual help Romney. It shows he's not an unreasonable
person."

Obama's aides deny there's any serious debate about messaging and that all the core
arguments add up to a single, coherent message about Romney's trustworthiness, or lack
thereof.

Moreover, Bob Shrum, who helped run Ted Kennedy's successful 1994 Senate campaign
against Romney, takes issue with Clinton's advice. An all-of-the-above strategy worked
then and should work now.

"I think they are doing the right thing, it's all part of the same narrative – that Romney
doesn't care about anybody but himself," said Shrum, who ran John Kerry's unsuccessful
2004 campaign against George W. Bush. "It's coherent."

But the key, he added, was coming up with a succinct way of tying all the narrative strands
together. In his case it was mocking Romney's changes on abortion. "The most effective
attack we had was that he wasn't pro-choice, he was multiple-choice ... something like
that."

Romney's advisers, for their part, are seizing on the shift as a sign of Obama's own lack of
core political conviction.

"This is a White House in search of a reason for reelection," Romney spokeswoman
Andrea Saul told POLITICO.

Saul and other Romney advisers say they have been stunned by their opponent's failure
to concoct a more consistent anti-Romney message, emailing links to the various Obama
attack lines on the presumptive GOP nominee — tying him to Bush, the Supreme Court,
Republican House leadership, Rush Limbaugh, and accusing him of having no core and
then filling one up, as the need arises.

"They are grasping at straws," Saul wrote in an email. "The Obama campaign first said
President Obama was going to run on his record and the election would be a referendum
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792064 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792064 Date: 10/30/2015




on his handling of the economy. When it was clear that wouldn't work, his team said they
were going to adopt a "Kill Mitt" strategy. Then came their plan to run against President
Bush (again) and, then, against Congress. Next they tried to claim Gov. Romney had no
core. Now they're trying to claim his core is not mainstream. Each new day brings a
different made-up attack from the Obama campaign — what doesn't change is the fact
that President Obama has failed and so is going to try to tear down Mitt Romney instead
of talking about his record."

Despite the recent shift, Obama's campaign is likely to pound away on three distinct
Romney-cores: No Core, Conservative Core and Bain Core, leveraging Romney's years
at Bain Capital to make the case that he's out of touch and deaf to the concerns of
working people.

It's not like senior Obama officials haven't been hammering Romney for his increasingly
conservative positions on immigration or women's reproductive rights already: Stephanie
Cutter, one of the party's most experienced messaging operatives, oversees entire units
of Obama's Chicago-based reelection campaign whose sole job is to do just that.

And Axelrod, for one, is still taking to Twitter to gleefully remind his 81,000 followers of
Romney aide Eric Fehrnstrom's now-infamous claim that the Boston-based campaign
would shake the "Etch-a-Sketch" after putting away Rick Santorum.

"Etch-a-Sketch moment?" Axelrod tweeted on April 17. "After telling donors he's "doomed"
unless he picks up with Latinos, Mitt puts kibosh on Kobach," a reference to POLITICO
story reporting that a Romney spokeswoman had distanced the campaign from
controversial immigration adviser Kris Kobach.

That was a day after a top West Winger went the other way during a briefing with national
political reporters, unexpectedly rejecting the entire empty-core storyline and arguing that
the real Romney was the 2012 conservative, and not the moderate, pro-choice Romney of
the 1990s.

The aide's argument — which can't be recounted here because of the strict no-quotes, no
names ground rules the White House imposes on such sessions — set off alarms among
the White House press corps, political cadaver dogs paid to sniff nearly imperceptible
changes in tone and language. Reporters, who can be quoted under the rules,
harrumphed.

"He has a core now! You said he didn't have a core — are you saying he has a core
now?" asked an incredulous TV network correspondent.
                                                                                  llt Il)F5
                                                                                  0, I R   P., I N4
                                                                                                      r)
                                                                                                       `d

© 2012 POLITICO LLC




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792064 Date: 10/30/2015
