      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783101 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL


From:                             Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                             Saturday, November 5, 2011 9:51 AM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Iran says US plot suspect is anti-Tehran militant (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Saturday, November 05, 2011 08:21 AM
To: NEWS-Iran; NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Iran says US plot suspect is anti-Tehran militant (Reuters)

TEHRAN, Nov 5 (Reuters) - Iran has complained to the United Nations about a U.S. accusation it tried to
assassinate a Saudi diplomat, saying one of the alleged plotters Washington calls an Iranian military official is
really a member of an anti-Tehran rebel group.

  Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Salehi said on Saturday the plot was part of a multi-pronged U.S. strategy to
smear Tehran, a process he said would continue next week when the U.N. nuclear agency publishes a report
western diplomats say will contain new evidence about Iran's nuclear programme.

    The complaint to U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon turned the U.S. accusation that Tehran supports
terrorism back onto Washington, Salehi said.

   "This letter contains our complaint about the plots of the United States, reliable information that we have of
the U.S. involvement in those plots," he said in a news conference broadcast live on the English language
channel Press TV.

   On its website, Press TV reported the letter said a suspect who U.S. prosecutors have identified as an Iranian
military official is actually a member of the exiled Iranian rebel group Mujahideen Khalq Organisation
(MKO).

  One of two men charged with plotting to kill the Saudi ambassador to Washington, 56-year-old Iranian-
American Manssor Arbabsiar, pleaded not guilty at a court hearing in New York last month.

    The second, Gholam Shakuri, is still at large and U.S. officials say he is a member of the Quds Force, an arm
of Iran's Revolutionary Guards, who approved the plan to hire Mexican gangsters to murder Saudi Ambassador
Adel al-Jubeir.

   The semi-official Mehr news agency reported on Oct. 17 that Shakuri was a member of the MKO, also
known as the People's Mujahideen Organisation of Iran (PMOI), based in Iraq and listed as a terrorist group by
the United States.

  Citing "informed sources", Mehr said Shakuri had travelled to Washington and to the MKO base at Camp
Ashraf in Iraq.

   Iranian officials did not initially comment on the report which said Interpol had discovered Shakuri's true
identity, but Press TV reported on Saturday it was now in the letter delivered to Ban.
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783101 Date: 10/30/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783101 Date: 10/30/2015




    "LET THEM PUBLISH"

   Washington is using what it says was a foiled plot to help bolster international support to tighten sanctions
on Iran which it accuses of developing nuclear weapons and sponsoring terrorism, charges denied by Tehran.

    Israeli and western media have increased speculation in recent days that Israel might launch a strike on Iran's
nuclear sites. Some analysts say that, rather than any firm evidence military action is imminent, the chatter
reflects efforts to increase diplomatic pressure on Tehran.

   Salehi said Iran did not fear possible revelations in a report to be issued by the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) on Wednesday that western diplomats say will make a "compelling case" the Iranian nuclear
programme is not entirely peaceful.

   "They are claiming that they are going to publish new documents. We know what the truth is -- let them
publish them and we'll see what happens. Will they not be called into question as an agency that is under
pressure by foreign powers?" Salehi said.

    The IAEA report, the assassination plot and accusations about human rights abuses were a "three-pronged
attack from the West against Iran ... just an assault to pressure Iran into subjugation," he said.

   Salehi repeated the stance of Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei who has said Iran has 100
"undeniable documents" proving U.S. involvement in terrorism.


News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783101 Date: 10/30/2015
