       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783652 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                                            RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Monday, November 14, 2011 12:03 PM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: Egypt lifts bar on ex-ruling party members in vote (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Monday, November 14, 2011 10:15 AM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Subject: Egypt lifts bar on ex-ruling party members in vote (Reuters)


CAIRO (Reuters) - A top Egyptian court on Monday overturned a decision barring members of President Hosni
Mubarak's former party from standing in a parliamentary election that starts later this month, a move that was
cheered by supporters of the now disbanded party.

   A lower Egyptian court in the northern Delta city of Mansoura ruled on Friday to ban members of former
National Democratic Party (NDP) from running, setting off a string of lawsuits nationwide aimed at removing
such candidates from the race.

    But Judge Magdy el-Agaty in the Higher Administrative Court overturned the verdict.

   Backers of the former party cheered the decision at the court, chanting: "God is the greatest." Some waved
pictures of their favoured candidates.

   Many former NDP members have registered to run as independents or on other party lists in the first free
election in decades following an uprising that overthrew Mubarak in February.

    The first stage of the staggered vote starts on Nov. 28.

   Former NDP members have set up at least six new parties and many have older parties, angering activists
who want to ensure that those they see as "counter-revolutionary" forces are kept out of the assembly which is
tasked with appointing a committee to write Egypt's new constitution.

   Eliminating any members associated with the former ruling party could have meant party lists and candidate
applications would have to be reviewed from scratch, disrupting the vote or potentially even delaying it,
analysts had said.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783652 Date: 10/30/2015
