     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769297 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                           RELEASE IN
                                                                                           PART B6



From:                        Chris Jennings
Sent:                        Friday, January 22, 2010 12:12 AM
To:
Subject:                     RE: What now?



Hillary: Great to hear from you. I was just thinking of you the other day and was
contemplating giving you a read on where things stand, (but then I saw how busy you are
and thought the better of it). Thank you for your leadership in Haiti and throughout the
world; it has just been so impressive. You make us proud every day.

As for your note: I am well aware we don't have a lot of good options here. However,
for a number of reasons, I am not at all confident that Rehm is making the right call
about pushing for an incremental fall-back (although some tell me he has not made a final
decision about whether to go small ball and, if so, how best to proceed). At the very
least, he may be making a premature course change. As you know more than anyone, going
incremental creates as many policy problems as it solves. Politically, we have a myriad
of problems too:

Constructing an incremental package -- for which there is no consensus now on what that
would be -- takes time and distracts attention from what the Dems want to be talking
about -- lobs and the economy. The stakeholders that have agreed to cuts for
comprehensive care will renege on the savings produced if it is for small ball (that does
not significantly reduce their uncompensated care burden). The public, who will be told
that they are getting insurance reform, won't get much (because you can't do guarantee
issue and secure the elimination of pre-existing conditions for all people UNLESS you
have near universal coverage and/or significant subsidies) and it will not take too long
for them and the media to figure that out. (It is the one thing that the press has
learned from this debate -- starting from your primary campaign debate over the
individual requirement). And it will be extremely difficult to find a. viable legislative
vehicle that won't be slowed up and eventually killed by the Republicans with poison
pills galore. They certainly aren't going to .give the Administration a signing ceremony
if they can prevent it. Can you imagine what would happen if the Administration had what
was viewed as two separate failures at health reform in one Congress?

Moreover, as we both painfully know, any health reform failure will mean that the
Republicans will be the writers of history (because the victors -- not the vanquished get
the pen and the paper to do so). They will get to define what was in it and why it
died. And this will have implications not lust about the past but the
future. Republicans will say more effectively that, given the chance, the Democrats will
be right back at it again with their "evil, secret fantasy to take over the health care
system." They will more successfully (and inaccurately) define "it" as being a deficit
busting, government take-over that will ration care and harm seniors.

I know we are all panicked about the MA race• and its implications -- all with just
cause. But I think we need to step back and take a breath. We can't over-read the race,
which every pollster I have talked to saw is not a clean, slam on comprehensive
reform. The public still wants change and action in this arena.

And the House can still pass the admittedly flawed Senate but relatively decent bill if
we can convince the House that it is in their best interest to do so. (It will likely
take some help from the Senate leadership and some changes in a subsequent reconciliation
protected legislative vehicle to fix the most problematic provisions, but this can be
done). If the House does pass the Senate bill, it is important to note that there are a
lot of good things to sell even THIS YEAR including: the elimination of pre-existing
conditions for children, the elimination of lifetime caps, the extension of dependent
coverage for kids, the provision of small business tax credits or the first down-payment
on the elimination of the so-called Medicare prescription drug "doughnut hole."

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769297 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769297 Date: 10/30/2015




I have to admit that this will be difficult because the House is so angry and scared;
they are furious with the White House and the Senate. As such, it is true that that they
might well let their anger cloud their judgment. Having. said, I think a quick movement
to an incremental approach is at least as risky as waiting for a few days, even weeks to
determine if we can round 1110 the votes (by getting groups who are increasingly, and
perhaps constructively for us, fearing that nothing will happen - AND lobby the House
Dems hard). (Frankly, between you and me, I suspect that if we fail to do go for the
Senate package, we may well not get any bill enacted this year, no matter how hard we
try).

So, my initial advice (and I haven't talked to Rahm in a couple of weeks) is to step back
and see if the increasing perception that we may get nothing haunt people who were being
difficult in the Senate-House negotiations to largely accept the Senate bill. Use the
SOTU to focus on the consequences of. inaction in more compelling ways to fuel this
sentiment a bit more. If we need to make some relatively small changes to secure final
necessary votes, I would argue to limit them as much as possible. Make the Senate
leadership guarantee to the House, though, that these policies will be passed by the
Senate in a reconciliation package. However, add them as riders to a hopefully much more
popular economic development/jobs reconciliation bill. In other words, don't make the
necessary changes visible; hide them on a bigger vehicle that has to be enacted in any
case.

Having said all the above, of course, I am more than willing to help produce and sell an
incremental package if all the cowers that be conclude we have no other option. I just
have to be honest with you about my assessment about where this now stands and could go.
If we go that route, the policies should be designed to be politically popular, policy
viable, administratively feasible, relatively inexpensive and paid for, and easy to sell
to outside groups/experts who would validate as a step forward. It should be a series of
policies that are popular enough to be able to conceivably attract 60 votes, but under
any circumstances not vulnerable to failing to get at least 50 votes in a reconciliation
context. They must he relatively easily understood and simple to communicate. Options
include (and can be stand alone or collective) and probably should be designed to cost
less than $200 billion over 5 years (because the reconciliation bill sunsets provisions
after this period of time):

1) Some simple insurance reforms that would not mess up the market - things like banning
retrospective rescissions, the elimination of pre-existing conditions for children, the
extrication of lifetime caps, and the extension of dependent coverage offerings for kids;

2) A Federal grant and waiver program to get states to do comprehensive reform. themselves
(with some consumer protection minimum requirements). Senator-elect Brown would have a
hard time opposing this (since he said states should be supported to take the lead - like
MA did);

3) A parents mandate (individual requirement) to cover their kids with the help of tax
credits (and help from Medicaid/CHIP) to obtain private insurance coverage OR through a
state public program (like Medicaid);

4) A Medicaid or CHIP expansion to parents;

5) A reinsurance payment system for certain targeted populations OR federally-sponsored
high risk pools to cover uninsurable populations. This might be a policy that is designed
for the 55-64 population.

6) The provision of a targeted small business tax credit might be a popular provision,
(though it probably wouldn't get much new coverage);

7) Something more for seniors - perhaps a further down-payment on the Medicare doughnut
hole coverage gap OR some modest steps toward home and community based care (and/or
spousal impoverishment protections) (OR whatever A.ARP will sell and give us cover for).
NOTE: Remember, the seniors disproportionately vote in mid-term elections and hate
health reform more than any other cohort by far;

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769297 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769297 Date: 10/30/2015




8) Something on prevention/wellness - maybe the mandatory Trust Fund down-payment

9)Some "game-changer" delivery and financing reforms that can be argued to secure value
over volume and quality over quantity. This would probably include the Orszag-loved
Independent Payment Assessment Board (IPAB); and

10) Some specific offsets to pay for the bill, primarily through cherry-picked and
downsized savings from old packages; mostly this would come from Medicare; Medicare
managed care programs would be biggest contributors.

We probably could not do all of these provisions, even downsized. Moreover, we would
like to narrow the message perhaps to first steps on insurance reforms, kids, seniors,
and small businesses within a reformed delivery system that focuses on
prevention/wellness.

At any rate, this is probably more than you want, but I wanted to give you my sense of
the state of play. Hope you find helpful. Always at your service. If you want to talk
re this, don't hesitate to give me a call on my cell - 202 550 8677. Best.

Chris




     Original Message--
From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Thursday, January 21, 2010 8:22 PM
To: Chris Jennings
Subject: What now?

Chris--

   What's Plan B? Rahm asked me for ideas about the ingredients of a new compromise. Are
you talking w the White House? Any ideas I could advocate for the cause? I'd love to help
but have tried to stay out up until now and so am not up to speed (an under-statement!).

   Hope you and your family are well and that 2010 is a great year for you and yours.

   All the best,     Hillary




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769297 Date: 10/30/2015
