UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786523 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL
                                               1


                    Ideas for a U.S-Latin America agenda towards 2012


      Concept:

         •   Due to the consolidation of Liberal Democracy, free market policies, sound
             macroeconomic management and institutional strengthening, a great
             number of Latin American countries have experienced a dynamic
             transformation during the last two decades. Because of that, the IDB, many
             analysts, statesmen and prestigious publications have referred to the period
             between 2010 and 2020 as "The Latin American Decade",

         •   However some countries face challenges that must be addressed. One of
             them is the security crisis in Central America driven by narco-trafficking and
             organized crime that requires a comprehensive Plan with multi-party
             leadership.

         •   Other countries that have experienced an impressive social and economic
             transformation face the need to improve their policies to close the gender
             gap, improve education and promote entrepreneurship, in order to become
             more competitive and continue to expand the middle class.

         • Facing this reality the United States Government has a unique
           opportunity to promote a regional agenda, looking towards the Summit
           of the Americas to be held in Colombia in 2012.

     Ideas for the 2012 agenda:

     Security Situation in Central America:

         •   To face the challenging security situation in Central America a
             comprehensive action plan was agreed during the regional summit that took
             place in June 23 2011. With the purpose of achieving the objectives defined
             in the action plan, the creation of a multi-party coordination group should be
             considered. Examples as the Contadora Group in the 80's, designed to build
             peace agreements in Nicaragua, Salvador and Guatemala or the Quartet on
             the Middle East, can become effective bodies of coordination, execution and
             consensus building.

         •   The United States, the European Union and the region can identify 3
             individuals with credibility and proven executive capacity to lead the
             coordination group. Names like Jeb Bush, Alvaro Uribe and Xavier Solana
             would meet that criteria and help the countries put in place the action plan
             and find the necessary cooperation from the international community.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786523 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786523 Date: 10/30/2015




                                               2



     The road towards the Summit of the Americas:

         G   Considering the importance of the 2012 summit of the Americas and the
             need to have tangible and effective outcomes, three preliminary events could
             be organized to set the roadmap in the following areas:

                1. Closing the gender gap: Being two of the region biggest economies
                   (Brazil and Argentina) governed by women, and acknowledging that
                   in 2010 23% of regional members of Parliament and 30% of Cabinet
                   Members were woman, there is a significant potential to adopt
                   policies that close gender gaps. This endeavor must include
                   improving labor conditions, prevention and sanction of domestic
                   violence, discrimination and women trafficking. promotion of
                   micro-credit and a transformation of vocational and communitary
                   projects in low-income populations.

                2. Intra-Regional educational and cultural exchange: Following the
                   successful experience of the Alliance for Progress, the United States
                   Government can create a new scholarship program that facilitate
                   Latin-American citizens to study in the United States and
                   encourage American students to have and academic and cultural
                   experience in the region. Setting a target of 200.000 scholarships in
                   the course of decade can become a life changing experience to
                   students in Latin America and the Caribbean.

                3. The Hispanic community contribution to the United States: The
                   Hispanic community has become overtime a very important
                   contributor to the U.S economy. According to the U.S Census Bureau in
                   2007 there were 2.3 million Hispanic-owned business, generating
                   257US$ billion in revenues and creating almost 2 million jobs. The
                   consumption market of 1.3US$trillion, generated by a 50 million
                   population continues to become more vibrant day by day. Launching
                   a joint initiative between the SBA, ODIC. the Export-Import Bank
                   and the IDB to improve cross border ties and develop new trade
                   and investment relations between the Hispanic community in the
                   U.S and the region will be an effective win-win policy.

     During the summit:

             Business Leaders Forum: Considering that many high profile summits such
             as the case of APEC, count with dynamic business forums, the regional
             Presidential Meeting in 2012 cannot be the exception. President Santos as
             the Summit Host has expressed his support for a Business Leaders Round
             Table during the event. Having the possibility for U.S and Regional CEO's to



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786523 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786523 Date: 10/30/2015




                                               3


           interact and discuss ideas to increase intra-regional trade will enrich the
           summit beyond its pure diplomatic nature.
         • Establishing a small group of U.S CEO's from corporations with a strong
           presence in Latin America and the Caribbean such as Caterpillar, GE,
           Google andifi Morgan. to organize the round table, will be crucial.

      Other strategic actions:

         •   U.S-Brazil Ethanol Agreement: The U.S Senate has recently approved a Bill
             facilitating the import of Brazilian Ethanol by reducing tariffs. A debate and
             vote from the House of Representatives should take place in the course of the
             following months. Considering that such a Bill constitutes a symbol of
             energy security and sustainable energy cooperation in the hemisphere.
             the U.S Government should support the initiative and announce it in the
             context of a stronger partnership with the Latin-American region.

         •   East Caribbean Economic Alleviation Initiative: East Caribbean Countries are
             facing extremely complex challenges. They are importers of energy in times
             of soaring prices. Remittances and tourism flows have been reducing at a fast
             pace, fiscal and debt situations continue to deteriorate and more importantly,
             they are extremely vulnerable to natural disasters. Taking into account the
             small size of these economies and the profound impact that a Debt Relief
             and Sustainable Energy Cooperation Plan could have, the U.S, the U.K and
             other countries could design an Economic Alleviation Agenda for 2012.

      The IDB Role:

         •   The Inter-American Development Bank is ready to play a key role in each
             one of the listed recommendations and continue to act a credible
             institution for consensus building in the Americas.


      Forward for my new book "The Latin-American Decade":

         •   Finally I will like to reiterate my gratitude for your acceptance to write a
             forward for the English version of my book "The Latin-American Decade".
             This book clearly describes the economic, social and political transformation
             the region has faced, as well as the potential for the upcoming years. It also
             highlights challenges ahead and presents a variety of recommendations. Your
             forward will enrich the book and create awareness from public opinion
             throughout the world.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786523 Date: 10/30/2015
