     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                                     RELEASE IN
                                                                                                     PART B6




From:                               Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                               Friday, May 4, 2012 9:08 PM
To:
Subject:                            Fw: Chen Media Summary As of May 4, 2012 8:00 p.m. EDT / 0800 Beijing




From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Friday, May 04, 2012 08:30 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Campbell, Kurt M; Sullivan, Jacob J; Nuland, Victoria 3; Kritenbrink, Daniel 3 (Dan) (Beijing); Baer,
Daniel B; Posner, Michael H; Moy, Kin W; Carlson, Aubrey A; Wang, Robert S (Beijing); Patel, Nirav S
Cc: Hammer, Michael A; Paradiso, Darragh T; Marchant, Christian M; Okediji, Aleta T (Beijing)
Subject: Re: Chen Media Summary As of May 4, 2012 8:00 p.m. EDT / 0800 Beijing




From: Mike Hammer [mailto:
Sent: Friday, May 04, 2012 08:24 PM
To: Hammer, Michael A
Subject: Chen Media Summary As of May 4, 2012 8:00 p.m. EDT / 0800 Beijing



                                     SUMMARY OF MEDIA COVERAGE
                         (As of May 4, 2012 8:00 p.m. EDT / 0800 Beijing, prepared by PA)

Coverage of Chen Guangcheng continues to diminish, with evening news broadcasts no running it as the top
story. The focus is on the "apparent resolution" with reports noting that he will come to study in the US, citing
New York University. There are some post-mortem assessments about the outcome, with some pieces noting it
is "saving face" for both countries, and giving some credit to Secretary Clinton for leading a marathon effort to
resolve what could have been an all-out crisis. Nevertheless, reports are still cautious about whether the deal
will hold. There is some criticism that the US acted hastily to hand him back. Some Chinese media
reports characterize Chen as a "traitor" for wanting to study in the U.S. All carried Secretary's remarks today.

Editorial commentary is light so far. Of note, the NYT website features a 2 minute video clip by op-ed
columnist Nicholas Kristof on "whether the Obama administration mishandled the case of Chen
Guangcheng.

According to Kristof: Diplomats did a reasonably good job negotiating a possible solution to a situation that
could have dragged on for months, hobbling US-China relations. Some criticism of the Administration for
mishandling seemed partisan and ill-founded. For example, the Chinese government would never have
provided written guarantees as some had said. What's at stake: This is not just one lawyer but about human
rights across China. The change of leadership in China this fall gives some reason to think new leadership will
be more moderate. And Chen might become a folk hero which bodes well for day when people like Chen are
not in prison but leading their country to a better future.


EVENING NEWS SUMMARIES

 CBS — Evening News with Scott Pelley
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015




Clips of the Secretary's press conference, cover offer from NYU. Deal "seems to meet with his latest demands."
Chen alone has pushed Human Rights to the forefront of US/China talks, something that China usually keeps
under wraps. Characterized Gary Locke as "bragging" about Mission Impossible move. Interviewed Cohen in
New York, who said Americans don't usually pay attention to Chinese government policies so Chen may not be
able to make that much difference here in US.

ABC — World News with Diane Sawyer
Only short mention after top 4,stories, Diane Sawyer noting that international crisis appears to be ending, with
Chen coming to the US to study. The Chinese government agreed to let him go with his family and the State
Department expects it to happen within weeks.

NBC — Nightly News with Brian Williams

Brief mention of Administration critics who said US was too hurried in its diplomacy. Rep. Chris Smith noted
in clip that Chen should have been given more time at the embassy.
4rth news story with Brian Williams noting that a day of diplomatic drama, with marathon negotiations led by
Secretary Clinton, appeared to end with a way out of the crisis -- Chen on his way to study in the US. Andrea
Mitchell then filed a report noting that there was an apparent breakthrough, as both sides are eager to avoid an
all out crisis. Brief clip of Secretary Clinton noting that US officials visited him in the hospital and he now
wants to go to the US. If deal holds, Mitchell concluded, he could be in US a student visa in a matter of weeks.

CNN — Situation Room with Wolf Blitzer
Not top story. Stan Grant: Covered S's statements. NYU visiting scholar offer, reports people trying to visit
Chen in hospital were beaten; "Chen's fate at a center of a firestorm. Diplomacy continues to be tested." Critical
of U.S. handing back "enemy of the state" to the Chinese Government and that nothing is really reaching the
Chinese people.

CNN - John King USA with Stan Grant and Jill Dougherty
Clips of S presser. Questions about student visa process. Grant reports extent of threat wasn't clear to Chen
until he walked out of embassy. Jill reports that S was doing a lot of work behind the scenes, very fast-moving,
direct talk to top leadership at summit. Will China uphold its bargain? Jill: Chinese media is reporting that the
`traitor" will be going to US for school, so it looks promising.

SOCIAL MEDIA HIGHLIGHTS

On Twitter, chatter about CGC has died down. The limited reporting focuses on details surrounding any "deal"
with the Chinese government on CGC and how the diplomatic process played out over the past few days.

Relevant tweets:

@blakehounshell - Managing editor of Foreign Policy magazine (37,000+ followers)
Chen confidant Jerome Cohen: No U.S.-China 'agreement' on Chen's
fatehttp://thecable.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2012/05/04/chen confidant no us china agreement on blind acti
vist s fate

@cnnjill - Foreign Affairs Correspondent CNN (6,172 followers)
A diplomatic mess played out through a multimedia prism security.blogs.cnn.com/2012/05/04/a-d... #cnn

SELECT ARTICLES FROM MAJOR OUTLETS

Washington Post
Prominent legal scholar and China expert comes to aid of Chen Guangcheng
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015




May 4, 2012
5:38 PM EDT
By Daniel de Vise and William Wan
The man who plotted Chen Guangcheng's possible escape from China to study law at New York University is a
veteran legal scholar who shares the activist's passion for chiding Chinese officials when they fail to follow
their own laws.
When Chen weighed his options inside the U.S. Embassy this week after fleeing house arrest, he told American
officials there was one adviser he could trust: Jerome Cohen, 81, an NYU law professor who is considered the
godfather of Chinese legal studies in the United States.
They spoke multiple times by phone, and Chen eventually accepted Cohen's invitation to defuse a global
political crisis by coming to America as a visiting scholar at NYU's U.S.-Asia Law Institute. It was Cohen's
idea and a typically elegant solution: By departing China as a traveling scholar rather than an asylum-seeker,
Chen would spare both governments political shame.
"This has been a hectic 72 hours," Cohen said Friday, speaking by telephone from his New York home, hoarse
from a cold. "But it's coming out well, I hope. You know, I'm an eternal optimist."
Cohen, known for his mustache and bow tie, is regarded as a towering figure in Sino-American legal relations,
with credentials befitting the political elite.
The son of a New Jersey lawyer, Cohen graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Yale, graduated at the top of his Yale
Law School class and clerked for two U.S. Supreme Court justices. He taught law at the University of
California at Berkeley and Harvard University, where he founded the United States' first East Asia legal studies
program.
"There's probably not anybody teaching today who wasn't either Jerry's student or someone he impacted in
some way," said Adam Segal, a senior fellow and colleague at the Council on Foreign Relations, where Cohen
is an adjunct senior fellow.
Cohen embraced China in an era when the nation and its legal system were not yet deemed worthy of serious
attention. He learned Mandarin in the basement of his Berkeley home and became the first Western lawyer to
practice in Beijing, according to a profile in the NYU law school magazine. By chance, Cohen shares a birthday
with that of the Chinese Communist Party.
"I just knew that China was going to be very important to our future, and its law was going to be very important
to our interaction," he said.
 Human rights was always on Cohen's radar; in recent years, it has moved toward the center of his agenda.
Cohen has leveraged his diplomatic stature to help negotiate the release of several political prisoners, including
 Kim Dae-jung, who later was president of South Korea and a Nobel Peace Prize winner, and Annette Lu, who
 would rise to be vice president of Taiwan, according to the university profile.
 Kenneth Lieberthal, a China expert from the Brookings Institution, recalled a function he attended with Cohen
 "where a former student walked up him and said, 'Jerry, it's amazing, you've built a career teaching around
 Chinese law. But as you seem to point out in books, there is no Chinese law.' In that funny way he has, he
 simply said, 'Yes.' "
 Rather than judge China by Western standards, Cohen's usual tack is to press Chinese officials to adhere to
 their own laws. He succeeds, colleagues say, on the strength of his reputation.
 "I think China understands that to deny access to Professor Cohen would send such a negative signal around the
 world that they just can't afford to do it," said Jared Genser, a human rights lawyer who has collaborated with
 Cohen. "He's that important."
 Cohen, who met Chen in 2004, was drawn to the blind, self-taught lawyer partly because he shared Cohen's
 knack for challenging Chinese authorities over legal abuses. Chen was incarcerated after filing suit on behalf of
 women who underwent forced sterilizations and forced abortions, both of which are forbidden by Chinese law.
 "I'm interested in, and he's interested in, trying to improve the Chinese legal system," Cohen said. "And
 obviously, there's room for improvement."
 The two hadn't spoken in several years when Cohen took a call Monday morning from Chen's American
 advisers, who said Chen had named Cohen as "the only person he could trust," Cohen said.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015




Chen's first plan was to relocate with his family from their walled-in farmhouse to a Chinese university so that
he could begin formal study of the law. "He didn't want to leave China; he didn't want to give up his important
work," Cohen said.
He advised Chen that he should accept the deal only if President Obama personally made "some endorsing
statement," so that all parties would honor it.
But then, Chen changed his mind: he wanted to leave the country to ensure his family's safety.
Cohen said he played no direct role in the second round of negotiations between U.S. and Chinese officials,
"except Chen knew that I would invite him" to come to NYU. Cohen had assumed that journey might happen in
a year or two. Now, he said, "I suppose the whole thing can be done in a month."
As a visiting scholar, Chen would receive a salary, likely paid by the Chinese government. The visit would
probably be limited to a few months, Cohen said.
"He'll get a start toward the legal education he's always wanted," he said.
AP
US, China Forge Tentative Deal on Chinese Activist
By Matt Lee

BEIJING (AP) — With a series of quickly choreographed steps, the U.S. and China outlined a tentative deal
Friday to send a blind legal activist to America for study and potentially bring a face-saving end to a delicate
diplomatic crisis.

The arrangements, if kept, promise to give Chen Guangcheng much of what he wanted: a chance to live with his
family in safety and to get a formal legal education. It would also allow Washington and Beijing to put aside a
rancorous human rights dispute to focus on managing their rivalry for global influence.

As part of the deal, China's Foreign Ministry said Chen can apply for travel permits to study abroad. The State
Department said an American university — later identified as New York University — has offered a fellowship
for Chen with provisions for his family. Spokeswoman Victoria Nuland said the U.S. expects Beijing to process
the travel permits quickly, and once done, visas would be issued.

"I don't think this is empty talk here. I think they mean this is a way out, and it's a dignified way out. It's a good
way out for the Chinese government and our government and for Chen and his family," said Jerome Cohen, an
NYU law professor who met Chen nearly a decade ago, advised him during the negotiations and arranged the
fellowship.

In a sign that not all was settled, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton offered a guarded assessment.

"Over the course of the day, progress has been made to help him have the future that he wants, and we will be
staying in touch with him as this process moves forward," said Clinton, who was in Beijing for annual strategic
talks.    .

The progress, however, seemed significant after a bizarre, rocky crisis triggered when Chen, an inspirational
figure in China's human rights movement, escaped from house arrest in his rural home and reached the U.S.
Embassy in Beijing last Friday. First saying he wanted to stay in China, a smiling Chen emerged from the
fortress-like embassy to a hospital reunion with his wife and two children only to say hours later that he
changed his mind.

 In cell phone calls from his hospital room with friends and foreign media, he said he and his family felt unsafe
 and he wanted to go abroad, undoing a deal U.S. and Chinese officials worked out to guarantee their safe
 relocation to a city in China where he could study law.

 "My situation right now is very dangerous," Chen told The Associated Press early Friday. On Thursday, he
 dialed into a congressional hearing to make a direct appeal for Clinton's help.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015




The drama unfolded but did not derail the two days of talks by Clinton, Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner
and their Chinese counterparts on irritants that bedevil U.S.-China relations: trade, Iran's and North Korea's
nuclear programs, conflict in Syria and cyber-spying.

"This week has shown again that we cannot wall off human rights from our bilateral relationship or relegate it to
the margins of our engagement," Clinton said at the end of the talks.

Much could still upend the agreement. A key problem is where Chen and his family would pick up their
passports. Returning to their home town, the usual route, would expose them to possible retribution from the
same local officials who illegally put Chen and his family under house arrest to punish him for exposing forced
abortions and other misdeeds carried out as part of China's one-child policy. Applying directly to the police
ministry, which issues passports, is allowed in some cases.

Authorities could still deny Chen by law if it's determined that he "will undermine national security or cause
major losses to the interests of the state."

"This has been used to deny passports to people who will hurt China's image," said John Kamm, a veteran
human rights campaigner. Among those denied passports is Tibetan writer Tsering Woeser.

Chen could not be reached for comment. The cell phone he had used for days was switched off.

Still there were signs that his treatment was improving. After being unable to meet with U.S. officials for the
better part of two days, Chen was allowed to meet with embassy staff and an American doctor.

Medical checkups showed his health is good except for three broken bones in his foot suffered when he was
escaping from his rural village, a senior State Department official said.

Hospital staff brought his children new clothes, cut their hair and gave his son, Kerui, a present for his birthday,
the official said. The son, who lived with relatives during the family's recent house arrest, is believed to be
around 10, family friends said, a vagueness that is typical in rural China where birthdays are traditionally
celebrated at the Lunar New Year.

Chinese officials have also begun talking to Chen about his mistreatment by officials in his home province,
Shandong, the U.S. Embassy said. As part of the agreement that originally brought Chen out of the embassy,
U.S. officials said China had agreed to look into his complaints.

Chen spent nearly all of the past seven years in prison or under house arrest. During the past 20 months of home
confinement with his wife, mother and 6-year-old daughter Kesi, Chen has said local officials and people they
hired beat the adults, followed and searched the girl and humiliated them.

At a briefing shortly after the Foreign Ministry said Chen could apply to go abroad, spokesman Liu Weimin
also confirmed that Chen faces no pending criminal charges, indirectly acknowledging that the house arrest he
and his family endured in their rural home was illegal.

"According to Chinese laws, he is a regular citizen. He can absolutely go through regular formalities by normal
means," Liu said.

Should China permit the Chens to travel, it's unclear when they would go. Authorities have up to 30 days to
consider a passport application, and Cohen, the NYU professor, said he hopes to see them by summer. Also left
unresolved if they go is whether Beijing will refuse to allow them back, as it has done with some dissidents.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015




Senior State Department officials, briefing reporters about the arrangements, said the question of Chen's return
to China did not come up in negotiations with Chinese officials.


BBC, Beijing News
By Michael Bristow
May 4, 2012
US expects dissident Chen Guangcheng to leave China soon.
Mr Chen initially said he wanted to stay in China, but changed his mind
The US says it expects China to allow prominent dissident Chen Guangcheng to travel abroad soon.
The US state department said Mr Chen had been offered a fellowship at an American university, and it would allow his
wife and children to accompany him.
Earlier, Beijing said the blind activist could apply to study abroad - paving the way for a resolution to a tense diplomatic
stand-off with the US.
Mr Chen fled house arrest last month and spent six days in the US embassy.
He left but now says he wants to go to the US with his family.
His case has overshadowed high-level US-China talks taking place in Beijing.
US State Department spokeswoman Victoria Nuland said in a statement that Mr Chen had been offered a fellowship from
an American university - later identified as New York University (NYU).
She said Mr Chen could be accompanied by his wife and children, and that the US expected Beijing to process their
application for travel "expeditiously".
"The United States government would then give visa requests for him and his immediate family priority attention," the
statement added.
US and China close to deal on Chen
Jerome Cohen, an NYU law professor who arranged the fellowship, was quoted as saying by the Associated Press news
agency: "It's a good way out for the Chinese government and our government and for Chen and his family."
Earlier, Xinhua news agency quoted foreign ministry spokesman Liu Weimin as saying: "If he wishes to study overseas,
as a Chinese citizen, he can, like any other Chinese citizens, process relevant procedures with relevant departments
through normal channels in accordance with the law."
Following an annual strategic dialogue between the US and China, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said she was
"encouraged" by the Chinese statement.
"Progress has been made to help him have the future he wants," she told a news conference in Beijing.
 Mrs Clinton also confirmed that the US ambassador in Beijing had spoken to Mr Chen by phone on Friday, and that an
 embassy doctor had been able to visit him.
 Media attack
 The dissident is currently in a Beijing hospital, sealed off by Chinese police.
 Mr Chen spent a week in the US embassy after escaping from house arrest for more than a year-and-a-half. He left the
 embassy on Wednesday after accepting China's assurances of his safety.
 Clinton: "This is... about the human rights and aspirations of a billion people."
 He later said that in view of the threats against his family, he had decided to leave the country.
 He told the Associated Press news agency that his wife was being followed and filmed by unidentified men whenever she
 was allowed to leave the hospital.
 China had earlier demanded an apology from the US for sheltering Mr Chen in its embassy.
 One of China's main official newspapers, the Beijing Daily, accused the dissident of being "a tool and a pawn for
 American politicians to blacken China".
 In another development, the Chinese authorities have told some foreign correspondents covering the Chen story they may
 lose their visas if they breach regulations again.
 The police warning came after the journalists, thought to number about 20, were accused of entering the hospital where
 Mr Chen is being treated without permission.
 Mr Chen, 40, is a lawyer who has campaigned against forced abortions and sterilisations of women under China's policy
 of one child per family.
 The case has increasing political resonance in the US. Republican presidential hopeful Mitt Romney has said that if
 reports that Mr Chen had been persuaded to leave the embassy were true, it was "a day of shame for the Obama
 administration".


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015




The Cable
Chen confidant: No U.S.-China 'agreement' on blind activist's fate
By Josh Rogin
May 4, 2012

There is no firm Chinese government agreement to allow blind Chinese activist Chen Guangcheng leave China
to study in the United States, only two statements by the two governments and hopes that everything will work
out fine, according to Chen's legal mentor and confidant Jerome Cohen.

In a long interview Friday with The Cable, Cohen expressed optimism that the latest twist in the Chen saga,
whereby the Chinese Foreign Ministry issued a statement suggesting that Chen can leave China but doesn't
promise anything, will lead to a salvation for Chen and his family.

"If he wishes to study overseas, as a Chinese citizen, he can, like any other Chinese citizens, process relevant
procedures with relevant departments through normal channels in accordance to the law," Xinhua quoted
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Liu Weimin as saying Friday.

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, in her own remarks, praised the statement.

"We are also encouraged by the official statement issued today by the Chinese government confirming that he
can apply to travel abroad for this purpose. Over the course of the day, progress has been made to help him have
the future that he wants, and we will be staying in touch with him as this process moves forward," she said.

"Now things look brighter," Cohen told The Cable in a Friday afternoon interview, compared with Chen's
situation earlier in the week. "When I saw that this morning, I thought this was great news and it seems to be a
way out."

There may be private understandings between the two governments. But nothing is assured, Cohen said, and the
Chinese government's statement was not the same as a promise, much less a bilateral agreement to do anything
for Chen.

"The first question I asked is: What form will this take? Will this be in writing by the Chinese? At what level?
The form that was contemplated was not that conventional. It was going to more like the Shanghai
communiqué. One side says something and the other side doesn't say anything," Cohen said.

But Cohen was nonetheless upbeat, explaining that in the U.S.-China relationship, having the two sides make
two unilateral statements and then act as if there were an agreement is a time-honored tradition.

"This is the real world and the way nations deal with each other," Cohen said.

Cohen, a law professor at New York University, said that NYU would provide an invitation for Chen to be a
visiting scholar but that reports of a "fellowship" are incorrect, leaving open the question of who will pay for
Chen and his family to live and study in the United States -- if, that is, he is actually allowed to go.

"I run a budget; I know about slender academic resources. I don't have the money to support him and his family
at the moment and I can't commit to that at this point. Hopefully if push comes to shove I could raise it," Cohen
said. "I can't assume he will necessarily come to NYU. It's very likely, but many law schools would likely
welcome him as a guest"

Chen consulted with Cohen directly and often during his six-day stay in the embassy before agreeing to the
terms of the first U.S.-brokered understanding with the Chinese government, under which Chen and his

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015




immediate family would be allowed to live freely in China and Chen would be able to study at a Chinese
university.

Cohen was always skeptical of that deal and had recommended to Chen that he should reject the deal and elect
to stay inside the U.S. embassy indefinitely, he disclosed.

"Neither option was attractive. Though he wanted to stay in China, he was very fearful to make the choice to
accept the arrangement that the U.S. and China had agreed upon," said Cohen. "I said to Chen 'Look, you are in
no position to take this offer. Just tell them you will stay in the embassy and take your chances.'"

On the morning of May 2, Chen had nonetheless decided to take the deal because he had been informed that the
Chinese government, through the Americans, had made it clear if he stayed in the embassy he would not be
reunited with his wife and children.

"Tough pool, there," Cohen said, referring to the Chinese gamesmanship. Cohen also said Chen wanted to
continue his work in China if at all possible. "Only 40 years old, did he want to exile himself from the country
so that he would be ineffectual both in America and in China7"

Cohen told Chen May 2 that the strength of the Chinese assurances rested on the engagement of senior U.S.
official's, namely President Barack Obama and Clinton. If they spoke out about the deal, he believed, the
Chinese government would have to take it seriously.

"Chen said he would go for the deal if Obama would say something about it," Cohen said.

Clinton's statement supporting the deal fulfilled that request, as far as Cohen was concerned, though Obama has
yet to make a statement.

Cohen also said he was cognizant of the fact that the issue was fast becoming a political football in the United
States and that Obama was under pressure to help out Chen.

"I knew Obama would sooner or later have to say something. How was he going to fight a campaign and
respond to attacks by Romney? By sitting in silence?"

Chen also took a call from his wife before leaving the embassy, Cohen said, wherein his wife expressed her
support for the idea of staying in China but did not mention the harassment and abuse she had been subjected to
since Chen's escape.

Based on all of those factors, Chen decided to take the deal.

"Everything's fine, he gets in the car, everything's lovey-dovey. He gets a call from Hillary. He's exhilarated,"
Cohen said. "Then he gets to the hospital and over the next few hours the environment changes drastically.
That's when things took a turn for the worse."

Not only was Chen disoriented and hungry when he first arrived at the hospital, he began receiving phone calls
from activist friends who told him he had make a mistake in taking the deal and that he was a fool to think the
Chinese government would hold up its end of the bargain.

The Americans should have kept somebody there, Cohen said, noting that the place was infested with secret
police, including some of those that escorted Chen's wife and children from their locality.

"His human rights friends start calling him and saying 'Are you crazy, get out of here, they will never fulfill the
terms of this crazy deal,"' Cohen said.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015




Fellow activist Hu Jia's wife called and said "This is terrible, don't accept this," according to Cohen. It was she
whose tweets first alerted the international media to Chen's change of heart.

At that moment, Chen started getting calls from the AP and other media and Chen and his wife decided they
wanted to leave China after all. Unfortunately, some of the statements Chen made to the media made it seem as
though he was criticizing the embassy and that he was coerced to leave the embassy, which wasn't Chen's
intention, according to Cohen.

By the next day, Chen had been reached by more moderate activists, who informed Chen how the impression
abroad was that Chen was criticizing the embassy. Chen then sought to clarify his position, including with a
dramatic call into a congressional hearing, that he was not seeking "asylum" -- only a "rest" in the United States.

The following day, the Chinese Foreign Ministry issued its statement, notably free of any of its previous
condemnations of the United States.

In a Friday background briefing in Beijing, several reporters pressed two senior Obama administration officials
on the lack of concrete, much less written, assurances by the Chinese government that Chen would be allowed
to leave China.

"We are encouraged by the overall process, and we believe that steps will play out expeditiously," one official
said, declining several times to define what timeline "expeditiously" means.

The officials said the United States would quickly approve a student visa application for Chen if one
materialized. But the U.S. officials did not give any sense that the Chinese had committed to approving Chen's
application to leave the country. They did say they agreed with the Chinese that the Chinese government had
held up its side of the original deal.

"Let me just say on that we actually, believe that the Chinese government was following through with the
arrangements and the understandings that were undertaken. But what matters is what Mr. Chen felt and
believed," another official said.

Also left unanswered is the fate of Chen's extended family and those who supported his escape. The officials
said they were aware of it and that they were optimistic it would all be resolved constructively.

"We've had detailed conversations with Chinese interlocutors about concerns of his family, his friends, his
colleagues back in Shandong, and others who have been involved in his pilgrimage to Beijing over the course of
last week," one official said. "We believe that this process will proceed accordingly, and we have high
confidence in its course."

Reuters
By Andrew Quinn and Terri! Yue Jones
BEIJING, May 4 (Reuters) - China said on Friday that blind dissident Chen Guangcheng could apply to study abroad, a
move praised by U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and suggesting an end may be near to a diplomatic standoff
between Beijing and Washington.
But rights activists sounded a note of caution, saying Beijing could move slowly on granting Chen permisson to leave out
of fear that appearing soft might embolden other challengers to Communist Party rule before a power handover late this
year.
An announcement by the Chinese Foreign Ministry followed a dramatic and very public appeal by Chen, who spoke by
phone to a U.S. congressional hearing on his case and asked to be allowed to spend time in the United States after fleeing
19 months of extra-judicial captivity in his home village.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015




"If he wants to study abroad, he can apply through normal channels to the relevant departments in accordance with the
law, just like any other Chinese citizen," ministry spokesman Liu Weimin said in a brief statement, adding that Chen was
still being treated in hospital.
Clinton, in Beijing for strategic and economic talks, said the U.S ambassador to Beijing, Gary Locke, had spoken to Chen
again on Friday when he had confirmed he wanted to go to the United States to study, along with his family.
"Over the course of the day, progress has been made to help him have the future that he wants and we will be staying in
touch with him as this process moves forward," she said.
"This is not just about well-known activists; it's about the human rights and aspirations of more than a billion people here
in China and billions more around the world and it's about the future of this great nation and all nations," Clinton added.
U.S. officials said they now expect American diplomats and doctors to have regular access to Chen, who campaigned
against forced abortions under China's "one-child" policy.
They also said that checks had shown that Chen had three broken bones from his escape, and his foot was put in a cast.
UNIVERSITY FELLOWSHIP
State Department spokeswoman Victoria Nuland said Chen had been offered a fellowship by a U.S. university, where he
can be joined by his wife and two children. Ne w York University said it had invited Chen to be a visiting scholar at its
law school.
Nuland also said Washington expected Beijing to deal quickly with Chen's application to travel abroad. "The United
States government would then give visa requests for him and his immediate family priority attention," she said in a
statement.
While some activists said China could drag its feet on Chen, Bob Fu of the Texas-based advocacy group ChinaAid said in
a statement on Friday that "Chen is so widely popular now, Beijing probably wants him in New York as soon as possible."
The crisis erupted on April 22, after Chen made a dramatic escape from his rural home, where he was effectively under
house arrest, and made his way to Beijing and sought refuge at the U.S. Embassy.
He stayed there for six days until Wednesday when U.S. officials took him to a Beijing hospital after assurances from the
Chinese government that he and his family would receive better treatment and could move out of Shandong province,
where rights activists said they had suffered surveillance and abuse.
But within hours, Chen, 40, had changed his mind, scuppering what had seemed to be a delicately constructed deal
between Chinese and U.S. diplomats to allow him to receive treatment for a broken foot, and be reunited with his wife and
children.
Chen, in translated comments, also told the congressional that villagers who had helped him were "receiving retribution"
and he was most concerned about the safety of his mother and brothers.
"Chen's frail mother remains detained, his brother Chen Guangfu and nephew Chen Kegui will be sentenced, and the
netizens who helped Chen escape, like He "Pearl" Pierong, still face charges," ChinaAid, the main source of information
about Chen while he was at the U.S. Embassy, said in a statement.
The issue cast a shadow over this week's visit to Beijing by Clinton for talks intended to improve ties between the world's
two biggest economies.
Despite the friction, a U.S. official said China would raise foreign ownership limits in domestic joint-venture securities
firms and allow them to trade commodities and financial futures in a move to further liberalise capital markets. Treasury
Secretary Timothy Geithner said China had also made significant reforms to its currency regime, long a bone of
contention.
Clinton told Chinese President Hu Jintao ties were the strongest they had ever been. Nevertheless, Beijing has accused the
United States of meddling in its affairs in the Chen case.
Chinese human rights lawyer Tang Jitian cautioned that the authorities could easily hold up the paperwork to delay Chen's
departure from China. China's security forces might not be as keen as its diplomats for a quick exit.
"How it will play out we don't know. For instance, getting the approval for the paperwork to go, there are many potential
pitfalls," said Tang. "We can't be 100-percent optimistic."
U.S. officials said they did not know when Chen might leave but said they had no reason to believe it would be this
weekend.
STARBUCKS-SIPPING TROUBLEMAKER
The Obama administration has come under criticism for its handling of the matter, particularly from Republicans such as
House Foreign Affairs Chairman Deana Ros-Lehtinen.
"U.S. officials made a mistake by escorting Chen away from the safety of the U.S. embassy and into an uncertain fate,"
she said. "The State Department must press China to carry out its commitments. We cannot assume that this saga has been
resolved."
Congressmen Chris Smith and Frank Wolf, both Republicans, hope to grill senior U.S. officials as soon as next week.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015




Chen himself was attacked by one of China's main official newspapers, which accused him of being a pawn of U.S.
subversion of Communist Party power and described U.S. Ambassador Locke as a backpack-wearing, Starbucks-sipping
troublemaker.
"Chen Guangcheng has become a tool and a pawn for American politicians to blacken China," the Beijing Daily said.
The dissident's village remained under lockdown. Guards chased away two Reuters reporters who attempted to enter the
village on Friday. The four heavy-set guards ran slowly, yelling at the reporters as their car drove away.
The Chen case comes at a tricky time for China, which is engaged in a leadership change. The carefully choreographed
transition has already been knocked out of step by the downfall of ambitious senior Communist Party official Bo Xilai in
a scandal linked to the apparent murder of a British businessman.


The next media summary will be sent after the Sunday Shows, at noon EDT, 2130 Calcutta




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790046 Date: 10/30/2015
