      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790905 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                           RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Monday, February 21, 2011 8:08 AM
To:                                'abedinh@state.gov'
Subject                            Re: Overnight update from dcm in tripoli



Can you call me at home?

    Original Message ---
From: Abedin, Huma [mailto:AbedinH@state.gov]
Sent: Monday, February 21, 2011 08:02 AM
To: H
Subject: Overnight update from dcm in tripoli

They are asking for ordered departure from post at bottom of email fyi.

Tripoli

The security situation deteriorated significantly overnight. It is the Embassy's assessment that Libyan authorities are
losing control of the capital, with a further decline likely tonight.

There were anti-regime protests and violent clashes throughout Tripoli during the night, with heavy gunfire ongoing
from 10 PM until early this morning. A rumor that Libyan leader Muammar al Qadhafi had fled to Venezuela sparked
celebrations throughout the city after midnight, with thousands of Libyans rushing to Green Square; government
security forces then reportedly opened fire in Green Square on the gathered civilians. Two Embassy local employees
were eyewitnesses to this, and claim they saw at least 9 bodies in the aftermath.

Embassy staff have observed several burned police stations throughout the city, as well as the People's Assembly
building (parliament-equivalent) on fire. The Italian Embassy reports that the Interior Ministry was also set on fire
overnight. In parts of the city, omnipresent billboards of Qadhafi have been torn down. Burned out hulks of police cars
are visible on several roads.

State TV broadcast a speech by Qadhafi son Saif al-Islam al Qadhafi late in the evening, in which he noted "Libya is not
Tunis or Egypt," threatened civil war if the violence did not stop, and blamed foreign interference for the protests. His
words were not well-received by most Libyans and it appears that his speech may have further agitated anti-regime
sentiment.

There are press reports that the "HQ's of state TV" have been seized by anti-regime demonstrators. We cannot verify
those reports. The main state TV HQ's (located near the Italian Embassy) appear calm and well-guarded by government
security, according to our Italian colleagues. As of 1 PM, state TV continued to broadcast recorded clips including music,
footage of pro-government demonstrators and repeats of Saif al-Islam's speech.

There are reports of looting at various locations throughout the city, including the compound of a South Korean
construction firm (where 3 Korean citizens were allegedly injured), as well as schools. The cellphone network went
completely down in Tripoli for long periods throughout the night, but is now operational again.

Security checkpoints have been set up throughout the city, with some manned by the "Khatiba," Qadhafi's personal
militia.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790905 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790905 Date: 10/30/2015




Libyan security forces guarding the Embassy remained in place throughout the night, and are currently at their posts.
The Embassy is closed today; only essential staff are on the compound. We will have several staff members remain on-
compound for the next 24 hours to maintain communications with Washington and monitor the situation. EAC has
determined that, given the Embassy's vulnerable security, it is safer for other staff members and EFM's to shelter at
their homes for the rest of the day and overnight tonight.

As of 12 PM, we received unconfirmed reports that an anti-regime protest was headed to Green Square. From the
Embassy compound, we can hear sporadic gunfire.

Benghazi

Based on numerous eyewitness reports, it is the Embassy's assessment that the government no longer controls
Benghazi. This is likely the case for Ajdabiyah as well. Numerous sources in Benghazi report that Libyan Interior Minister
Abdul Fattah Younes has "changed sides" and is "now with the protesters in Benghazi." The mood in Benghazi and
Ajdabiyah is allegedly "celebratory" and all posters of Qadhafi have been knocked down. There are reports of
widespread looting, including from a variety of expatriate companies' compounds outside of Benghazi.

A contact in Benghazi reports that, in protest of Saif al-Islam's speech yesterday, Libyan workers that support operations
at three eastern province oilfields are striking.

Consular:

We have been trying to get 7 Amcits who work for U.S. construction firm AECOM, plus 4 Amcit minors and their two
Libyan parents, onto a UK charter flight out of Benghazi. The. UK Embassy informed us this morning that their sources
report that the Benghazi airport is no longer in government hands, and "no one is operating it." They have thus deemed
it unsafe to fly in to, and are suspending the charter flight. They are exploring alternative options. For the moment, we
are advising the Amcits to shelter in place.
We are receiving numerous calls from Amcits who want to depart Libya, but cannot get seats on flights from Tripoli. The
Embassy has not been able to get tickets for our departing EFM's or personnel for today; earliest availability is
tomorrow, still unsure if we can get flights booked for all tomorrow. As discussed in the call with Ops Center earlier this
morning, we recommend Washington explore the option of a charter flight to Tripoli to evacuate Amcits. We estimate
between 300-600 Amcits would want to avail themselves of such flights.




Depending on the category of Libyan visa they hold, expatriates (including Amcits) are required to obtain exit visas in
order to depart the country. Several Amcits have already raised their need for exit visas with us. We and other
embassies are requesting of the MFA that this requirement be waived for the moment. We have not received any
indication yet that it will be waived, and will likely require senior-level USG intervention with FM Musa Kusa on this
issue.




The American School of Tripoli has decided to close for the next 2 weeks.




We have received reports of two dual American-Libyan nationals being arrested (details sent to CA-OCS-Duty and CA-
OCS-ACS-NESCA). We have attempted to raise their cases with the Assistant Secretary-equivalent at the MFA's Consular
Affairs Department; he has not responded to our multiple phone calls.

Admin:


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790905 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790905 Date: 10/30/2015




Per our separate EAC report cable, the Embassy is requesting to go to ordered departure for EFM's and non-essential
staff. We plan to evacuate 27 EFM's and 8 staff, which would leave us with 19 staff remaining in Tripoli.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790905 Date: 10/30/2015
