      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785910 Date: 10/30/2015

                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                    B6




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Friday, March 11, 2011 2:00 PM
To:                                Huma Abedin
Subject:                           Fw: two more thoughts on Libya before I head to Liberia/Sierra Leone with the Women's
                                   Tech Del



PIs print.


From: Anne-Marie Slaughter [mailto:
Sent: Saturday, February 26, 2011 07:30 AM
To: H
Cc: Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>; Sullivan, Jacob 3 <SullivanJJ@state.gov>; Mills, Cheryl D
<MillsCD@state.gov>
Subject: two more thoughts on Libya before I head to Liberia/Sierra Leone with the Women's Tech Del

The flurry of activity yesterday was great. But just two additional thoughts. First, as I wrote before, we have to see this
not just as responding to obligation or outside pressure, but as an actual opportunity to impress the young people across
the middle east whom you said at Doha are the majority of the population. If we think about this in moral terms, we will
be much more cautious, thinking about precedent and legalities. But if we think about it in strategic terms, as a chance,
in Mark Malloch Brown's terms yesterday in the FT, to "detoxify America's brand in the Middle East," then we should be
willing to contemplate bolder policy steps. This is a moment we can seize. Second, and relatedly, we are doing lots of
things to try to increase the pressure on Gaddafi. But that is not quite the same thing as doing things that will be actively
felt as support by the protesters in the streets. Think of how many cases there are where prisoners, oppressed
minorities, women etc. have told us how important a speech or affirmation of support by the U.S. is. Old-fashioned
moral support can go a long way for people who are putting their lives on the line. To that end, UN resolutions and
sanctions may have less impact than public statements. Fareed Zakaria suggested on CNN yesterday that POTUS call for
Gaddafi's resignation. I would go with that and with a more public statement that Gaddafi has forfeited his legitimacy as
a leader by violating the responsibility to protect; that we are with the protesters, that we admire their courage and
their spirit, etc. Something that can be tweeted from person to person.

All best,
AM




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785910 Date: 10/30/2015
