      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784995 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                               Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                               Wednesday, December 7, 2011 2:03 PM
To:
Subject:                            Fw: LGBT Activists from Around the World React to Secretary Clinton's Speech



Fyi


From: Baer, Daniel B
Sent: Wednesday, December 07, 2011 01:37 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob]; Posner, Michael H; Nuland, Victoria 3; Zareski, Karen B
Subject: Fw: LGBT Activists from Around the World React to Secretary Clinton's Speech

Good quotes.


From: The Council for Global Equality [mailto:i
Sent: Wednesday, December 07, 2011 01:16 PM
To: Baer, Daniel B
Subject: LGBT Activists from Around the World React to Secretary Clinton's Speech

           Having trouble viewing this email? Click here

               13C113131:113
             LGBT Activists from Around the World React to Secretary
             Clinton's Speech



               In Photo (right to left): Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Alice N'kom (Cameroon),
            Anastasia Danilova (Moldova), Sanja Juras (Croatia), Adrian Jjuuko (Uganda), Sass Sasot
            (Philippines), Polina Savchenko (Russia), Vladimir Simenko (Lithuania), Arvind Narrain
            (India), Zoryan Kis (Ukraine), Santiago Eder (Colombia), N'dumie Funda (South.Africa),
                      Pouline Kimani (Kenya), and Rev. MacDonald Sembereka (Malawi).


               December 9, 2011 - For this historic moment in the LGBT movement,
               the Council for Global Equality was privileged to bring 14 prominent
               LGBT activists from around the world to Geneva to be present for
               Secretary Clinton's Human Rights Day speech. The Council applauds
               both Secretary Clinton for the pitch-perfect speech as well as President
               Obama for yesterday's vital Presidential Memorandum addressing the
               human rights of LGBT people worldwide.

               Reactions from LGBT human rights defenders from around the world who were on
               hand to witness the speech included these:




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784995 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784995 Date: 10/30/2015




       Arvind Narrain from the Lawyers Collective in India: "The Secretary made a
       passionate case for LGBT rights as gay rights while being very culturally sensitive.
       The generosity of mentioning the gains in South Africa, Brazil, India, and Nepal
       conveyed a wider sense of ownership of these issues."

       Sass Rogando Sasot from Society of Transsexual Women of the Philiipines: "The
       sincerity and courage of Secretary Clinton is an invitation for us to make the dignity
       of our common humanity the center and goal of our politics. Her speech is another
       step towards a world that's more inclusive, fair, and compassionate."

       Polina Savchenko from the Russian LGBT Network: "Secretary Clinton's point about
       'honest discussion' is particularly important for Russia because we suffer from
       extreme ignorance. Discussion is shut down in our country. Her message about
       decriminalization was also very important in our country right now."

       Santiago Eder from Colombia Diversa: "It was extremely important that the
       Secretary of State of the United States of America introduced the concept that 'gay
       rights are human rights and human rights are gay rights.' It was a very symbolic and
       historic moment for the gay liberation movement."

       Pauline Kimani of the Gay and Lesbian Coalition of Kenya: "I really appreciated the
       speech. I loved the introspective parts and believe that the consultative process with
       these activists on the ground that was started today will continue for a lifetime'

       Adrian Jjuuko, Civil Society Coalition on Human Rights and Constitutional Law,
       Uganda: "It was a very powerful speech - which very relevant in the context of
       Uganda. Coming from the stature of HC, it amplifies our voices for equality much
       much further. I'm sure its impact will be felt for years to come.

        Rev. MacDonald Sembereka of the Malawi Network of Religious Leaders Living
        with HIV/AIDS: "First and foremost, thank you Hillary Clinton and the U.S.
        government for starting a global discussion like never was done before. To me this
        has been a speech that touched all aspects of a discussion that we need to have
        globally. She covered all the pros and cons - and now the global discussion begins.
        I hope that the rest of the world takes it up."

        Anastasia Danilova of Gender DOC-Moldova: "It was very important speech for
        Moldova because we have no political will or support in our country for the human
        rights of LGBT people. That is why it is so important to have the high level of Hillary
        Clinton's support for LGBT rights and freedoms. Personally, it was very empowering
        for her to talk about the importance of us - the LGBT activists."

        Alice N'kom of ADEFHO, Cameroon: "I am so honored and privileged to be a part of
        this historical message. As a defender of women's human rights, it felt like it did
        after the Beijing conference on women -- the Secretary had the same impact on
        LGBT human rights today as she did with women's rights in Beijing. This makes our
        struggle a success. We will win, as we won in Beijing. And I hope my country and I
        will be a part of this side of history."

        Sanja Juras of Kontra, Croatia: "It was certainly a very important speech and crucial
        that such a high official sent the message that LGBT rights are human rights. This
        makes a difference for people all over the world. For us in Croatia, the mention of


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784995 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784995 Date: 10/30/2015




        freedom of assembly was very important, since these rights are violated, as during
        gay pride demonstrations this year."

        Zoryan Kis of Fulcrum, Ukraine: "It was very exciting to really witness the history
        that Secretary Clinton said we are on the right side of. For the Ukrainian LGBT
        community the message that 'we are not alone' was so important to hear. The other
        message about the evolution of opinions and how Clinton's own understanding has
        developed was really helpful to our work. We cannot persuade people through
        accusations, but we have to work to help our society understand and accept LGBT
        rights."

        J-FLAG Representative, Jamaica: "I was so honored to be a part of this moment in
        history. The central thing that stuck out for me is that progress begins with honest
        conversation. That is key for us at home in Jamaica to begin more rational, honest
        conversations about the rights of our people, including LGBT."

        Vladimir Simenko of the Lithuanian Gay League: "Personally, as an human rights
        watchdog for two decades, I sometimes feel frustrated. But when I heard Hillary
        Clinton say that we have friends and partners abroad, I really felt that we are not
        alone. I truly feel motivated and inspired. We will use this message for our struggle -
        and hope that our government does too."

        Council for Global Equality
        1220 L Street, NW
        Washington, District of Columbia 20005-4018

        202-719-0511




                             0

  Forward email

                                                                                                  0
  This email was sent to baerdb@state.gov by                          lI
  Update Profile/Email Address I Instant removal with SafeUnsubscribeTM I Privacy Policy.
  Council for Global Equality 11220 L Street, NW I Suite 100-450 I Washington I DC I 20005-4018




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784995 Date: 10/30/2015
