        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787817 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                             Friday, January 6, 2012 4:56 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Latest Egypt vote brings Islamists closer to win (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Friday, January 06, 2012 04:22 PM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Subject: Latest Egypt vote brings Islamists closer to win (Reuters)

CAIRO (Reuters) - The Muslim Brotherhood won more than a third of the votes in the last stage of elections for
Egypt's lower house of parliament, according to partial results on Friday, showing the Islamists are set to
dominate the legislature.

  Banned under deposed President Hosni Mubarak, the Brotherhood has emerged as a major winner from the
uprising that toppled him, exploiting a well-organised support base in the first free legislative vote in decades.

   The Brotherhood's party list won 37.5 percent of the vote in the third and final stage of voting. Repeating a
pattern seen in previous rounds, the hardline Islamist Notu. Party list came second in most of the districts after
this week's vote, results on its party website showed.

   The Islamists now look set to wield major influence over the shape of a new constitution to be drafted by a
100-strong body that the new legislature will pick, though the Brotherhood has promised that Egyptians of all
persuasions will have a say.

   "We are happy with the results and are also happy that there are 15 or 16 parties in the parliament so far,"
Essam al-Erian, deputy head of the Brotherhood's Freedom and Justice Party, told Reuters.

  "This means all voices will be heard in the parliament," he said, speaking at a party rally which drew
hundreds of supporters to a working class district of Cairo.

  "Together we make the future of Egypt," declared a banner at the rally, held in a tent decked out with
Egyptian and party flags. Freedom and Justice Party songs blasted out over loudspeakers.

   Though the success of the Brotherhood and Nour Party has alarmed some Egyptians and the Western
governments which backed Mubarak, it is unclear to what extent the rival Islamists will cooperate or compete in
the new legislature.

  The Nour Party seeks a strict application of Islamic law and some analysts believe the more moderate
Brotherhood may seek an alliance with liberal groups to allay concerns about the prospect of an Islamist-led
Egypt.

    For now, the military generals who assumed Mubarak's powers last February will stay in power. They are set
to rule until the end of June, by which time they say the country will have a new elected president to whom they
will hand power.

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787817 Date: 10/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787817 Date: 10/30/2015




    MORE VOTING TO COME

   Official results of the voting held this week are due on Saturday, but it will take longer before the exact
shape of the 498-seat lower house is known.

   There are run-offs for seats being contested by individuals in the latest round which will be held on Jan. 10
and 11. And voting must also be held again in a district where the election was cancelled due to irregularities in
the first round.

    According to a complex electoral system, a third of the seats are reserved for individuals. The other two
thirds will be distributed among the lists on a proportional representation basis.

   As well as contesting the lists, both the Freedom and Justice Party and the Nour Party have fielded
candidates for the individual seats. Polls for the upper house of parliament will follow later this month and
conclude in February.

   With the elections for the lower house drawing to a close, debate is now likely to focus on the new
constitution that will take the place of the one that kept Mubarak in power for three decades.

  One main area of discussion will be whether there should be a dilution of presidential powers which
underpinned his rule.

  Those powers are now exercised by the ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, which has faced
mounting criticism from activists who accuse it of seeking to hold on to power and privilege.

    The military council decided on Jan. 1 to accelerate the timetable for the elections, an apparent response to
street protests demanding a faster end to army rule.

   The council has said that Kamal al-Ganzouri, appointed prime minister in November, will stay in his post
after the legislative election. But some analysts believe the emergence of a new legislature with a popular
mandate could force changes in cabinet.

   Erian said the new parliament would make demands of the Ganzouri government, but without saying what
they might be. "There is no excuse for provoking any conflict in this country because we are on a threshold of a
new period," he said.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787817 Date: 10/30/2015
