      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788171 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                          RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Thursday, February 9, 2012 12:45 PM
To:
Subject:                          FW: KXL -Sanders + Cohen first to put out statements on the Hill




From: Hammer, Michael A
Sent: Thursday, February 09, 2012 12:33 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Klevorick, Caitlin B; Blumenfeld, Joshua R; Adams, David S; Jones, Kerri-Ann; Clune, Daniel A; Benes,
Keith
Subject: KXL -Sanders + Cohen first to put out statements on the Hill

The press stories so far are real solid (will forward a couple more in a sec), but Sen Sanders and Rep Cohen have both
issued statements portraying the report as finding "flaws" or "raising serious concerns" about our KXL review. Perhaps
to be expected given they called for this investigation.

Visit Senator Sanders' Online Resources:
Website    I Facebook 'Twitter I You Tube I Bernie Buzz


            sr.vvroR BERNIE SANDERS
            UnitedState0030040Val**                                         Scutil'e4.400.
             State Department IG Finds Flaws in Pipeline Review

        WASHINGTON, Feb. 9 — A special internal review by the State Department
        inspector general faulted aspects of the department's handling of a proposal to build
        a crude oil pipeline from Canada to the Gulf of Mexico.

        Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) and Rep. Steve Cohen (D-Tenn.) last Nov. 7 asked
        Howard W. Geisel, the acting inspector general, to examine apparent conflicts of
        interest in the department's handling of an environmental impact statement.

        "The findings confirm once again why the project should not be rubber stamped
        for approval, despite efforts by Republicans in Congress to do just that," said
        Sanders.

        "The more we learn, the less merit there is to this project," Sanders added. "For
        those of us who are concerned about the consequences of global warming and the
        need to cut greenhouse gas emissions, the idea of producing oil that emits 82
        percent more carbon pollution than conventional oil is indefensible. We have better
        options for the American people that do not jeopardize the future of our country
        and our planet. These include increasing fuel efficiency standards for our cars and
        trucks, a step which would cut pollution and save up to three times as much oil as
        Keystone XL could ever deliver."



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788171 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788171 Date: 10/30/2015




      The State Department inspector general's inquiry focused on the department's use
      of Cardno Entrix to perform an environmental impact statement for the department.
      The same firm had extensive ties to TransCanada, the Keystone XL pipeline
      developer.

      Despite acknowledging that the developer influenced the selection of the firm that
      studied the environmental impact of the project, the inspector general concluded
      that the relationship between the two companies was not technically a conflict of
      interest. The inspector generally recommended and the State Department agreed to
      change its contractor selection process in the future.

      The report criticized the department for failing "to perform any independent
      inquiry to verify Cardno Entrix's organizational conflict of interest statements,"
      according to the inspector general. Moreover, the report added, the State
      Department did not, as required, ask TransCanada to view and certify Cardno
      Entrix's organizational conflict of interest statements.

      In another key finding, the inspector general said the State Department's "limited
      technical resources expertise and experience" limited the government's
      environmental review process. The officers in charge of the review, according to
      the report, had "little or no" experience with environmental law "and had to seek
      training and learn quickly on the job."

      In addition, the report said the State Department did not adequately weigh concerns
      by the Department of Energy and the Environmental Protection Agency about the
      proposed route of the 1,700 million pipeline project.

      The State Department had authority to determine whether the pipeline would be in
      the national interest because it would have crossed an international border.

      Since the in-house State Department review was launched, President Obama on
      Jan. 18 rejected the 1,700-mile pipeline project, saying it could not be adequately
      reviewed within a 60-day deadline set by Congress. Republicans in Congress,
      however, have continued to press for legislation that would authorize the pipeline.

      To read the inspector general's report, click here.

      Contact: Michael Briggs (202) 224-5141




http://cohen.house.gov/press-release/cohen-inspector-general-report-keystone-xl-pipeline-
raises-serious-concerns-about

Rep. Cohen's press release:

Cohen: Inspector General. Report on Keystone XL Pipeline Raises Serious
Concerns About Permit Process
Feb 9, 2012


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788171 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788171 Date: 10/30/2015




WASHINGTON, D.C. — Congressman Steve Cohen (D-TN-9) today said the State Department's Office of
Inspector General report on the Keystone XL Pipeline — the "Special Review of the Keystone XL Pipeline
Permit Process" — raises serious questions about the real impacts of the controversial $7-billion
pipeline. The objective of the report — which was requested by Congressman Cohen, Sen. Bernie Sanders
(I-VT), and 12 other Members of Congress -- was to determine to what extent the Department complied
with federal laws and regulations relating to the Keystone XL oil pipeline Presidential permit process.

"For the last two years, I have worked with the State Department to ensure that their review of
Keystone XL was thorough and based on sound science," said Congressman Cohen. "In his
investigation Deputy Inspector General Geisel finds that the State Department's limited technical
resources, expertise, and experience impacted the quality of State's years-long review of the
project. Nowhere was this failure more apparent than State's inadequate consideration of
alternative routes for the pipeline. This report undermines the integrity of the project's review and
underscores the point that the pipeline should not be approved based on a shoddy, unscientific
review."

Congressman Cohen was the only member of Congress to attend an anti-Keystone XL Pipeline rally
outside the White House last year. He has been leading Congressional advocates in calling upon the
State Department to ensure that the Keystone XL Pipeline is safe and will not pose a threat to life,
property, and the environment. In June 2011, he spearheaded a letter citing concerns about the
controversial Keystone XL Pipeline. The letter was addressed to U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Lisa Jackson and was signed by more than 30
members of the U.S House of Representatives. This letter was a follow-up to another Congressional letter
that urged the State Department to conduct a Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement — a review of
the total safety and environmental impacts of the proposed project.

                                                  *IN




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788171 Date: 10/30/2015
