    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788295 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                         B5



From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Wednesday, January 25, 2012 10:52 AM
To:                                H
Subject:                           FW: Fareed Zakaria, "Obama's World - An Exclusive Interview with the President"




"The pivot to Asia has been highly effective, taking advantage of China's belligerence. But the Administration must now
work to build an affirmative vision of an Asia that is not banded together against China but rather is open, diverse and
plural. The real challenge is to convince China that it benefits from the stability, rules and prosperity that such a vision
would produce (just as Germany benefited from a peaceful and prosperous Europe with it at the center) and to
persuade the Chinese that they are better off with such an Asia than one characterized by geopolitical competition. So
far, Washington's relations with China have not reached the level of serious strategic dialogue that will be necessary to
achieve any true global cooperation in the years ahead. Going forward, U.S. security and prosperity depends on a
productive relationship with China more than with any other country.

The challenge with China is the challenge with other great powers-and with Obama's foreign policy in general. It is
worthwhile to have good relations with countries. But it is crucial to have good relations in the service of a broader
vision of a world that is characterized by increasing levels of openness, economic interdependence, international
cooperation, peace, prosperity and liberty. Over the past 60 years, the U.S. has helped build an international order
characterized by institutions, policies, norms and best practices. The hundreds of organizations that help coordinate
countries' policies on everything from trade to disease prevention to environmental protection are all new creatures in
international life, and they have created a world of greater peace and prosperity than humans have even known. But
this world needs shoring up as new nations rise to power. The challenge for the U.S. is to make a stable structure for the
world that all the newly emerging powers can buy into and uphold. That means revitalizing global trade, pushing
through on a nuclear-nonproliferation agenda, working to integrate the emerging powers and, perhaps crucially,
articulating a vision of this world.

Henry Kissinger once said that the test for a statesman was to find the place between stagnation and overextension.
Good tactics alone would leave you reacting to events and stagnant in the stream of history. Too vast a vision would
leave you overextended, exhausted and inviting adversaries. Barack Obama is already pointed in the right direction on
foreign policy. The challenge for him is to find the sweet spot."




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788295 Date: 10/30/2015
