      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787302 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                       B6


From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Sunday, October 9, 2011 12:04 PM
To:                                'ntanden                                                                              B6
Subject:                           Re: Your speech at CAP



Neera--I'm looking forward to being there and seeing you. I think we are lashed up on topic and presentation. So, til
then, H

    Original Message
From: Neera Tanden [mailto:ntanden
Sent: Sunday, October 02, 2011 08:54 PM
To: H
Subject: Your speech at CAP

Hillary,

Thank you so much again for agreeing to do this speech. The conference is really shaping up.

Obviously, we're pretty amenable to any topic you want to discuss. But I just wanted to send to you more specifics on
themes for the conference.

As I wrote you before, we are trying to capture the ideas that animate American exceptionalism as quintessentially
progressive ideas. And make the case that the values that underlie the progress the country has made are fundamentally
progressive values. So for example, we believe that what is particularly American is the idea that a strong vibrant
middle-class is the heart of growth. And that concept is an important one for our country, but also for the world. As
such the conference will have panels on innovation, the Constitution, and economic growth all before your remarks (I've
sent the agenda to Lona). After your remarks we'll have panels on public lands and superheroes (I know, I know, we're
trying to capture American iconography as well).

The panel on the middle class and growth will directly precede your speech. I remember on your Asia trip you discussing
the American economy and its connection to our foreign policy goals. We thought that focus would be particularly
helpful: on how the American economy's greatest attribute has always been the idea that growth is shared widely, that
it is indeed a strong middle class that forms the basis of America's economic might. That sense that anyone can make it
in our economy inspires other nation's best and brightest to come here. And it is that sense of shared economic growth
that animates the understanding of America's might in the world. That's why sustaining that economic strength - that is
different from other countries in that growth is broadly shared - is not just critical to our competitiveness, but also help
with our foreign policy challenges. In the conference, we're trying to subtly focus on how shared growth - through a
strong middle class - has been a progressive value.

Anyway, I just wanted to send those thoughts across in case it's helpful.

We're honored to have you and I look forward to seeing you on the 12th!

Neera




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787302 Date: 10/30/2015
