      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767596 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                    B5,B6



From:                               McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sent:                               Saturday, January 9, 2010 8:32 AM
To:
Cc:                                 Mills, Cheryl D
Subject                             RE: Happy New Year!



Hillary:

So sorry but I did not get the earlier email. Not sure why but this is the second time that has happened. I'll have
someone look into it on Monday.

The meetings in Tampa went well. I got a message Thursday night while I was heading down there that Adm. Olson also
wanted to meet so I met with him before the CENTCOM meeting. I ran through the new strategy with him and he is very
supportive of our new approach. He again said he wants to find a way to transition some of this activity to State. He said
he had tried to do this before but was unable to find a way to easily transfer the funds (there isn't one) and he was
concerned about our ability to handle the activity. I believe he now feels we can do the latter and we agreed to work
together to formally assess the situation and see what, if anything we can transfer. We both agreed that this has to be
done in a collaborative way and that we would have to go to Capital Hill together. I told him I hope to meet with
Michelle Flournoy and her team next week to present the new strategy and propose a framework for moving the
State/DoD conversation forward. Olson and I are scheduled to meet again in DC January 19.

After meeting with Olson I had a series of briefings at CENTCOM. Frankly, their activities are far more extensive that I
had at first assumed. Some of their initiatives are highly problematic and, indeed, somewhat troubling. Unfortunately
the agenda was so packed I did not have a lot of time to dig down too deeply or ask too many questions. I attended
Petraeus' daily briefing (interesting process!) and then met with him and some of his staff for about and hour and a half
which included lunch. I presented the new strategy to him and I could sense he was initially somewhat skeptical about
our ability to execute the plan. However, the more we spoke the more comfortable he got. By the end of our discussions
he said he wanted me come back to Tampa and also make a trip to Baghdad so I could really see all they are doing. He
directed his staff to arrange trips for me and to be sure I got the opportunity to "see behind the curtain with nothing
held back". We will work to get this scheduled as soon as possible.

He and I did not discuss transition in the way I did with Olson. I have no doubt he will be initially resistant to any shift in
responsibility at this point and it is critically important that I continue to build a personal relationship with him before
we broach that subject. At this point my strategy is to continue to emphasize that we need to share information and
develop ways to support each other's programs to maximize the impact of all USG initiatives in this critical area. I think if
we move too soon they will shut down and there is no way I'll be allowed behind that curtain. You will no doubt be
amused to know he and I have bonded over our love of the Hudson River, having both grown up along its banks ( and
yes, I promise to have you over to the house soon!!!!)




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767596 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767596 Date: 10/30/2015




In response your earlier email, the Ben Franklin Awards are for private sector enterprises which develop and implement
innovative programs which advance public diplomacy. It was launched fairly recently (not exactly sure when) but is very
much in line with our goals of expanding private sector engagement.

I have met several times with Cynthia Schneider and she has been very helpful on a number of fronts, particularly with
Pakistan. I expect we will do much more with her when Ann is in place.


                                                                            am in the process of rolling it out to the
Department leadership and H is developing a plan for taking it to key members on the Hill. I expect that it will begin to
make its way into the blogs shortly so we are also working with PJ on a public rollout. I'll keep and Cheryl in the loop on
those plans as they move forward.

I have asked for time on your schedule to give you a fuller briefing on the CENTCOM meeting and provide you with more
information about some of their programs. If I don't see you before you head off, hope the trip goes well.



1M

    Original Message----
From: H Emailto:HDR22@clintonemail.connj
Sent: Saturday, January 09, 2010 7:20 AM
To: McHale, Judith A
Cc: H; 'cheryl.mills
Subject: Fw: Happy New Year!

Judith--Did you ever receive the email below? There were a few questions I wanted to bring to your attention.

How was your mtg w Petraus? I'd love to get a readout before I leave for 10 days on Monday. Thx, H

     Original Message ---
From: H
To: urnchaleja@state.govi <mchaleja@state.gov>
Sent: Sun Jan 03 18:40:06 2010
Subject: Happy New Year!

Judith--

 Happy New Year to you and your family and thank you for making this journey w me. I'm looking forward to the work
ahead in 2010.

 A few odds and ends--

  Have you heard of the Ben Franklin awards for public diplomacy? I saw a reference to them and don't know what they
are.

 Have you connected w Georgetown Prof and former Amb Cynthia Schneider? She has written and worked on cultural
engagement in the Muslim world and wants to help.

                                                                                                                     f so,
when would you be ready to do it?

 All the best--H

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767596 Date: 10/30/2015
