UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                                            RELEASE IN FULL




                                                     •••.1   r4.:
                                          ;?.."2                 ,A
                                                                                                     nth:74 e

                    ;•   A




             A Stratezy fir S\"Aia                            1--lo\-,z to tiria
             the Asaci Tpictators'r-Lio While Resa.iring Nonviolence to the
                                     Syran. Re        n



              Thibli            Janc                                                 Hodgcs,                    n-1":71,
                   Sj7,',1C D !WW1, Sh a rh.,i13 e CI al-2iee;-n...1ohn              S.1., Yong -1'.ardi,


                                                                                STA KES


             The ions role of the A sad ch, mist y over          peopl,;f is fort-two vcars old. Jr begat;
             in 1970 when then Defense           nis:er       ai-Asad carried t:d.lt a bloods cot in
             his own ;:Arty colitagocs and appointed a imself presidcnt, Hafez, the fanaila pazniatch
             and dic7ator for iife, killed or t.,3..ilect cOmpanions he perceived as his rivals; supf)orted
             kriolent extremism 'a enssve; he found it useful, and plundered Soda's riches \vhile
             arresting and to1::1 ng ens' u:sseriter„ Over two generations of P'...ads, a brutal
             trovernmenr its Dar—,scus has been the main Micieasr ally of an increasinlyiv



                 Ti-te authors wish io thank Paul .Kahn, Er terd MO-Cti= r, Email Shaker, sarI Anne-Marie
             Slaughter. \,Ve are ,grarefui for the1r arse spent looking (wet this piece and their heipOl
             criticisms .;ind                     strengthened it. Of cc,urse, ail the views expressed herein err
             those of the a Iji::i1OTS.




                                                   2012 the
                                                        tv P:iei.-iident   Fellows of Ha rvard College.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015




               2012 / A Strategy for Syria Under International Law                                 145


              Iran. Bashar al-Asad, the son, has acted as the chief facilitator for Sunni extremist
              killers in Iraq over the past ten years. In Lebanon, Asad's father and son have
              wrought havoc since 1975, killing in turn Palestinians, Muslim Lebanese, Christian
              Lebanese, and whoever dared help the return of stability to a country torn asunder.
              They assassinated the most prominent Lebanese leaders who stood in their way,
              including Kamal Jumblat in 1977, Bashir Gemayel in 1982, and in all likelihood Rafik
              Hariri in 2005. Operatives of self-proclaimed "Loyal to Asad's Syria" Hizbullah are
              now under indictment before the Special Tribunal of Lebanon for Hariri's murder,
              and scores of journalists and politicians along with hundreds of other innocent people
              have been assassinated, "disappeared," or randomly killed.

              Most tragically, the Asads never hesitated to commit mass murder against the Syrians.
              Hama's historic center was leveled to the ground in 1982, and the relentless siege,
              bombardment, and mass killing continues to this day a pattern of ruthless governance
              across the country, with Homs the latest victim.

              Both the future of the Middle East and the success of the formidable nonviolent mass
              movement in Tunisia, Egypt, Bahrain, and Yemen depend on what happens next in
              Damascus. If the dictatorship survives, if its main pillars are not brought to justice on
              the way to a democratic transition, Asad's continued rule will doom domestic and
              international peace in the region and beyond. Why? Because the nonviolent
              movement will find it hard to recover from this blow. Asad's regime itself will have
              its own noxious effect on peace. Yet more deeply, more world-historically, it will be
              harder—much harder—to argue to any brave young man or woman cleaving to
              nonviolence that this path, although potentially bloody in sacrifice, is the right form
              of resistance to tyranny.

              Our joint reflection seeks to bring recognition to the unparalleled bravery and
              sustained nonviolent resistance of Syria's revolution and to provide concrete political
              means to help end the forty-two year long reign of death and fear. Drawing on the
              appropriate tools of international law and the strength of Syrian revolution, the ends
              and the means of the strategy proposed must remain worthy of the sacrifice of Syria's
              thousands of nonviolent demonstrators.


                             II. A CLEAR OBJECTIVE: ENDING THE DICTATORSHIP

              The objective is clear and has been defined by the year-long revolution. Left in place,
              the system formed around Bashar al-Asad, his notorious brothers, and the circles
              around them will continue to murder Syrians they dislike, while gradually causing their
              opponents to become like them, and sending a signal to the diminishing dictatorships
              in the world that the way to win is to shoot nonviolent protesters and cling to power
              at all costs.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015




              1 46                                                                                                        tr io/. 5.3



              ;=■_sacl anci his accomplices must be removed from. power ',113(1 brought. to 't.',stiee.
              Nothing lesstil do. As the coutittys death toll 'nears the i000n mark and many
              -more Syrians lamtuish in prison,. the pert iously dominant nonviolent character of :the
               re yoluticin i    loy,-1y ii;ivinit- way tf.:,        revota,tionaries---civilians or defect:v'
              soldiers--taking tip arms against. one of the best honed repressive machines in the.
              world. On their own, the                     protesters do nor stai)ci a ch2IFICrz:.


                        Pip‘VER       NONVIOL.E1,:1i. RECOGNIZED ANF.: i.31-A.:?.,RD1'.1-): -THE
                                                              DI.P1.0:■1ACY

              Mon.: difficult chin) elarif,Fin.):riseobiiective of the revoiuti,:n                  the' ii:eatis to achieve It.
                 tent we propose a. 11CV, nteana: militant elipic.nlacv.
              ir-s()r


              The means of militant (-I:von:la:e demand                and Foternoat toe proactiv,' rec.:so:hi:non:
               of the S.:1 C3'1fICC:,, tria::ie by Syrian resnolutionarN" ,i,..)17P:10tti.:110.:. The West has nor
               aufficiently iv)ticed the demo and streniilir,h of the norn7lioient movement actoss
              -Middle East. Itiar 17,()V,tiTt00l' has         1:00 CS 111' Gandhi, the ktacv01:- the ciyii
               ITI0Veill(":;1: in the 1.init:i States, and the examples of Ear-tem Elort.a„),:.- iii 1 919 and
                 rbia.II2Cifil1.1. it had a iiiienesis of its     in the J.,clininese Cedar Revo;utiii:,n
               06 and the Iranian Green                        :1009.

                      treh S:33:;,-a*;      7011                        ham(' from. 'he                       Spirini.t of
              'which ilo,rislied briciily in Damascus un-til Bashar                            yirchiessk, r.estrover: it be
              sencline                 to ciisri.i.Dt ,.;:::CU.S.:(:r theetinii;s in hornes----i-ri,ist              the orrtin
              cliab”--beatin?' up its leaden- end throwirG them in ;ail.                           CE1.                     201
              huhair tasi ioined ()their oelt111 wotlicr, iitatl'ieted in; silence befc)
              Interior in the ;place: at herb ii to protest the clisaphearance A theirson:, fatheta, and
              husbands.. she was                       by her 1-tail: 005011l                                           01(1
              vo'n.:•.2; women wore bc0u20, insuitea and fltr:::SI'Cd. f i:11r s; Hr.: Followed the First
               recorded street demonstration. 10 Old Damascu'is                                         district the OreHOU.S
              d'aV.                  the soufb;-...1:0 city of D0 eta 51505 bCuil OIO.00O 0711,"                             C>i.-- a
              dozen of its children for scribbling the sioc,ans of the Eyptian a:volt' don on the
                          erect erupted on Marcili IS in a masi.i0e non vio11.17;r r::bclijon that oriiil
              spot-Italie:Gush: and massivelii- and which continue:, to date. :is.                         Hama and Homa,
              .Asad's ranks were sent in to cinell peaceful protesta. And as in 1.-Iarni'i and .FIonis, the
               moment the tanks .disappcar, Deraa tud 1 be instantly !reclaimed i")";, its people. tIoppo
              and I) 11011005 2`.:C. 110 dif.f.etct. Remove the aliiparaius (if tcp.rff:ssi,.-)11, atld
              be celebtatin ti the street their reclaimed coon

              ::•1otiv1o1e0ce as belic,.f and practice—ecrtocC; In couatty aftet money in the words
                ricacefullv, peacclifili,"---bas had e.,itta.ordinary traction. Responsible in large parr fur
              the rz. moval of Born: d ubayak and Line El :iiibidine Ben i \di in code 201                the
              nonviolence movement has travelled from the l!,,Ed:11,,! East to               Undkfllaile the
              Buyrnesc military dictatorship and the African presidents-for-life and has reached into




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015




              2012 / A Strategy for Syria Under International Law                                    147



              the heart of Russia and China's authoritarian systems, not to mention, in a very
              different context, the Occupy Wall Street protests in the United States. Only eleven
              countries voted against the resolution condemning Syria's government passed by the
              U.N. General Assembly on February 16, 2012, a vote that followed the veto of Putin's
              Russia and the Communist Party's China in the Security Council. In the General
              Assembly, Russia and China led the list of Asad's friends and supporters—let us call
              them Friends of the Asads (FA). The Russian and Chinese governments were
              unsurprisingly joined by the most brutal governments on earth: Iran, Zimbabwe,
              North Korea, Cuba, and Belarus. These FA countries, their despots terrified by the
              possible precedent that may soon haunt them, are next in line in the worldwide sweep
              of the nonviolent revolution's march.

              This is why the global future, and not only the future of the Middle East, is being
              decided in Syria. Thousands of Syrians have walked into the jaws of death, trusting
              that their acts would bring about the basic rights and governance they deserve.
              Meanwhile, a bloody regime gloats and persists, putting the lie to nonviolence not
              only in Syria but in each land that takes the evil lesson from its course: nonviolence
              will fail when repression rules. Since the first nonviolent protests of the women of the
              place of Marja and the children of Deraa in mid-March 2011 and the unimaginable
              violence rained on them by the Asad government, the world has been derelict in its
              duty to protect Syria's nonviolent heroes. It is beyond the time to act.

              What Support Can Be Given Internationally to the Nonviolent Protestors?

              Given the continued veto by Russia and China of any meaningful resolution in the
              Security Council, other sources of legitimacy must be sought. The Friends of Syria
              (FS) will defeat the few dictatorships in the FA camp by a comprehensive counter-
              strategy—one adumbrated in their first meeting in Tunis at the end of February 2012,
              but which is in need of better articulation.

                       On the diplomatic front, FS governments can act individually and collectively in a
              dual pincer strategy. The general principle is simple: delegitimize the Asad
              government institutionally, while legitimizing the nonviolent opposition through
              international recognition.

             The relatively new Syrian National Council (SNC) has significant claims on such
             recognition. It has created an ever-closer process of consultation with the many
             groups in Syria, growing as a body in legitimacy as Syria's people turn collectively in
             horror from the tyrant's long train of abuses. Despite inevitable dissensions in a group
             whose leaders are scattered in exile and managing disagreements over matters of life
             and death, it has achieved an imperfect but functional unity. Despite , the daily dangers
             accrued through overt association with the SNC, nonviolent demonstrators have
             repeatedly expressed their support for it. There is no other "game in town" for the
             nonviolent movement. Yet it is essential to understand that the SNC can be only
             provisionally and partially legitimate until free elections are carried out in Syria. In the




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015




              148                                  Hart,;ard Internaliohd Lan journal Online / Vol: 53



              interim, it needs to expand its representativeness, giving particular prominence to
              women, minorities, Alawites, Christians, Druze, and Kurds, and fulfill its promise of
              as efficient a rotation in its leadership as possible. •

              Its legitimacy depends on five factors: (1) the support of the people as expressed in
              continuing non-violent demonstrations; (2) the maximum exercise of democratic
              deliberation despite the practical difficulties; .i)
                                                               -• the continuing guest for descriptive
              and substantive representativeness of all parties in the absence of electoral
              representativeness; (4) a growing internationai recognition, in law and in fact, that they
              stand on a at superior ground than the regime as the right interlocutors—therebY
              also a recognition that the massive popular disaffection is a Repoli/lion, and not a "civil
              war"; and, (5) on a moral plane, its continued adherence to the path of either no
              violence or, in the most dire circumstances, the least possible use of force. 'Like the
              signers of the U.S. Declaration of independence and of many other founding
              documents of great nations, the SNC and any group purporting to speak for a people
              in turmoil must have their legitimacy laded by some criteria. We suggest these. By
              any of the five interlocked criteria, the SNC is the most legitimate group in Syria—
              certainly including the present totally discredited re!ilme of BaShar            It is not
              surprising, then, that European Union (EU) capitals and Gulf Cooperation Council
              (GCC) countries severed diplomatic relations with the current Syrian government.
                            the.EU officially recogr11 ed,the SNC on 28 February.

              As for the Asad regime, much more can he done to accelerate the process of
              &legitimization. First steps would include surrendering the Syrian embassies to the
              opposition as a far more legitimate representative of Syria's people than the present
              envoys. This measure woulci immediately promote defections in those embassies and
              in the Syrian diplomatic services. Should ES governments decide that giving the
              embassy to the Syrian people as represented transitionally by the opposition is nor
              sufficiently supported by consular law, they cart simply expel the local Syrian
              ambassador and top aides at the embassy.

                hey can also provide serious logistics to assist the SNC as the most significant
              umbrella group for this transitional. period, in order to better advance the agenda of
              Syrian democracy. Despite its inevitable organizational problems, the opposition must
              act as the real government and be increasingly recognized as such.

              The U.N. General Assembly can meet again to yore formally for such recognition.
              Individual governments can start the process immediately. Governments are free
              under international law to recognie the foreign government they consider legitimate
              in a given country. 'While tile effective control or territory is sometimes developed as a
              condition of recognition internationally, it is left to individual governments to decide.
              This is the time to advance the better part of a halting doctrine and practice.: in
              situations such as Syria, a government cannot claim to represent people it kills
              massively and sYsternatically.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015




              2012 / A Strategy for Syria Under International Law                                     149


             One highly symbolic, extremely practical, measure that results from this dual strategy
             of derecognition and recognition is that it is virtually costless. Many Syrians have been
             deprived of travel documents for years. This hampers their action and increases the
             risks on their lives. These Syrians should be issued passports by the SNC government
             and their passports recognized for travel abroad by the FS.

             In addition to official recognition of the resistance envoys as the temporary
             government, with the consequences such recognition entails for the isolation of Asad
             and his circle of killers, the leading political parties from both the government and the
             opposition in FS countries can help enhance the quality of support to the revolution.
             Party leaders across the political spectrum of FS societies should meet with designated
             representatives of the opposition and offer them headquarters, logistical, and media
             support.

             Parliaments in supportive countries in the seventy-strong FS group can also play a key
             role by organizing open debates and working meetings where nonviolent
             revolutionary Syrians can be heard and their requests studied and discussed seriously,
             both for immediate needs and in preparation for the transition to democracy.

             The U.N. Secretariat and the Arab League apparatchiks must immediately stop their
             pointless mediation with a killer regime, now being formalized by their joint envoy
             calling for a "dialogue" that puts the two sides on an equal moral footing and
             threatens to destroy the revolution. Instead, it should address the SNC and the
             resistance inside the country as the only worthy interlocutors for Syrian society until
             free elections are possible, that is, after Asad is removed from power.

                     On the front of judicial accountability, Syrian and international human rights
             organizations have been active in gathering the evidence needed for the indictment
             and eventual trial of Syria's leading killers. Two practical measures can be further
             developed in coordination with the opposition, which knows the country best

             First, a list of personae non gratae needs to be established, tallying the central pillars of
             the repression and their financiers. Such a "list of shame" has already been established
             in various countries for the most notorious henchmen of Asad. The process needs to
             be enhanced, regulariied, and rigorously documented, and its parameters publically
             adopted. Fighting corruption is central to accountability. The immediate kin involved
             in mass murder and the financiers of the Asad family must have their assets frozen,
             and they must be questioned and eventually arrested when they travel, or they must
             be denied visas. To the extent allowed by the law, they must be separated from their
             ill-gotten properties abroad, to be held in trust for their Syrian victims, and some
             frozen assets must be disbursed to the extent possible to the families of those killed
             and jailed. A joint committee of oppositional representatives, honest wealthy Syrians,
             and respected international figures can establish a special compensation fund for
             bereaved families.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015




              150                                 Harvard Intemationai Law journal Online / Vol. 53




              Conversely, efforts to openly distance the merchants and industrialists from the
              regime need to be perceived as an important aspect of the opposition's strategy. Not
              only must the SNC press them further for support, but it is important for the
              revolution to have stronger views on the day after, thereby reducing the fears of the
              minorities and the wealthy, and involving them in the formation of a short anti longer
              term economic vision that covers (a) managing the economics of the revolution to
              lessen the terrible plight of ordinary people and to accelerate the demise of the
              regime, (b) preparing for the economic transition, and (c) working on the day and
              years after Asad's removal.

              This work will prepare for full judicial accountability. 'A massive international
              investigation that registers names of the victims, the circumstances of their death, and
              the names of the main commanders of the repression and its most notorious thugs,
              should be started immediately. Here also much work has already been achieved by
              leading Syrian and international human rights organizations and by the Office of the
              U.N. Commissioner for Human Rights. These flies cannot just gather dust. The office
              of the ICC cannot continue to hide between formal pretexts to. ignore the Syrian
              dossier. It is high time for Prosecutor Luis .viloreno Ocampo to officially start the
              investigaticti so that the files are ready when the circumstances are ripe to formally
              proceed with an tnglictment. Once the SNC is recognized by the more than seventy PS
              countries, it can ask the ICC Prosecutor to move on the indictment, with the help of
              the FS if China and Russia continue blocking the ICC, from carrying out its legal duty
              as inscribed in its raisor; d'etre in the first place.

              In short, Asad's government must be isolated politically, delegitimized diplomatically,
              and investigated criminally, while the Syrian nonviolent revolution represented in part
              by the SNC should be increasingly recognized, assisted, and dealt with as the
              transitional government of Syria.

              In this transition period, the responsibility of the Syrian opposition to enhance its
              unity and develop its ties to the resistance inside Syria cannot he emphasized enough.
              Only free elections after the removal of Asad can give it full legitimacy, but the
              opposition can take many steps in the meantime: the rotation in the leadership, as
              agreed when the SNC was announced, must be respected; women and minorities
              must be included in a real and visible way; collective, professional debates to sharpen
              the vision of democratic post-Asad Syria must be a daily concern; the Syrian youth
              and the professional diaspora must be involved through finance, organization, and
              technology in support for human rights and election monitoringi, and moves to
              connect with the other revolutions in the region should be ongoing, along with
              discussion of nonviolent means to end all regional disputes, including the Arab-Israeli
              conflict. These measures are important in themselves. They are important to set the
              stage for a constructive transition to democracy when the dictator is removed. They
              are important, above all, because the world needs a serious oppositional entity as a




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015




              2012 / A Strategy for Syria Under International Law                                  151


              Syrian partner for change, with provisional and partial but real legitimacy, in order to
              bring to an end the forty years of bloodshed for which Asad rule is responsible in
              Syria and in the Middle East.

              Nothing in international law requires a Security Council resolution for FS
              governments and societies to take any of the above steps. Call it militant diplomacy.


                   IV. ON THE GROUND: A COERCIVE STRATEGY BUILT ON HUMAN RIGHTS

              Humanitarian support cannot wait for a positive response from Asad to the
              International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)'s continuous begging him for entry
              or to the lamentably hollow calls, in the United Nations and elsewhere, for him to
              please be nice and stop the killing machine.

              The more quickly militant diplomacy proceeds, the more quickly international
              derecognition will suffocate the Asad regime. Yet as Asad's crimes mount in Syria, the
              urgent need to protect the nonviolent demonstrators and the civilian population at
              large requires not only that the screws be tightened relentlessly but also that they be
              given a potential razor edge. The killers in Syria will be tried, but they must first be
              removed from power.

              Although the status of Responsibility to Protect remains imprecise in international
              law, Syria's nonviolent revolution presents both a test case and a formidable occasion
              to set new standards for dictatorships whose murders mount into the thousands. In
              December 2004, a forty-strong coalition of Middle East Non-Governmental
              Organizations (NGOs) expressed at the G-8 meeting in New York its firm belief that
              "dictatorship is a crime against humanity." Nothing proves the point more than the
              Asad system.

              Decisive action on the ground requires a coalition of governments willing to stop the
              killing of unarmed demonstrators. Several North Atlantic Treaty Organization
              (NATO) and Arab League leaders have already expressed their support for ending the
              dictatorship. In the New York Times on February 23, Anne-Marie Slaughter, director of
              policy planning at the U.S. State Department from 2009 to 2011, argued that the
              Friends of Syria should militarily establish "no-kill zones" in several places as near as
              possible to the borders of Syria and gradually expand these zones. Army defectors and
              others could flee to the zones, which would be used only defensively and would
              protect all Syrians within them. We support this strategy and add that within these
              zones, political and judicial institutions could be established that would then maintain
              the law, prevent revenge killings, and at the same time allow the Syrian opposition to
              articulate its differences and its unity within a legal structure that enhances its
              domestic and international legitimacy. The zones would allow widespread
              consultation, discussion, and even protest, providing in the best case the genesis for
              the fledgling democracy that would take over from the Asad regime. At the same




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015




             152                                    Harvard International Law journal Online / Vol. 53


             time, a significant military buildup on the borders of Syria would make clear the
             potential for action if all peaceful and nonviolent means should fail.

             The combination of "no-kill zones" and an international military build-up form a
             coercive strategy, that accomplishes three goals.

             First it demoralizes the dictator. His hope for prevailing through the continued use of
            'force against unarmed citizens will be undermined when his apparatus of repression
             sees a growing international coalition commanding a formidable force of last resort.

             Second, it demoralizes the core of the army and the bureaucracy. By demonstrating
             the illegitimacy of the regime and making it clear that it will riot prevail, it encourages
             soldiers and officers to desert and to link their future with a growing civil opposition.
             Particularly in conjunction with increased diplomatic delegitimization of the Syrian
             foreign office and sanctions on the leading financiers of the repression, the gathering;
             mobilization encourages the domestic Syrian bureaucracy to express its disquiet in
             various ways, from resignations to establishing open or secret bridges to the
             opposition.

             Third, it gives hope to the nonviolent movement and encourages persistence in this
             path. The opposition can then continue to pursue peaceful strategies knowing that its
             actions will have results and that the regime will eventually be defeated and its leaders
             tried. Realistically, we must recognize that strictly peaceful strategies can continue only
             in a climate that promises the increasing certainty of an ever-closer end of Asad's
             political life.

             Only in the worst case and in the last resort might force be needed. Even then, it
             should he applied selectively, gradually, and with the least possible violence.

             If the exercise of outside force is required, it must in the best case he legitimated by
             the Security Council. In the next best case it would be legitimated by (1) a substantive
             application of the Responsibility to Protect by the FS governments, individually and
             collectively, (2) a combination of extensive consultations within the coalition and with
             the Syrian opposition, with demonstrations of various sorts of domestic and
             international measures to assist civilians and end the killing, (3) the features that make
             the nonviolent opposition a far more legitimate representative interlocutor than
             Asad's government, (4) the moral act itself of holding back until the last possible
             moment, and (5) the justice and appropriateness of the acts of force if and when they
             are exercised.

              How can a coenive sttateg be put in place?

             Before any troops move on the ground, small symbolic measures can frighten and
             unnerve the tyrant. Daily drones with cameras can transmit close-up images of his
             palace, the headquarters of his apparatus of repression, and the rubber stamp




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015




              2012 1 A                         t.,7thier                                                        153



              parliament to tii-ce te pillars of the regime a tangible warning. On the tequi.....s: 01 'the
              S.:NC and in conjunction :with its military buteaii just eStablished to integtate the Fte.c:
              Syrian. Array, stealth helice,D l         nd C t s can follow into the Syrian               ciriinpirw;
              summons to the InzPrnational Criminal Court (!CC) and leaflets with health and
              security instructions, followed pefhairis with non- lethal bombs the wouiti eplode
              with noise but no hatm, pointing only to pot-co:hal luture action. TisJops from Jordan
              and Terltey--even •from Iraq. if 1      . 17. wants to *host the Arab Sumnut lite:" this month.
              and in Lebanon under a new 2:0v                                      t. to move to every possible
              boi:der of the country, in preparation for any e.\-etuality. These troops siVOtlid
              Clefnd the "no-kill"                safeti-, established first at the lordet: and later farther in,
              to shelter the ref14...t:es and procidt: a ,:ane-rastv for dcfectirG scdh it.. V..)*Ihere Asaclls
              troops thin OM             hC;cntIe to WII7rant the. sin7.1.!.nder 01 the territory to the
              revolution:int coall',1; IrtC e S and the Frey: S":i7.1',1•■.! Aemt• !inder SNC governiyientai
              control. dozens o nterruitional Is,l. ClOs can lend their: tOrrnidable orl:zanizational
              know-how to help the onpotition organize us a en.iiimare. i:-,ovempeent. \vithin rise
              territories, while NATO will Protect the safe zones and a                  blithe logistical sr:pi:port
              needed for eNp:Inding them. Air !hat pt...lnt, 1-triv use of force inns,: 0: coordinated
              closely enoi.igh to be a Ott St.:‘,11:Cp" I:.*;.::173CC:::n the;nrernati,..)11:1! c. imnunitv and, tit
              coin a term needed be dr:                   iv:               C OF i                   \ tilt. S.
              appositional Government ("SOC.l--). I               the ..k:iad rind        Cl .5...      be nothing.:
              more than criminal fugitives that the -S!")G" is seelcintn:ni attest and bring ...J.) iustice
              with the help of the FS..

              An importann measure- in this 1p-cocess is the deplitt-rnefit of ianraan ha:his monitors fl..)
              ensure that re\ ,elate killing does not. as in                  the de.-nise of the dictator and
               tiC flCtic!aen. Some of us ativocatti. :Ills "human rights mon:tots' approach               end
              the regime of Saddam Husain in Iraq fl the 1_ 990S, tr..-:2;ethC:". With his indicayient in. a
              Special Tr:but:AI         Iraq, borh niciasures to be inscribrd in a. Securit:: Council
              Resolution tune constdared hi                           the le::ntiniatc talc; of ) r:a SI cider
              international law.         still believe that. nad this "117211 Dt1110Cratk- Initiative been
              adopted, the disastrous war of 200:I could have bee:; avoidect.

              If these mccisures arc. not enoi..azh         r.A.,sttl scurrying in fear, Or      FliS realiation
              reaches a Bengliazi-Srebtenica level, tt.ea at loisg               riesessar:-.- nicans must be
              used to prevent a new Hama. It may be that Asad's systematic 1)n:tali:Ie.; has already
              reached a "Hama level." The R.esponsibilin: to Protect is facing a severe test in Syria.
              This is why doing it right at this critical. moment or Middle East and) worlci histoty Wilt
              help international law define more precisely the threshold of crimes against hurrianin,
              and the set of contextual circumstance.s that jtastify in law an international military
              intervention. Yet even mt this last stage, which we may ferventi.:,-' hope v,-ill never :arise,
              violence should be kept to minimum, and niusi: specifically target the political and
              military commanders of the             machine.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015




             154                                     Harvard International Law Journal Online / i%cl. 53


             The likelihood is high that in the end massive violence will not be needed. But only a
             credible coercive strategy developed by the nonviolent opposition and its backers
             worldwide, expressed with as little actual violence as possible, will ensure that the
             nonviolent character of the revolution is responsible, and is seen as responsible, for its
             success. The alternatives are defeat or another Libya. Both outcomes would deeply
             undermine the growing commitment to nonviolence across the globe, from
             Damascus to Beijing. That would be the greatest loss, both for the Middle East and
             for humanity.




             Sadek Jalal al-Atm is the leading public intellectual of Syria and is emeritus Professor of
             Philosophy at the University of Damascus and the recipient of numerous human rights awards;
             Ishac Divan is director for Africa and the Middle East at the growth lab of the Center for
             International Development at Kennedy School of Government. Harvard; John J. Donohue, S.J.
             is a scholar of both the classical and contemporary Middle East and has taught for overforty years in
             the region; Mansoor al-jawri is editor of the Bahraini independent daily Al Fasat and recipient
             of CPI's International Press Freedom Award for 2011; Yang penal, Ph.D. is a prominent
             Chinese dissident, founder of Initiatives for China and Harvard Fellow; Chibli Mallat is a
             Lebanese lawyer and 41211 professor,. Jane M an sbridge is Adams Professor of Political l_eadership
             and Democratic 'Values at Harvard Kennedy School and President-elect of the American Political
             ScienceAssociation; Sharhabeel al-Zaeern IS a leadingPalestinian lawyer in Gaza.            are part
             of Right to Nonviolence, an international NGO based in the Middle East, for which the Executive
             Director is Trudi Hodges.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790537 Date: 10/30/2015
