UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769514 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL


                      The Need to Reconfirm Chairman Bernanke Now

  Ben Bernanke's current term as Chairman expires on January 31, 2010. Nearly six months will
  have elapsed since the President announced his intention to renominate Chairman Bernanke
  on August 25, 2009, and six weeks since his confirmation hearing before the Senate Banking
  Committee on December 3, 2009.

  From the President's Remarks on August 25, 2009


     •    Ben Bernanke has led the Fed through one of the worst financial crises that this nation
          and the world has ever faced. As an expert on the causes of the Great Depression, I'm
          sure Ben never imagined that he would be part of a team responsible for preventing
          another. But because of his background, his temperament, his courage, and his
          creativity, that's exactly what he has helped to achieve. And that is why I am re-
          appointing him to another term as Chairman of the Federal Reserve.

     •    Ben approached a financial system on the verge of collapse with calm and wisdom; with
          bold action and out-of-the-box thinking that has helped put the brakes on our economic
          freefall. Almost none of the decisions that he or any of us made have been easy.
          They've faced plenty of critics, some of whom argued that we should stay the course or
          do nothing at all. But taken together, this "bold, persistent experimentation" has
          brought our economy back from the brink.

      •   Of course, as I've said before, we are a long way away from completely healthy financial
          systems and a full economic recovery. That's why we need Ben Bernanke to continue
          the work he's doing, and that's why I've said that we cannot go back to an economy
          based on overleveraged banks, inflated profits, and maxed-out credit cards.

  Specifics on .the Bernanke Nomination


  On the financial crisis


      •   Chairman Bernanke has reiterated that the Federal Reserve remains committed to its
          mission to help restore prosperity and to stimulate job creation while preserving price
          stability. And, if confirmed, he will work to the utmost of his abilities in the pursuit of
          those objectives.

      •   As severe as the effects of the crisis have been, however, the outcome could have been
          markedly worse without the strong actions taken by the Congress, the Federal Reserve,
          and other authorities both here and abroad.

      •   For its part, the Federal Reserve, led by Chairman Bernanke, cut interest rates early and
          aggressively, reducing the target for the federal funds rate to nearly zero.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769514 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769514 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                       Page 2 of 3


     •   The Fed played a central role, directed by Chairman Bernanke, in efforts to quell the
         financial turmoil, for example,

            o   through its joint efforts with other agencies and foreign authorities to avert a
                collapse of the global banking system last fall;
            o   by ensuring financial institutions adequate access to short-term funding when
                private funding sources dried up; and
            o   through its leadership of the comprehensive assessment of large U.S. banks
                conducted this past spring (the "stress tests"), an exercise that significantly
                increased public confidence in the banking system.

     •   Chairman Bernanke also guided the Fed as it created targeted lending programs that
         have helped to restart the flow of credit in a number of critical markets, including the
         commercial paper market and the market for securities backed by loans to households
         and small businesses.

     •   Indeed, the Fed estimates that one of the targeted programs--the Term Asset-Backed
         Securities Loan Facility--has thus far helped finance more than 3.4 million loans to
         households (excluding credit card accounts), more than 100 million credit card accounts,
         480,000 loans to small businesses, and 100,000 loans to larger businesses.

     •   And its purchases of longer-term U.S. government and agency securities have provided
         support to private credit markets and helped to reduce longer-term interest rates, such
         as mortgage rates.

     •   Taken together, the Federal Reserve's actions under Chairman Bernanke's leadership
         have contributed substantially to the significant improvement in financial conditions and
         to what now appear to be the beginnings of a turnaround in both the U.S. and foreign
         economies.

  On transparency and accountability

     •   Chairman Bernanke—long an advocate of greater central bank transparency and
         openness prior to his service at the Federal Reserve—has renewed and strengthened
         the central bank's longstanding commitment to transparency and accountability.

     •   In the making of monetary policy, the Federal Reserve is highly transparent, providing a
         statement of policy action immediately after each FOMC meeting, detailed minutes
         three weeks after each policy meeting, quarterly economic projections, regular
         testimonies to the Congress, and much other information.

     •   The Federal Reserve's financial statements are public and audited by an outside
         accounting firm. The Fed also publishes a weekly balance sheet—unique among central




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769514 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769514 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                       Page 3 of 3


         banks—and by virtue of Chairman Bernanke's leadership, provides extensive
         information publicly through monthly reports and on its website on all the temporary
         lending facilities developed during the crisis, including the collateral it has taken.

     •   Further, the Fed's financial activities are subject to review by an independent inspector
         general.

     •   And the Congress, through the Government Accountability Office, can and does audit all
         parts of operations, other than monetary policy and related areas explicitly exempted
         by a 1978 provision passed by the Congress. The Congress created that exemption to
         protect monetary policy from short-term political pressures and thereby to support the
         Fed's ability to effectively and independently pursue its mandated objectives of
         maximum employment and price stability.

 The Senate Should Confirm Chairman Bernanke Now

     •   Failure of the Senate to act on Chairman Bernanke's nomination introduces uncertainty
         at exactly the wrong time for our economy and consumer and business planning.
     •   Nearly six months have elapsed since the President announced his intention to
         renominate Chairman Bernanke.
     •   Nearly six weeks have passed since the Senate Banking Committee held its confirmation
         hearing for Chairman Bernanke.
     •   Chairman Bernanke has responded to 110 follow-up questions, many with multiple
         parts, from committee members.
     •   Chairman Bernanke has met with every member of the Banking committee who wished
         to do so, as well as a number of other Senators.
     •   Chairman Bernanke has testified before Congress 43 times since he was confirmed in
         2006. He has also held dozens of meetings with Senators, House members, committees
         and caucuses during that time.
     •   Having confirmed Chairman Bernanke three times already—once as a member of the
         Board of Governors, then as Chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers,
         and again as Chairman of the Board of Governors—the Senate has ample knowledge of,
         and experience with, Chairman Bernanke and clearly more than enough information to
         proceed to the advice and consent of his renomination.
     •   Moreover, given the state of the economic recovery and condition of financial markets,
         it is imperative that consumers, markets and businesses have a sense of policy certainty
         from the Federal Reserve.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769514 Date: 10/30/2015
