      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766111 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART B6


From:                               PIR <preines
Sent:                               Sunday, December 13, 2009 10:00 AM
To:
Subject:                            Re: Interview



I don't see it as a problem, no - for the very reason you just said. Not only because their dynamic was a specific
reflection of Nixon, but of Kissinger's neediness too. On the elevator ride back up with him (sans Meacham), I said that
this President chairs more Sit Room mtgs than W, so the core team is seeing each other as a group or different subsets
near constantly.

Generally though, another way to answer that question which comes up often is to conflate all the time at the WH with
your 1:1 time. So, you can say "We make sure to meet privately at least once a week - but I'm at the WH for NSC or
other meetings practically everyday. So I'm seeing the President, or speaking with him by phone, near daily. I have a
secure phone on my desk that has a button programmed to dial right to him. Plus all the trips we've taken together
where I'm with him all the time"

People know you're at the WH a lot. So that's easy. The one thing they don't know is that you speak by phone. And
obviously there's no way for them to know how often.

But again, no, I don't think it's a problem. The conversation is going to be run as a transcript, either in whole or parts -
so there won't be any Newsweek commentary or snark.

And for as much as I dislike them and wish they'd fold already, I always believe that when media outlets do these
specials that are supremely important to them - more so than the subjects - they don't make people look bad. This is
Newsweek's answer to Time's Person of the Year. They aren't doing a hit job.

Now, if it were                   doing a cover story on you, I'd be worried. But we separately nixed that.




     Original Message
From: Evergreen
To: PIR
Subject: Interview
Sent: Dec 13, 2009 8:02 AM

In thinking about the Kissinger interview, the only issue I think that might be raised is that I see POTUS at least once a
week while K saw Nixon everyday. Of course, if I were dealing w that POTUS I'd probably camp in his office to prevent
him from doing something problematic. Do you see this as a problem?




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766111 Date: 10/30/2015
