     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784335 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                             Sunday, October 23, 2011 8:37 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Huge turnout in Tunisia's Arab Spring election (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Sunday, October 23, 2011 01:04 PM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Huge turnout in Tunisia's Arab Spring election (Reuters)


TUNIS, Oct 23 (Reuters) - Tunisian voters poured into polling stations to vote on Sunday in their country's first
free election, 10 months after vegetable seller Mohamed Bouazizi set himself on fire in an act of protest that
started the Arab Spring uprisings.

    The leader of an Islamist party predicted to win the biggest share of the vote was heckled outside a polling
station by people shouting "terrorist", highlighting tensions between Islamists and secularists being felt across
the Arab world.

   Bouazizi's dramatic suicide, prompted by despair over poverty and government repression, provoked mass
protests which forced President Zine al-Abidine to flee Tunisia. This in turn inspired revolts in Egypt, Libya,
Yemen and Syria.



   Rachid Ghannouchi, leader of the moderately Islamist Ennanda party, took his place in the queue outside a
polling station in the El Menzah 6 district of the capital.

   "This is an historic day," he said, accompanied by his wife and daughter, both wearing Islamic headscarves,
or hijabs. "Tunisia was born today. The Arab Spring was born today."

  As he emerged from the polling station, about a dozen people shouted at him: "Degage", French for "Go
away", and "You are a terrorist and an assassin! Go back to London!".

  Ghannouchi, who spent 22 years in exile in Britain, has associated his party with the moderate Islamism of
Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan. He has said he will not try to impose Muslim values on society.

   "Islam should be respected again in Tunisia," said Hasna Ben Zid, a 38-year-old woman wearing a hijab,
"That's why I'm going to vote for the only Islamic party."

   But the party's rise worries secularists who believe their country's liberal, modernist traditions are now under
threat.

  Across Tunisia, queues stretching hundreds of metres formed outside polling stations from early in the
morning for an election which could set the template for other Middle Eastern states emerging from the Arab

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784335 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784335 Date: 10/30/2015



Spring.

   Kamel Jandoubi, head of the independent commission organising the vote, said turnout was nearly 70
percent, with three hours still left before polls close.

   That level of voter interest was never seen during Ben Ali's rule. Then, only a trickle of people turned out for
elections because they knew the result was pre-determined.

   People in the queues on Sunday took photographs on their mobile phones to mark the occasion.

   "This is the first time I have voted," said Karima Ben Salem, 45, at a polling station in the Lafayette area of
central Tunis.

   "I've asked the boys to make their own lunch. I don't care ... Today I am not on duty. Or rather, I am on duty
for my country," she said.

  There were long lines of voters too in Sidi Bouzid, the dirt-poor birthplace of the Tunisian revolution and
Mohamed Bouazizi's home town.

   "It's the first time I've voted because it's the first time I feel my vote is safe," said Sara Naji, a secondary
school teacher. "We suffered a lot from pessimism and frustration but now we're building a new life."



   ISLAMIST INFLUENCE

   Sunday's vote is for an assembly that will draft a new constitution to replace the one Ben Ali manipulated to
entrench his power. It will also appoint an interim government and set elections for a new president and
parliament.

   Most forecasts are that Ennanda will not have enough seats for a majority in the assembly, forcing it to seek
a coalition which will dilute the Islamists' influence.

  It will have to compete with secularist parties, who will try to form a coalition to stop Ennanda forming a
majority.

   Ennanda has been at pains to assuage the concerns of secularists and Western powers. Yet observers say
there is tension inside the party between Ghannouchi's moderate line and more vehement Islamists among the
rank-and-file.

   A final election rally on Friday illustrated the party's contradictions as Suad Abdel-Rahim, a tall, glamorous
female Ennanda candidate who does not wear a veil, addressed the crowd.

    But many books on sale on the fringes of the rally were by writers who belong to the strict Salafist branch of
Islam. They believe women should be segregated from men in public and that elections are un-Islamic.

   "I'm not so optimistic about the result of the vote," said Ziyed Tijiani, a 26-year-old architect who had just
cast his vote. His forefinger was stained with the blue ink used in polling stations to stop ballot fraud.

   "I think the Islamists could win. It's not want I want. They may try to change the way I live," he said,
accompanied by a young woman in jeans and T-shirt.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784335 Date: 10/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784335 Date: 10/30/2015




   An Ennanda victory would be the first such success in the Arab world since Hamas won a 2006 Palestinian
vote. Islamists won a 1991 election in Algeria, Tunisia's neighbour. The army annulled the result, provoking
years of conflict.

   Ennanda's fortunes may have a bearing on Egyptian elections set for next month in which the Muslim
Brotherhood, an ideological ally, also hopes to emerge strongest.

   Tunisia's election will be watched too in neighbouring Libya, which plans elections next year after a revolt
there ousted Muammar Gaddafi.

NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784335 Date: 10/30/2015
