      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785088 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Monday, November 28, 2011 9:18 PM
To:
Subject:                           FW: Benghazi Sitrep - November 28, 2011
Attachments:                       Benghazi Sitrep - nov 28.docx



Very interesting.


From: Abbaszadeh, Nima
Sent: Monday, November 28, 2011 6:39 PM
To: Wells, Alice G; Sullivan, Jacob J
Cc: S_SpecialAssistants
Subject: Benghazi Sitrep — November 28, 2011

Finger-pointing continues on the Yunus assassination.

TNC Chairman Implicates Former Deputy PM as a Criminal Conspirator in Killing of Gen. Yunus — At a November 28
press conference in Benghazi, TNC Chairman Abd al-Jalil released the results of the TNC's criminal investigation into the
killing of Abd al-Fattah Yunus. In the press conference, Abd al-Jalil named those accused, some of whom were in
custody and some of whom were still at large. Among the criminal conspirators named were former Deputy PM Ali
Essawi (Note: Following the assassination of Chief of Staff Abd aI-Fattah Yunus in August, the TNC launched two
investigations — one criminal, and one administrative. As a result of Abd al-Jalil's announcement, Essawi has now been
implicated by both investigations. End note.) Yunus's son told poloff that the investigation of his father's death has
transformed into a political matter rather than a legal one. The Yunus family is demanding that an independent,
preferably international, body investigate the matter. (Comment: It is unclear if the TNC will now pursue the extradition
of Essawi, who is currently in abroad in Doha. End Comment.)

Former Deputy PM Implicates TNC Chairman in Killing of Gen. Yunus — The evening before the TNC Chairman's press
conference on the issue (per above), former Deputy PM Ali Essawi make a preemptive strike via a rare interview to the
Cairo-based satellite channel Libya TV, in which he gave his own account of the events leading to the assassination of
Gen. Abd al-Fattah Yunus. Essawi disputed the results of the administrative investigation into the killing of Yunus, which
found that Essawi and then-Religious Affairs Minister Salem Al-Sheikhi issued an order to arrest Yunus without
evidence. Essawi said that in fact a grbup of rebel fighters had presented the TNC with evidence that Yunus had been
meeting with Abdurrahman Al-Seid, a former regime security official. The fighters also complained that Yunus was
failing to provide them with ammunition and other supplies. Also contrary to the findings of the administrative
investigation, Essawi claimed that Abd al-Jalil had full knowledge of the decision to arrest Yunus and that the Chairman
was personally responsible for the irregularities during Yunus's arrest that led to his death. Essawi also alleged that the
TNC knows the identities of the killers, but Mustafa Abd al-Jalil refuses to release them.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785088 Date: 10/30/2015
