     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787721 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                            H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                            Monday, October 24, 2011 8:26 PM
To:                              'hanleymr@state.gov'
Subject                          Fw: Spearhead Research Analysis: Tough Talks



Pls print.


From: Sullivan, Jacob J [mailto:Sullivan13@state.gov]
Sent: Monday, October 24, 2011 07:46 PM
To: H
Subject: FW: Spearhead Research Analysis: Tough Talks

Worth a read

From: Vali Nasr
Sent: Monday, October 24, 2011 7:41 PM                                                                  B6
To: Feldman, Daniel F; Raphel, Robin L
Subject: Fwd: Spearhead Research Analysis: Tough Talks



See the analysis below from Jahangir Karamat. Interesting on the suspicions.


Vali Nasr
twitter @vali_nasr

Begin forwarded message:

         From: Spearhead Research Information <info@spearheadresearch.org>
         Date: October 24, 2011 6:46:30 AM EDT
         To: Spearhead Research Information <info@spearheadresearch.org>
         Subject: Spearhead Research Analysis: Tough Talks


               isit Spearhead Research Forums

         Spearhead Analysis - 23.10.11



         Tough Talks

         Team Clinton that visited Pakistan was a high level group—in fact except for President Obama
         almost everyone was there. The team leader—Hillary Clinton—was buoyant, cheerful, confident
         and all smiles in her public interactions. She laughed loud and long when a questioner called
         America a demanding mother-in-law. She also talked tough. She did not differ with the US
         media who had previewed the purpose of her visit as being to deliver tough ultimatums to
         Pakistan—do this or else! She also said that Pakistan was a partner but also a challenge and that
         the challenge part had overtaken the partner part. She said that the US wanted action against the
         Haqqani Network—"not in months or years but in days and weeks". She balanced the tough
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787721 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787721 Date: 10/30/2015




  messages by adding that there had been agreement to resume the interrupted strategic dialogue
  after reviewing progress. She spoke about a bilateral investment treaty, reconstruction
  opportunity zones, about supporting Pakistan to improve education, health care and the energy
  shortfalls clarifying that the US had delivered a total of US$ 2 billion out of the Kerry-Lugar-
  Berman Bill commitment. There were no deadlines, no definite commitments and no promises.
  The implications were clear within the messages---Pakistan had to do things to change from
  challenge to partner and that it was primarily Pakistan's responsibility to get its priorities right,
  stabilize internally, generate revenues and formulate policies that were in its own interests.

  A noteworthy point was that Mrs Clinton quoted Pakistan's Army Chief twice—once on his use
  of the term 'squeezing the militants' and secondly on his agreement that there "convergence was
  90 to 95 per cent and divergence only 5 to 10 percent". There was no elaboration of how
  important the 10 per cent divergence was and whether it could actually undermine the 90 percent
  convergence. There was also no clarification on 'squeezing' being an acceptable strategy in
  dealing with the Haqqani Network or whether the US wanted more drastic and urgent action. She
  did declare that the US would not act unilaterally in Pakistan but did not add that this would hold
  even if there was a target that the US determined was really, high value. She agreed that there
  was anti-American opinion in Pakistan (though it is really anti US policy!) and added that there
  was similar anti-Pakistani opinion in the US. She also did not deny that there was a high level of
  distrust and that this was the reason for the unilateral raid into Pakistan to take out Osama bin
  Laden.

  In fact the level of distrust is so high that Pakistanis are suspicious that they are being set up for
  some kind of trap and that this was the real purpose of the high level visit. The briefing of other
  ambassadors by the US Ambassador on the visit added to these suspicions. It is entirely possible
  that the Pakistan Foreign Office would also brief them to set the record straight so that there are
  no surprises later. The well timed positive statements by the Indian Prime Minister and Foreign
  Minister on India-Pakistan relations and US-Pakistan relations and President Karzai's emotional
  assertions of friendship with Pakistan in an interview with a Pakistani journalist added to the
  overall perception of this being an orchestrated affair. The majority of Pakistanis, however, took
  the Team Clinton visit seriously. There was appreciation of the working group format so that
  there are no 'one on one' talks with more confusion than progress. This should be the format for
  all future interactions. There was appreciation for Mrs Clinton's view that footholds by militants
  lead to loss of control. This found resonance because Pakistanis are concerned about being
  branded the 'epicenter' of terrorism and having their image tarnished. And they want internal
  stability so that there can be political and economic viability. The Secretary of States'
  endorsement of the All Parties Resolution was also appreciated though our Foreign Minister
  pointed out that Parliament would be the final decision maker. There was strong appreciation for
  her admission that the US had no hard evidence to back the allegations made by Admiral
  Mull ens against Pakistan.

  Perhaps what created an overall positive impression was the emphasis on peace and
  reconciliation being the preferred approach and the understanding that the ISI was not the only
  agency to have wide ranging contacts because without such contacts intelligence agencies could
  not deliver results. Her impression of the talks having been 'frank and open', of both sides
  having 'heard' each other and that she was 'reassured' that both were on the 'right track'. One
  assumes that Pakistan's concerns and interests have been fully understood. By now it should be
  clear that coercion and irrational pressure cannot deliver results. Nor does demonizing
  institutions through the media and public statements help—if anything it confirms suspicions and
  hardens resolves. Very important was Mrs Clintons unambiguously stated belief in Pakistan's
  potential—something that is lost sight of as Pakistanis grapple with trivia and lose sight of the
  bigger picture. Unless Pakistan prepares for the future it will be by passed by others better
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787721 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787721 Date: 10/30/2015




  positioned to exploit a changed environment. This means focusing on the economy, internal
  stability, infrastructure and strategic relations not just with the US but with all the neighbors.
  Much will now depend on how both sides follow up on these talks and create the environment
  that sends the message that US-Pakistan relations are back on track. This will require a
  bilaterally orchestrated effort by the US and Pakistan.


  Spearhead Analyses are the result of a collaborative effort and not attributable to a single individuaL

  www.spearheadresearch.org

  *** ** ***




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787721 Date: 10/30/2015
