            UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765856 Date: 10/30/2015
                                                                                        RELEASE
                                                                                          IN FULL




From:                                   sbwhoeop@aol.com
Sent:                                   Wednesday, November 25, 2009 10:03 AM
To:                                     H; MillsCD@state.gov
Subject:                                FYI: McDonough feeds this reporter like a zookeeper throwing fish to a seal. He's
                                        striking back for Gelb column. Sid



http://www.politico.com/blogs/bensmith/1109/Envoy_to_Telluride.html

November 24, 2009

Categories:

        0   AfghcarOtan

Prrz                              17,
4twas       .c:
              #„   A
                              e              C7; e




As President Obama and a small circle of aides and advisers work out the scale, details and optics of the American
strategy in Afghanistan this week; one key figure will be out of town.
Special Envoy Richard Holbrooke — who n:!e: Afghan President Hamid Karzai last week and attended the final Afghan
session at the White House yesterday — hor.;4eft will be leaving shortly for a ski vacation in the Colorado resort town of
Telluride, I'm told. (UPDATE:, Holbrooke spokeswoman Ashley Sommer said 'Holbrooke is in Washington this morning.
  He is planning to spend Thanksgiving with his family in Telluride, Colorado. He will be back this weekend," she e-mails.)
Holbrooke's absence seems to confirm what has been whispered for months: that he has not occupied the central role on
Afghanistan strategy that he had once been expected to take and that although -- or perhaps because — he's maintained
his strong relationship with Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, his relationship with the \Alhite House leaves something to
be desired.
Holbrooke's absence means that he won't be the last person the president listens to on the region he's overseeing and,
further, that he isn't even fighting for that role. And it's the latest in a series of tea leaves indicating his distance from the
White House. Laura Rozen teoriee.:' on friction earlier this year over the White House insistence that National Security
Council chief of staff Denis McDonough clear Holbrooke's meetings. And this week, Holbrooke friend Les Gelb — in a
g.c.1:!■,:rnh taken by some in the administration as channeling the envoy's grievances — eviscerated the White House
national security staff, taking special aim at "Lord High Executioner" McDonough.
Holbrooke's visit to Afghanistan last week means he's still very much a player in the region. But it's ari increasingly
crowded field, with military and civilian officials jockeying for influence, John Kerry taking a high-profile role and the White
House alLe.::-,earinato .stress Hillary Clinton's personal relationship with the Afghan president. The politics of the national
security team remain in flux; and Holbrooke has been doing this longer than any of them, so it would be foolish to count
him out. However he does, at the moment, seem to be down.
Posted by Ben Smith 11:30 AM




            UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765856 Date: 10/30/2015
