      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766244 Date: 10/30/2015
                                                                                            RELEASE IN
                                                                                            PART B5,B6




From:                              Steinberg, James B <SteinbergJB@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, November 26, 2009 1:07 PM
To:                                H; Gordon, Philip H; Holbrooke, Richard C
Cc:                                Sullivan, Jacob J; cheryl.mills
Subject:                           Re:




Again, I don't disagree that there's work to be done, and not something to discuss in detail in email Phil and I saw simon
mcdonald yesterday, there are some things to follow up there too. Look forward to more detailed discussions

Happy t-day to all

    Original Message
From: H <HDR22@clintonemail.com>
To: Gordon, Philip H; Steinberg, James B; Holbrooke, Richard C
Cc: Sullivan, Jacob 1; 'cheryl.mills          <cheryl.mills
Sent: Thu Nov 26 11:54:21 2009
Subject:

Dear Phil, Jim and Richard,

  First, Happy Thanksgiving! I am making FM calls re Afghanistan which are going well and the memcons will describe the
specific responses for our followup, especially in Athens and Brussels.




 Below is a memo from a concerned observer about the British feeling alienated from us.
                                                             Let me know what you each think. Thx.

  Consensus across the board in Britain—center, right, left—is that the Atlantic alliance—the special relationship—the
historic bond since World War II—is shattered. There is no dissenting voice, not one, and there are no illusions. Opinion
is unanimous. The bottom line is that the Obama administration's denigration of the UK is seen as the summation of the
Bush era.

  Undoubtedly, you saw this week Minister of Defense Bob Ainsworth's public criticism of Obama's indecision and his
accusation that the president is indifferent and damaging to British interest. While Downing Street sought to ameliorate
his remarks with an oleaginous statement his view is simply what everyone—everyone—thinks. His clumsy outburst was
a classic gaffe—an embarrassing mistake because it reveals something true.

 The Chilcot inquiry of Parliament, publicly conducting hearings on the origins of UK involvement in the Iraq invasion,
has put Bush's war on terror—and British involvement—on trial—and the calmly conducted but eviscerating hearings
will go on for another year. Blair is seen as either complicit on the basis of knowing there was no casus belli or as an
enthusiastically deceived tool. Nick Clegg, leader of the Liberal Democrats, has stated that the reason support for the
Afghanistan mission has cratered is because of the lies told in the run-up to the Iraq war—another view universally held.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766244 Date: 10/30/2015
