     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART B6


 From:                          PIR <preines
 Sent:                          Monday, April 16, 2012 4:03 PM
 To:                            H
 Cc:                            CDM; Huma Abedin; Jake Sullivan
 Subject:                       Re: What It Takes to Be a Great Secretary of State (with my edits in red)



 Omg - it was LAURIE who did this!


 From: "PIR" <preines
 Date: Mon, 16 Apr 2012 19:35:12 +0000
 To: Evergreen<HDR22 clintonemail.com>
 ReplyTo: preines
 Cc: CDM<cher l.mills              ; Huma Abedin<Huma@clintonemail.com>; Jake
. Sullivan
 Subject: Fw: What It Takes to Be a Great Secretary of State (with my edits in red)

Thought you'd get a kick out of this lampoon of Aaron David Miller that Laurie Rubiner past on... (Unclear who
did it, but they're obviously a fan)


From: Laurie Rubiner
Date: Mon, 16 Apr 2012 14:32:50 -0400
Subject: What It Takes to Be a Great Secretary of State (with my edits in red)

                                                                             laurie_rubiner
                                                                             Add to circles
   hat It Takes to Be a Great
 Secretary of State                                                         diAq
                                                                            4toq

 THE NOTATED EDITION                                                        4•4
                                                                            sc-ci
                                                                            Show details
                                                                            Ads • Why these ads?
 (And why we can't have one in the Obama administration.)
 BY AARON DAVID MILLER+14■MARCH 28, 2012                                   'Vanguard. your
                                                                            retirement
                                                                            Plan your ideal retirement with a
                                                                            Vanguard..IRA..Find out more
                                                                            today
                                                                             vanguard.com
                                                                             512
                                                                             Showers for Special
                                                                             Needs
                                                                             Get Info On Our Line of Showers
                                                                             for.Special.Needs..Free Brochure!
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                            DisabledBathing.corn
First,,full disclosure: I really admire.Hillary Clinton.. I really do
                                                                            512
like girls, seriously. I'm not4a misogynist. Also, Aaron, that's
                                                                            Are You Writing A
Secretary Clinton to you.
                                                                            Book?
                                                                            Become A Published Author Today.
I was never an FOB or an FOH* in the political sense of the term or         Get.Your.Free.Guide To
really in any sense of the term, for that matter because I'm                Publishing.
                                                                            www.iUniverse.com/Get-Published-
irrelevant in every sense of the term though I did work for her             Now
husband, because I am not man enough to work for a woman                    512
whom I also9like. In 2000, while at the U.S. State Department, I had        Pre-Owned Ford E-150
                                                                            The low-mileage pre-owned Ford E-
the privilege of accompanying her to the funeral of Leah Rabin, the wife    150.you.want..Certified.
of former Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin as her purse holder,         ford.com/certified-used
                                                                            512
which is why I came to resent her and, hence, the genesis of
                                                                            Masters in Diplomacy
this article.                                                               Earn a Masters in Diplomacy
                                                                            Online.at.Norwich.University.
                                                                                           Edu/Diplomacy
                                                                            128
Then, as now, she struck me as a smart, charismatic leader, a quick study   Never Fly Coach Again
                                                                            Save on First Class International
(insert pat on the head to HRC) with a strong sense of humor and of
                                                                            Airfare..Up.to.60%! Cook Travel
the absurd (such as her ability, if she were ever to waste her              www.cooktravel.net
                                                                            512
time reading this article, to note the absurdity of it).— both
very useful when working on foreign-policy basket cases where chances
                                                                          New Age Book
of solutions are slim to none..The Clintonites can shoot me if they want,
                                                                          Publishing
                                                                            Self-Publish Your New Age Book On
(no thanks, we'll leave the shooting to Dick Cheney) but Clinton            Your.Terms..Find.Out How
isn't going to end up in the Secretary of State Hall of Fame (there,        Today!
                                                                            www.BalboaPress.com
there Aaron, being a purse holder isn't so bad that you have to             512
throw sticks and stones. Lots of men do it for Secretary .                  Sign up for Google
Clinton and still hold their heads high).                                   Offers
                                                                            Find great deals in your city
You might conclude otherwise, given the tsunami of favorable media          from.Google.Offers. Sign up today!
                                                                            vvww.google.com/offers
coverage and international acclaim and awards she has received,             512
particularly from the traveling press corps and just about every            More about...
                                                                            Barack Obama4+
international leader on the planet..But don't let any of that               President Obama Office$
fool you, especially you gullible women. But that's not unusual.            Obama46
Alone amon
         g the cabi
                 met secretaries,
                               America
                                     ' ts op
                                          dip1omat                          President Obarna

traditionally already wears a nonpartisan halo, whether her name is
Albright or Rice. And here I allude to Secretaries of State
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015




wearing a decorative headpiece and.it's not coincidental.at
all that I name the only two women as examples to hold the
office. It's not because I'm a misogynist or anything. See
introductory line about how much I admire Hillary Clinton
which.should read Secretary Clinton.,

Still, what the media haven't done is to ask some of the tough questions
about what makes a truly consequential secretary of state. Nor has the
press (or the punditocracy, for that matter) been able to establish any
standard against which her performance might be measured. So true.
Nobody EVER holds Hillary Rodham Clinton to ANY standard
at all. It's disgraceful what she gets away with.

My take on her performance -- midway through what is likely to be her
last year in the job -- has little to do with her own abilities, which are
impressive. (Insert, again, pat on Secretary Hillary's head)


What shapes Clinton's performance more are the two unfriendly
universes in which she operates: the cruel world beyond America's
shores (as opposed to the really gentle one she's been exposed
to here at home) and the bureaucratically skewed one back home.
Throw in her own innate caution (well, Aaron, you know how
women are. It's so hard for us to make up our minds) when it
comes to taking on some of the hopeless issues of the day (see the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, Iran), and what you have is a very hardworking
(pat, pat, pat) and smart media.superstar.(do you mean like
Kim Kardashian? I mean, I think Hillary at least has better
hair, don't you Aaaron? For a media superstar?).who fights for
her department at home and shines abroad on several key 21st-century
issues that she has identified as critical, but has yet to put any major
points on the board. The Twitter summary of Clinton's legacy would
read: No spectacular failures, but no spectacular achievements either.
A.John Quincy Adams, George Marshall, Dean Acheson, Henry
Kissinger, or James Baker she's not (see paragraph titled "Anatomy
Really is Destiny" which explains how you have to have a penis
to be a successful Secretary of State. Or politician, for that
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015




matter. Over the years, I've thought a great deal about what is required
to be a truly effective, consequential, even great secretary of state
(Because I, unlike Secretary Clinton, sit on the sidelines and
don't realloy have anthing consequential to do except think
about what consequential people do and criticize them)..The
position is a unique one. It's   the second-best job in Washington and
carries a status no other cabinet position holds, period (Mine is the
best job because nobody holds me accountable for anything
and I have no responsibility).

Part of the halo effect is that the job is supposed to be apolitical, like the
country's foreign policy itself. When it comes to foreign policy, politics is
supposed to stop at the water's edge. And Americans like to believe,
somewhat naively, that the country's top diplomat is immune or
somehow protected from the seamier aspects of Washington's partisan
swamp. Secretaries of state are expected to rise above the fray, and they
generally try to. This is one reason their public image and favorability
ratings tend to be so high (except in Hillary's case, she just hasn't
been held to any high standard, we have just given her a pass,
see above paragraph) .

Still, in the history of the Republic, only two secretaries of state have
resigned over reasons of high principle -- William Jennings Bryan and
Cyrus Vance..The job -- like so much of America's high politics -- is
filled by survivors, not martyrs. Tending to the country's foreign policy is
a tough assignment, one that requires a combination of skill and luck
(and a penis, see paragraph titled "Anatomy Really is
Destiny") to succeed.

The latter is particularly important. If crisis opens the door to greatness
in the presidency, it does the same for the country's top diplomat..Had
there been no Civil War, Theodore Roosevelt lamented about his own
missing great moment, no one would have known Abraham Lincoln's
name..Without the right kind of crisis abroad, no matter how talented
the secretary of state, there's no chance to demonstrate his or her stuff..
What, you thinkOthe ongoing conflicts in Iraq and
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015




Afghanistan and the revolutions you've overseen in Yemen,
Libya, Egypt and Tunisia are enough? You need to show your
stuff Hillary you lazy girl. Oh, right, I'm sorry, you CAN'T show
your stuff. You don't HAVE stuff. See paragraph titled
"Anatomy Really is Destiny".

So what makes a great secretary of state? Fortuna is necessary, but not
sufficient for top-level performance. Three other elements are required
too.


1. The president must have your back.

All presidents support their secretaries of state, but not all get the kind of
support critical to success. Baker used to say that he was George H.W.
Bush's man at the State Department, not the State Department's man at
the White House. Those two were particularly close, and it gave Baker
real authority, power, and street credibility. Kissinger and Richard
Nixon, on the other hand, were more competitive, though each exploited
the other's talent and authority to command and marshal respect and
power.


If there's daylight between the two or if it's clear that the White House
isn't really empowering the secretary to take on the important issues of
the day, the latter's status is diminished. The president not only needs to
tell the world that his secretary of state is a trusted confidante, but he
also needs to demonstrate it. If a president doesn't chargeOthe secretary
with responsibility for tackling the biggest challenges, how does he or she
become truly important?


2. Anatomy, really is destiny.

Freud was talking about gender differences here. But the capacity to
project a physical presence and persona is critical to success in politics
and foreign policy. And that persona, F. Scott Fitzgerald held, flowed
from an unbroken series of gestures. Effective presidents and secretaries
of state are actors on a.public stage; they require charm,

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015




flattery,.toughness, and drama to make allies and adversaries take



them seriousl , articularly in a negotiation or crisis. So,




Oover                 7 or               That makes sense to me.
That means playing any number of roles, sometimes with high gestures
of real or feigned anger, frustration, or disappointment. During the 1948
Senate hearings on the plan for European recovery that would bear his
name, Marshall, whom columnist James Reston described that day as
displaying legendary "moral grandeur," silenced an interrupting senator
with a single glare. Kissinger threatened to walk out on Syria's Hafez al-
Assad at least once; Baker did the same with Assad, the Palestinians, and
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir.


Here's my suggestion to you Aaron. You say you're not an
"FOH", so rm guessing you've never met Secretary Clinton,
which I suppose is the only way you could write something as
bone-headed as this. Why don't you take this article over to the
State Department, see if you can get an audience with her
while she reads it, and stand there and await her reaction. And
then why don't you let us know if she can get you to take her
seriously enough to convince you that anatomy isn't really
destiny. I'll standy by.


•
3. The negotiator's mindset.

Beavers build dams, and teenagers talk on the phone and text. By
definition, effective secretaries of state work negotiations, defuse crises,
and tackle issues that normal human beings consider very hard. A
coherent worldview is important too, but not as critical as the instinctive



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015




capacity to   know how to make a deal, sense the opportunity, and then
figure out how to close it.


Kissinger may have been the grand strategist, but both he and Baker had
the negotiator's mindset, the ability to figure out how to assemble the
pieces of the puzzle strewn on the living room floor and stay even when
all the pieces didn't quite fit..Kissinger's Middle East diplomacy -- three
disengagement agreements following the October 1973 war -- is a
remarkable testament to those skills: The one between Israel and Syria
still survives, while the other two, between Egypt and Israel, evolved into
a peace treaty. There's no school at which to learn these kinds of things.
Marshall was a military man; Kissinger an academic; Baker a lawyer. All
possessed a natural ability to gauge how to move the pieces around on
the board.


Almost four years in, Hillary Clinton is undeniably one for three. And
here's where I just have to say, fuck you Aaron.

She clearly has star power -- a*Gallup poll.last year had Clinton at
an approval rating of 66 percent, more popular than the president and
the vice president and better regarded than she herself has been at any
time since 1993. And in terms of raw ability, she has the smarts and work
ethic to do the job.


We know Clinton is talented..(pat, pat, pat) 4>What we don't know is
how she'd do in a sustained negotiation or in coordinating and
orchestrating a grander political and military design. Her capacity in that
regard has never really been tested, and likely won't be: You can't be a
John Quincy Adams negotiating a historic treaty with Spain, a Dean
Acheson orchestrating the Truman Doctrine, or a George Marshall doing
NATO unless Fortuna and your boss let you.


What about her relationship with the president? Political rivals turned
compatriots can make for close bonds -- think Rabin and Shimon Peres.
Frenemies? Perhaps there's a great respect between the two born of


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015




political combat and now from the common challenge of making
America's foreign policy work.


But by either circumstance or design, her relationship with President
Barack Obama doesn't seem to have produced real empowerment. Sure,
they may have lunch together each week and she has a chance to weigh
in on key decisions like whether they have tuna salad or chicken
kabobs, but he hasn't allowed her to own the high-profile issues. And
ownership is critical to at least having a chance to do big things.


This doesn't mean she lacks accomplishments. She has fought hard and
succeeded in acquiring resources for the State Department; used her star
power to improve America's image abroad; sharpened America's
response to the Libyan crisis; focused on development, technology, and
the environment in a way few of her predecessors have;
and.highlighted the urgency of women's issues (ah, those
"women's" issues she's so, preoccupied with. More on this
later Aaaron)+4>from one end of the planet to the other. That she's
had no legacy achievements is less her doing than the result of two self-
reinforcing realities. Aaron, take note, you can't have a legacy
until you leave a place. She's still there. Just you wait.

First, in this administration, power on domestic policy and foreign policy
is lodged in the White House. Many key issues (and the strategic policies
that shape them), from Iran to Afghanistan to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, are reposited there, the president's various envoys and czars
notwithstanding.


The irony really is quite striking. Here's a president who inherited the
worst economic crisis since the 193os. You might have thought he'd be
only too happy to delegate some of the big issues to his secretary of state.
This hasn't happened; the White House controls everything of real
consequence. Indeed, whoever gets the job when Clinton leaves should
take notice: This president doesn't let go, at least on foreign policy.




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015




Second, one reason for the absence of ownership is the changing nature
of the world Clinton inherited. The reality is that there haven't been all
that many good chances for successful diplomacy. The conflicts where
U.S. diplomacy might actually bridge gaps between conflicting parties --
always rare -- are tough to identify. There are plenty of crises, but are any
really amenable to effective diplomacy?


I know the rap that effective secretaries create their own opportunities.
But negotiating with the mullahcracy in Iran on the nuclear issue? Going
for broke with Mahmoud Abbas and Benjamin Netanyahu on the Israeli-
Palestinian issue? Building nations in Iraq and Afghanistan by sorting
out differences between Sunnis, Kurds, and Shiites?.Let's get real.


The fact that Obama inherited the two longest wars in U.S. history also
gives the Pentagon an outsized role in his foreign policy. The State
Department is of course deeply involved in the political dimensions of
these issues. But abroad the military quite appropriately runs these wars,
and at home, because of the stakes in American lives and money, the
White House controls and coordinates high policy.


Finally, there's the secretary's own caution.


Clinton was a star even before becoming secretary of state; she had little
to prove. Ditto for Colin Powell..That kind of fame also makes you less
hungry and less eager to take risks.


Maybe it's also just smart political instincts. I suspect that when Clinton
looks around the world these days, she concludes that all these high-level
issues she doesn't own are really a dog's lunch; they are opportunities all
right -- for failure. Sometimes getting out of the way of history is better
than getting run over by it. Nope Aaron, that would be for
someone like you. And knowing what you can't do is as important as
figuring out what you can.


Perhaps Clinton is a secretary of state well suited for her times. She has
faithfully carried out the president's policies and reinforced the balance

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015




he's trying to strike: how to lead a world in which America has to be
much more discerning and disciplined about where and how it projects
its power. To the extent Obama is succeeding in this enterprise, she is
too..And whatever the future holds for her, she'll be remembered as a
pretty competent secretary of state.


So what if Hillary Clinton doesn't get admitted into the Foggy Bottom
Hall of Fame. James Buchanan didn't either, and he was the last
secretary of state to become president. But who's thinking about that?


In closing, here's some advice for you Aaron. Right before the
Christmas holidays, Secretary Clinton gave an awe-inspiring
speech about peace and security and the important role
women play in bringing that about. You were probably too
busy at one of your mostly male dominated elite foreign policy
conferences pretending to solve the world's crises to read
about it. Or maybe you didn't read about it because none of
your mostly elite male foreign policy wonks wrote about it.
They were too busy covering your mostly male foreign policy
conferences where you were pretending to solve the world's
crises. But if you had heard it, you might have learned
something about Secretary Clinton's so-called "women's
issues". You would have learned that she's not talking just
about women, she's talking about the world that you
supposedly care so much about. She has taken more risks,
personally and professionally, in a day than you have in your
life. When she goes into any foreign country, people throng to
her side.not because of her so-called star power but because
she is a stateswoman and a humanitarian in the truest senses
of the words. And legacy? Stay tuned.




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015




* (Friend of Bill001*Friend of Hilary)

Aaron David Miller is a distinguished scholar at the Woodrow Wilson

International Center for Scholars. His new   book,,Can America Have
Another Great President?, will be published this year. "Reality
Check," his column forAForeign•Policy.com, runs weekly.




•
aReply forward
  Click here to Reply or Forward

•
5% full
Using 427 MB of your 7701 MB

•
• 2012•Google - Terms & Privacy

Last account activity: 1 minute ago
Details
You have one new message.



Laurie Rubiner




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790246 Date: 10/30/2015
