UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789200 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL

 To the Secretary of State
 From: Ambassador Robert Hunter
 March 2, 2012

 Dear Mme. Secretary, Dear Hillary —

 It was good to see you in Munich. Your presence and your words did a lot to reassure the allies
 about our continued commitment to NATO, despite the US force and budget drawdown and
 European uncertainties about the "tilt to Asia."

 I am writing today because of my concerns about the course of events regarding Iran, to urge a
 root-and-branch review of US interests and policies, and to suggest some specific steps to secure
 US interests, prevent a war, maximize the chances that you and the President can keep control of
 the crisis, and chart a way forward.

  We are now in a difficult place: where our capacity to avoid a war — which I believe would have
  severe consequences for us, for Israel, for other friends and allies, for the global economy, and
  for the entire Middle East — depends less on what we intend and do than on the actions of at least
  two other countries: Israel and Iran. We depend on both to be "sensible" — which may be a good
  bet — but we also depend on Iran to be able to exercise positive command-and-control over all of
  its forces, which is not a good bet.

  No major power, in my judgment, should ever willingly get itself into such a position of
  dependence on others to prevent severe consequences for its own national interests.

  I write from a background of more than 40 years of involvement in Middle East affairs, in and
  out of government, including as director of Middle East affairs for two years at the Carter NSC,
  during which time I took the lead in creating the Carter Doctrine for the Persian Gulf, was the
  White House representative on the US negotiating team for the West Bank and Gaza, and was
  NSC liaison to the American Jewish community leadership (working with Ed Sanders and then
  Al Moses, as well as for Fritz Mondale). In the last-named role, I was charged with doing what
  was necessary to protect President Carter against the anti-Israeli "Arabists" in the State
  Department. Further, when Governor Bill Clinton faced his first "test of fire" before the AIPAC
  annual convention in 1989, Sandy Berger brought me in to coach the Governor on what he had to
  say (and not to say) in order to be successful on the issues of deepest concern to Israel and its US
  supporters. As you know, since that time I have also been a strong and active "Clinton
  supporter."

  After long study of the Iranian issue and US strategic interests and policies in the entire region, I
  have come to believe that the way this issue has developed now leaves us with a very narrow


                                                    1

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789200 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789200 Date: 10/30/2015




 range of options, none of which we can desire to see played out and some of which are clearly
 unacceptable: to see Israel attack Iran (leading to our inevitably being drawn in), to initiate attack
 ourselves, to face the need at some point of living with an Iranian nuclear bomb (or a "turn of a
 screwdriver" distance from a bomb), or to see the issue continue to fester with all of the attendant
 uncertainties and risks.

 In considering circumstances and our options, we also need to recognize four realities:

 •    First, sanctions do not work, at least not to the degree we are trying to have them work.
      Indeed, I cannot think of one serious instance in which they have produced the desired result,
      certainly not when the target country sees some critical security interest at risk or the regime
      in power believes its rule to be in jeopardy. The greatest value of sanctions is for domestic
      political purposes: to "feel good" that we are "doing something," and to help avoid more
      serious, more risky, and less desirable steps, such as war, or, in the current case, also to try
      containing domestic political pressures in an election year. Further, if anything, sanctions
      lead a population to cleave to its leadership, whether out of "patriotism" or dependence.
      Sanctions are, in fact, a form of warfare. This may be manageable unless sanctions reach a
      "tipping point" where the regime being sanctioned, in this case Iran, calculates that it is better
      off responding in ways we would find unacceptable, including asymmetrical attacks (hence
      Iran's "shot across the bow" — a message of possible consequences — by "threatening" to
      close the Strait of Hormuz, a "threat" which, absent US/Israeli-initiated warfare, was not
      serious, given that Iran would suffer as much as any other country from pursuing that
      course.) We are now running the risk that the Iranian regime may reach such a "tipping
      point," which we ourselves cannot calculate with any precision. We also need to understand
      that virtually all of our European allies support sanctions against Iran, not primarily to try
      forcing a change in Iranian behavior but rather to forestall a US attack on Iran and to
      provide us with political ammunition in our efforts to forestall an attack by Israel. Perhaps
      your counterparts in Europe do not tell you that directly; my European colleagues, from
      NATO and elsewhere, are candid — and unanimous -- on that point.

  •   Second, what we are doing — or could do — will not produce a change in regime in Iran; in
      fact, our sanctions policy and other demonstrations of hostility (e.g., supporting subversion in
      Baluchistan, tolerating MEK activities in Iran, and repeatedly stating that "all options are on
      the table") are a godsend to the regime, even though the Iranian people, as a whole, are better
      disposed to the United States and the American people than are the people of any other
      Middle Eastern country. Even if there were a new Iranian regime, the chances that it would a)
      abandon all enrichment activities and b) conform to all of our other desires for Iranian
      actions, including in its foreign policies, are sufficiently small as to mean that "regime
      change" is not a serious option.



                                                    2

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789200 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789200 Date: 10/30/2015




  •   Third, despite protestations -- and perhaps self-belief -- to the contrary, during at least the
      last two plus US administrations, including when Khatami was president, we have not in fact
      been prepared to negotiate seriously with the Iranian regime in terms that have any chance
      to succeed. Indeed, from all accounts that I have seen, we have consistently required that Iran
      yield on critical points regarding its nuclear program before talks start. We have certainly
      been unprepared to say, much less demonstrate, that we recognize that Iran has legitimate
      security needs. (By contrast, the US did that with North Korea, beginning in the GW Bush
      administration.) The US has not been willing to provide such an underpinning for potentially
      successful negotiations -- even before we determine whether Iran would be prepared to
      respond positively, which of course is itself far from certain. Indeed, among the wide circle
      of people whom I know who have been deeply engaged in these issues over many years, both
      in the US and among the "EU-3," I know of no one whose judgment I value who disagrees
      with this summary of the US approach to negotiating with Iran.

      We have set preconditions to negotiations that no country could accept and that no serious
      diplomat — or no serious lawyer in a civil suit -- would demand unless the objective were to
      make negotiations impossible (which, of course, can at times be a valid objective). We have
      also not explored the possibility of cooperation with Iran, however limited, on other issues
      where we have important national interests at stake, such as Afghanistan, Iraq, terrorism, or
      the drug trade. (For instance, I learned during a visit with SACEUR to Kabul in 2007 that
      Iran asked for deployment of NATO troops on the Iranian-Afghan border to inhibit the
      Afghan drug trade, from which Iran suffers second only to Russia, but that the willingness of
      other key NATO Allies to do this was vetoed by the US). And we have not been prepared to
      put on the table, in concrete terms, that we are prepared to consider Iran's legitimate security
      interests, in ways that can credibly appeal not just to the Iranian regime but also to its people,
      in exchange for its behaving in ways acceptable to us (including, of course, on issues of
      concern to Israel).

      In sum, i f I were intent on pushing Iran to get a nuclear weapon, I would be following
      precisely the policy track that we have been on for the last several years.

  •   We also have to recognize a fourth and even deeper reality: that the Iranian nuclear issue is
      only one element of a deep-seated competition for power and influence being conducted
      throughout the region of the Persian Gulf and Southwest Asia. If the nuclear issue were
      resolved, no doubt others would be cited by Israel, Saudi Arabia, and perhaps others -- in
      opposition to US reconciliation with Iran. For decades, this competition has pitted Arab
      states of the Persian Gulf against Iran, beginning well before the advent of the current regime
      in Teheran. Furthermore, Israel's concerns with Iran are rooted only in part in the nuclear
      issue, but also derive from a critical element of its fundamental, decades-old security
      strategy: always to keep the US strategically tied to Israel in the region — in major part, at


                                                     3

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789200 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789200 Date: 10/30/2015




     least for the last three decades, through having a common "enemy." I first gained proof-
     positive of this point on the day after Israel turned the Sinai over to Egypt in May 1979, at
     which event I was the White House representative, when Menachem Begin made this point
     crystal clear to Cy Vance in Jerusalem. With the Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty, the risk of a
     successful Arab assault on Israel had immediately dropped to the vanishing point; as had the
     risk that such a conflict could escalate to a US-Soviet confrontation. From that time to this,
     Israel has needed a substitute means of keeping itself linked to the United States
     strategically, as any state in its situation would seek to do. Despite the American people's
     overwhelmingly positive sentiments toward Israel, no Israeli leader can ground the security
     of his country on such insubstantial stuff. Ironically, in the process of Israel's seeking to have
     an enemy in common with the US, for years there was debate in Israeli politics about
     whether Iraq or Iran would be more useful in fulfilling this purpose: the side of this debate
     that was prevailing at the time led Israel to be deeply involved in the Iran-contra affair,
     fostering arms supplies for Iran during the Iran-Iraq War.

     For US analysis, it is critical to understand two points: 1) that the "existential" concerns on
     the part of the most serious Israeli analysts are not only with developments in Iran but also --
     and perhaps even more important -- with their fear that, for whatever reason, at some point in
     the future Israel might not be able to count on the United States. That now includes fear of a
     backlash on the part of many Americans if Israel were credibly seen as leading the US into
     yet another Middle East conflict; and 2) that however much US and Israeli interests may on
     most occasions be compatible, they are not always identical and may at times potentially
     now on policy toward Iran -- in fact be at variance.




  President Obama is clearly looking for every way possible to avoid a war with Iran. From my
  current vantage point, I have also seen this directly in the activities and statements of US military
  leaders. I draw this conclusion even though so much administration rhetoric points in the
  opposite direction (e.g., "all options are on the table;" "we will prevent Iran from getting the
  bomb") -- obviously both to increase pressures on Iran and to reassure Israel. Yet despite all
  efforts, it is far from clear that the administration will be able to control events, to prevent an
  unwanted conflict with Iran.

  The President faces the difficulty in the coming months of threading a needle: avoiding war
  while also not paying a heavy price in US domestic politics — a combination of pressures from
  the Israel lobby and from the Republican presidential candidates. By this logic, US calculations
  on the Iranian nuclear issue can be quite different after our presidential election. Notably, the
  capacity of the administration to consider policy solely (or even primarily) from the perspective
  of US national interests is today more compromised by domestic political pressures than has


                                                    4

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789200 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789200 Date: 10/30/2015




 been true at least since the run-up to the 2003 invasion of Iraq and perhaps since the decades-
 long freezing of policy toward China that was imposed by the "China lobby."

 These pressures, along with a fixation on the Iranian "nuclear file," have also inhibited us in
 considering — or exploring through diplomacy — areas where Iranian and US interests are at least
 compatible. This is most obvious regarding Afghanistan, where there was valuable Iranian
 cooperation after 9/11, based not on Khamanei's love for the US but on Iran's own self-interest.
 This cooperation was scotched by President Bush's designation of Iran as a member of an "Axis
 of Evil." Yet as we shift our strategic posture in the region, we will pay a heavy penalty in our
 efforts to construct a viable security structure and to promote political stability and
 modernization in Afghanistan and Southwest Asia -- and we may even fail in the attempt --
 unless we are prepared to deal with all of the regional countries. Refusing to deal with Iran (or,
 if we were to refuse to deal with any other major regional country) vastly complicates our
 situation.

  To help us get out of our current dilemma, I suggest the following 7 steps:

      1. A root-and-branch revisiting of US interests in the Middle East, the Persian Gulf, and
         Southwest Asia, in general, and with regard to Iran in particular. This review needs to go
         far beyond the "nuclear file" to consider a full range of regional issues, especially those
         involved 1) as a consequence of the reduction of US engagements in Iraq and
         Afghanistan; 2) with the interests and roles of all other regional countries, notably
         Pakistan, India, and Saudi Arabia, plus the interests and roles of Russia and China and the
         European allies (including a special focus on Turkey); and 3) with the impact of
         developments in Syria, Bahrain, Yemen, and elsewhere in the region, including those
         basic shocks to old patterns of politics and society that shelter under the rubric "Arab
         spring" and will be a long time in playing out.

      2. Consideration of a broad range of policy alternatives and potential interactions among
         policies, not just about Iran but also regarding the entire region — in effect, a "holistic"
         approach to Middle East and Southwest Asia policy which does not now exist; of course,
         this analysis needs to include the demands of a "containment and deterrence" strategy if
         1) Iran does move toward getting the bomb; or 2) efforts to prevent its doing so (without
         war) do not succeed. This consideration of alternatives should proceed with US domestic
         political factors sidelined, to be reintroduced into the balance only after objective analysis
         has been completed.

      3. In order for the analysis above to be truly useful to you and the President, I suggest that
         you engage a small number of people from outside the government who, together, are
         able 1) to provide in-depth understanding of all the countries, cultures, histories, politics,


                                                    5

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789200 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789200 Date: 10/30/2015




        and other factors involved in the Middle East/Persian Gulf/Southwest Asia region; 2) to
        "think strategically," beginning with clear-sighted analysis of US interests across the
        region and their interconnections; and 3) to design a variety of options for your
        consideration that go far beyond the current range of policy choices. I believe there can
        be value for you in drawing, on a systematic basis, upon the counsel of seasoned,
        regionally-knowledgeable, and strategically-adept American experts and former officials
        from outside and who have much to contribute.

     4. In assembling a small group of people to render you and the President this service, it will
        also be critical to choose people 1) who are not just the "usual suspects," but who have
        the capacity to provide you with fresh, serious, knowledgeable, and independent counsel;
        2) who have no "axes to grind;" 3) who do not have ideological or political perspectives
        that would inhibit them in providing the most candid advice, based solely on their
        understanding of the US national interest as opposed to any domestic political interest; 4)
        who can be relied upon to exercise the utmost discretion; and 5) who will report directly
        to you.

         By contrast, to base the composition of such a group on ensuring the representation of
         different constituencies -- concerning the area of the world which is the mostly highly-
         charged in US domestic politics -- would be to risk rendering its work of little and
         perhaps no value as a tool of analysis for you and the President. All the senior US
         political leaders whom I have advised over nearly a half-century — including three
         Presidents and virtually all of the serious Democratic candidates for President during that
         time, have insisted that I and others provide them with the best facts, analysis, and policy
         alternatives of which we have been capable. They would then add the domestic politics.

     5. There is a wide range of possibilities for discussions/negotiations with Iran, beyond the
        nuclear file (which itself is much too narrowly-constructed and technocratic) where we
        have at least compatible interests with Iran. In addition to those listed above
        (Afghanistan, Iraq, counter-terrorism, and counter-drug trafficking), we should propose a
        wide range of mutually-advantageous confidence-building measures (CBMs), including
        counter-piracy; an Incidents-at-Sea Agreement (such as we concluded with the Soviets in
        1972 and that is already at times being followed pragmatically by US and Iranian naval
        vessels in the Persian Gulf); a freedom of shipping agreement, including the Strait of
        Hormuz; and — eventually — regional CBMs, regional arms control, mutual security
        arrangements, and a new structure of security for the Persian Gulf region (on which I
        have written extensively). Further, we should be enlisting "honest broker" third parties in
        our diplomatic efforts (e.g., Oman, which has already provided some informal contacts
        with Iran for us), and also using third parties to help educate elements of the Iranian elite



                                                   6

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789200 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789200 Date: 10/30/2015




         on the demands and technicalities of nuclear deterrence, as well as on the net
         disadvantages to Iran and its security, overall, if it were to acquire nuclear weapons.

     6. For the longer-term, we need to begin developing, with Israel, a basis for providing it
        •with security and political reassurances that do not depend on having a common enemy
         or a distorted perspective of either US or Israeli strategic interests in the region that could
         lead to damaging consequences for both countries. The intellectual basis for such a
         revision already exists in Israel; it is witnessed by the concerns expressed by several
         former heads of Mossad and the IDF, regarding potentially-vital risks to Israel's future if
         confrontation with Iran turns to conflict.

      7. A parallel assessment of the requirements for stopping support by entities in Saudi Arabia
          in their fostering of radical Islamist fundamentalism and financing some of America's
          most virulent regional enemies.

  Of course, there are myriad tactical and timing issues regarding any new approach to
  negotiations with Iran; there will be strong objections within the administration (and on Capitol
  Hill) even to considering fresh analysis and alternative policies; and with all the pressures the
  administration faces, both foreign and domestic, there may never be a propitious moment, and
  the nay-sayers will always make this argument in order to try preventing any change in US
  policy.

  But I believe it is critical to do whatever is possible to forestall a conflict by accident or loss of
  control, from which the United States and Israel will suffer as well as will Iran and others. In my
  judgment, that effort could well benefit from a fresh, no-holds-barred process of analysis and
  examination of a full range of alternative courses. Further, today's short-term tactics 1) to
  pressure Iran; 2) to try building international support for punitive sanctions; and 3) to deal with
  domestic political constituencies need to be measured against the acute risks that, through no
  fault of its own, the administration may not succeed in "threading the needle" and that a conflict
  will still ensue, with all of the attendant costs in blood and treasure. This would confound what
  are clearly the best intentions of the President and his team to avoid such an occurrence -- the full
  results of which would be far worse, I fear, than the damage done to US interests both abroad
  and at home (including the US and global economies) by the 2003 invasion of Iraq.

  With best regards,
  Robert




                                                    7

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789200 Date: 10/30/2015
