      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787758 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Sunday, February 13, 2011 8:05 PM
To:                                'JilotyLC©state.gov'
Subject:                           Fw: Two ideas



Pls print.

    Original Message
From: Campbell, Kurt M <CampbellKM@state.gov>
To: H; Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>; Reines, Philippe I <reinesp@state.gov>; Mills, Cheryl D
<MillsCD@state.gov>; Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent: Sat Feb 05 22:06:46 2011
Subject: Two ideas

I know you all are exceptionally busy with Egypt and after action from the Chiefs of Mission but I just wanted to run two
ideas by you all.

I met last week with my friend Bill Inglee who was just appointed as Staff Director for House Approps. We were talking
about Start and he mentioned that the role of validating Republicans was crucial in helping to nudge uncertain Senators
into the yes camp. It occurred to me that we might be able to do a similar thing with Iraq funding. A concerted effort to
get the Iraq architects like Kagan Hadley Bremer Condi and others associated with the war to speak out in favor of State
budget requests for the transition. Such an effort might draw some positive attention and would again strike a note of
bipartisanship as a central theme. This could help on the margins. It probably is something LA is working on already but I
just wanted flag in case not.

Second, I was at a Pentagon ceremony last week for a guy who once worked for me. He was given a medal for valor and
there were flags and proud family members and it was really quite inspirational.

Have we ever thought of institutionalizing a medal for courageous diplomatic service in the line of duty (perhaps we
already have one)? I can imagine establishing a review board with a collection of distinguished and formers to review
nominations from every post. Just in my own experience I have heard stories of true heroism about young officers going
to great lengths to reunite families, assist after a natural calamity like Haiti, or protect someone from persecution. When
someone is truly deserving we could have a big event with the Secretary making remarks and pinning on a medal. The
Pentagon uses these events to favorably brand its people for the public. Why couldn't we seek to put a face on a
younger more operationally deployed diplomat that represents a new and courageous generation of forward deployed
diplomats? I think we could get a lot of positive feedback from this and could help us fight the Hill budget battles at least
on the margins. With some subtle work such a person could also be highlighted as a person of the week on one of the
networks. The whole thing would be great for morale as well.

Just a couple of thoughts to consider. Best Kurt




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787758 Date: 10/30/2015
