      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788070 Date: 10/30/2015

                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                               Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                               Tuesday, February 7, 2012 11:04 AM
To:
Subject:                            FW: CNN Global Public Square: The Doha Palestinian unity agreement: Now the hard
                                    part



This is a solid analysis of the Doha deal.


From: Robert Danin
Sent: Tuesday, February 07, 2012 10:45 AM
To: Undisclosed recipients
Subject: CNN Global Public Square: The Doha Palestinian unity agreement: Now the hard part




The Doha Palestinian Unity Agreement: Now the hard part
Editor's Note: Robert M. Danin is Eni Enrico Matte! Senior Fellow for Middle East and
Africa Studies at the Council on Foreign Relations. He is a former Director for the Levant
and Israeli-Palestinian Affairs at the National Security Council and former Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs. He writes the blog Middle East Matters at
CFR. org.

By Robert M. Danin — Special to CNN

February 7, 2012

Monday's Fatah-Hamas unity agreement announced in Doha marks the latest in a series of unimplemented
accords between the two Palestinian adversaries. The two sides announced - again - their intention to unify their
efforts and form an independent caretaker government to shepherd the Palestinians in both the West Bank and
Gaza to new elections.

In an innovation that apparently violates the Palestinian Basic Law, the two sides agreed that Mahmoud Abbas
would serve as both president and prime minister of the Palestinian Authority (PA). Recall, the PA's prime

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788070 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788070 Date: 10/30/2015




minister position was established in 2003 and Abbas was appointed to that post to reduce the absolute powers of
the presidency, then in Yassir Arafat's hands. Ironically, it is now Abbas as president who is seeking to claim
back what he once tried to take away.

Monday's announcement is more of a statement of intent than it is a full-fledged accord. When it comes to
Palestinian unity agreements - and there have been a few - the announcement is the easy part.

Recall the February 2007 Mecca Accords and last April's unity agreement —each either collapsed rather quickly
or was never even implemented. In the case of last April's unity agreement, many of the key details were left to
be resolved. Such is the case today. Will finances be shared under the unity agreement? Will llamas agree to
disband, let alone agree to recognize previous PLO agreements (including recognition of Israel)?

Another key question is: just how independent would such a transitional government be? The approach adopted
last April, while calling for a technocratic government, also called for an outside steering committee comprised
of Hamas and Fatah that would provide direction to the government.

Such directional control would have been enough for such a government to be considered untouchable by the
United States, and probably the other members of the Quartet. These kinds of critical details will need to be
addressed before the two sides reconvene in Cairo on February 18 as they have agreed to do.

Perhaps the more interesting question is why, after just last week when Fatah officials criticized Hamas for
failing to consult in earnest, did the two sides come together with today's shotgun announcement?

Two sets of shifting, interrelated regional dynamics are at play here. First, both Fatah and llamas have
effectively lost their respective patrons - Mubarak in the former case, and Assad in the latter. This has created
something of a vacuum that has led to a second phenomenon: other regional players stepping in to try to help
encourage Palestinian developments along.

Over the past month, Jordan has shepherded talks with Israel in an effort to guide the two parties back to final
status negotiations. Amidst intensive Jordanian diplomatic efforts, the Qataris called Abbas and Khaled Meshal
to Doha, and apparently made them an offer they couldn't refuse. It remains to be seen if Abbas said yes as a
polite guest, or if he is serious about moving forward.

In all likelihood, Abbas probably said yes in order to create options for himself and create two parallel tracks - a
potential negotiating track brokered by the Jordanians and the Quartet, and a reconciliation track brokered by
Qatar. Such an approach will not be welcomed by many in the region - Israel has already registered its strong
opposition - and others such as Jordan and the United States will also likely tell Abbas that he can only have
one approach: negotiations with Israel that do not include Hamas. Yet, Abbas will want to keep his options
open.

It is possible that this time is different, and that the region's uprisings have so altered Palestinian politics that
real reconciliation will now ensue, leading to new elections later this year. The fundamentals still argue against
it: Fatah enjoys exclusive control of the West Bank and is fighting Hamas on the ground to keep it that way;
similarly, llamas is resisting any Fatah encroachment on their supremacy in Gaza, and it is inconceivable that
the militant Islamist organization will relinquish control there should it lose elections.

Hence, PLO chairman and PA president Mahmoud Abbas must make some difficult choices now: reconcile
with Hamas thereby establishing greater Palestinian unity but incurring greater international (and possibly
regional) isolation and risk losing his Fatah party's remaining control in a region quickly giving rise to Islamist
parties. Or partner with the initiative launched by neighboring Jordan and endeavor to negotiate with Israel. He
has long professed this latter option as his preference.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788070 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788070 Date: 10/30/2015




The views expressed in this article are solely those of Robert M Danin

http://globalpublicsauare.blogs.cnn.com/2012/02/07/the-doha-palestinian-unity-agreement-now-the-hard-part/

Check out my blog Middle East Matters: http://blogs.cfr.org/danin/



This email has been scanned by the Symantec Email Security.cloud service.
For more information please visit http://www.symanteccloud.com




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788070 Date: 10/30/2015
