      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784589 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                    B6



From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Thursday, November 24, 2011 5:08 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Cairo Update 11/24, 2300



Fyi. Not great news.


From: Wailes, Jacob
Sent: Thursday, November 24, 2011 04:34 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3; Burns, William J
Cc: Feitman, Jeffrey D; Dibble, Elizabeth L
Subject: Fw: Cairo Update 11/24, 2300

FYI

Anne says the reaction in Tahrir is negative. She expects we are going to be presented with an energized demonstration
tomorrow, with the possibility that security forces can't control it. Ganzouri may not last long.

Happy Thanksgiving!




From: Cutrona, Aimee
Sent: Thursday, November 24, 2011 04:15 PM
To: NEA-ELA-DL: Wailes, Jacob; 'Steven_N_Simo                    <Steven_N_Simon(
'Prem_G._Kum                   <Prem_G._Kumar                                                                      SES-
0; Schwartz, Larry; Wittes, Tamara C; Biome, Donald A; Caudill, Mark A
Cc: Patterson, Anne W; Sievers, Marc J; ECPODistribution; Kabra, Patricia; Gollner-Sweet, Katharina; North, Walter
(Cairo/DIR); Beed, John (Cairo DIR);
Brown, Todd 3
Subject: Cairo Update 11/24, 2300

Immediate reaction to the reported naming of former Prime Minister (1996-1999) Kamal Ganzoury to replace PM Sharaf
has been mixed, leaning toward negative. We have seen little enthusiam for Ghanzoury as the leader of a new more
assertive cabinet.

We also have seen no formal announcement from the SCAF. Satellite channel CBC is reporting that the SCAF leaked the
news about Ganzoury to 'test the waters' with Tahrir demonstrators before making an official confirmed announcement.

Before becoming PM Ghanzoury was Minister of Planning and received his PhD in the U.S. When in government
Ganzoury had a solid reputation as a technocrat (see bio below), but left office after accusations of corruption and a
proported clash with then-president Mubarak After leaving office Ghanzoury did not speak publically until after the January
25 protests which he heralded as a new day for Egypt. Since then his name has been floated as a potential PM or
presidential candidate.

Reaction

Media report that MB-FJP member Hamdi Hassan complained of another Mubarak Minister and called Ghanzouri 'too
old.' Fellow Islamist and Nour Party member Yousri Hammad welcomed Ganzoury because he was dismissed by the
former regime. Al-Wasat Party leader Abol-Ela Mady called the appointment 'bad news' and asked 'Is this an attempt to
reproduce a subordinate prime minister?

Liberals have mixed views as well. Activist Mamdouh Hamza commended the choice as 'Ganzoury has no political
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784589 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784589 Date: 10/30/2015



ambitions and is concluding his political career'. Hamza told media Ghanzoury had confirmed he had been asked to stand
up a new cabinet. However, Youth Activist Tarek al-Khouly (Youth Coalition and April 6) told AJ the choice of Ganzoury
will 'provoke' Tahrir. The National Association for Change's Ahmed Darrag said the NAC rejects the appointment because
his era as PM left some questions unanswered (related to corruption charges against him). Al Adl party's Mostafa El
Nagar called Ghanzoury's appointment very provocative and said it will 'escalate the situation in Tahrir'. He added that
Ghanzoury is 'too old to hold this responsibility.' Kifaya activist George !shag said he respects Ganzoury but wondered
why the SCAF selected someone from the previous regime and not other rumored candidates without that same history.

Bio

Kama! Al Ganzoury
DOB:
POB:
Marital Status:
Education:
Doctorate Degree in Economics from Michigan University
Career:
Member of Board of the Scienific Research and Technology Academy
Economic Consultant of the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa
Member of the President's Association of Consultants
Member of the National Councils specified in Production, Education and services
Professor at the National Planning College - 1973
Undersecretary of Min. of Planning - 1974 - 1975
Governor of New Valley - 1976
Governor of Beni Suef - 1977
Head of the Planning Association - 1977
Minister of Planning - 1982
Min. Of Planning and International Cooperation - 1984
Deputy Prime Minister and Min. Of Planning and International Cooperation - 1986
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Planning - 1987
Prime Minister from 4 Jan 1996 - 5 October 1999 (was labelled the PM for the Poor)
• During his rule huge programs were implemented which concentrated on Production and Agriculture, including the
Toshka project in the south of Egypt, as well as plans for populating Sinai. • The 2nd Metro line that connected Shubra Al
Kheima and Al Moneib • Normalized relations between Egypt and the International Monetary Fund.




From: Cutrona, Aimee
To: NEA-ELA-DL; Wailes, Jacob; 'Steven_N_Simon                  <Steven N Simon
'Prem_G._Kumar                  <Prem_G._Kumar                                                                   ; SES-
0; Schwartz, Larry; Wittes, Tamara C; Biome, Donald A; Caudill, Mark A
Cc: Patterson, Anne W; Sievers, Marc 3; ECPODistribution; Kabra, Patricia; Gollner-Sweet, Katharina; North, Walter
(Cairo/DIR); Beed, John (Cairo DIR);
Brown, Todd 3
Sent: Thu Nov 24 19:13:24 2011
Subject: Cairo Update 11/24, 1900

1.(SBU) Tahrir has been largely quiet today as protest organizers plan for a million-man march on Friday November
25. Approximately thirty thousand protesters are currently in the square with numbers expected to increase throughout
the evening. The MOH announced that a total of 38 have died and 3256 injured since clashes began. There are reports
of small protests outside of Cairo with the largest, several thousand, taking place in Alexandria. A truce was brokered
overnight between police and protesters that had been clashing on Mohamed Mahmoud Street. We have no confirmation
of reports of ongoing clashes and the military has announced it has erected barricades calling in Statement No 86 on
"Revolutionary youth" not to dismantle them. The SCAF issued an earlier statement (No. 85) calling on Egyptians to work
together for stability and warning of dangerous times. It calls for cooperation in keeping police and protesters apart and
prohibiting people from going on roofs nearby. The Sheikh of Al Azhar issued a statement supporting the right to protest
and criticizing violence against protesters urging the MOI to issue orders to immediately halt the firing on fellow
Egyptians.

2. (SBU) Press report that MOI Mandour El Essawy has been summoned as part of an investigation launched by the
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784589 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784589 Date: 10/30/2015



public prosecutor into police handling of protests. In comments made on a private satellite news program this morning Al
Essawy denied accusations on use of force and defended police actions. Separately, and head of the military police
Major General Hamdy Badeen also appeared on another satellite news program this morning. He told viewers that the
military had not been part of attacks on protesters and was not present in Tahrir when these reports surfaced.

Multiple Calls for a Million Man Demo

3.(SBU) Thirty eight revolutionary forces (including the Youth Coalition of the Egyptian Revolution and April 6) T issued a
statement calling for a million man demonstration on Friday for "Martyrs' rights and Saving Egypt." The statement also
announced a "road map" for the transfer of power no later than 15 May 2012. It calls for an immediate end to violence, the
release of those detained during current protests and arrest of those responsible, restructuring the MOI and removal of
corrupt officials, the formation of a national salvation government with authority to run the state, raising the living standard,
cancelling the Shura Council in order to allow more time for People's Assembly and presidential elections and a "possible"
postponing of PA elections by 2 weeks. Today, the Muslim Brotherhood has also announced it will participate in Friday
protests with a different theme, calling it the Friday of Saving Al Aqsa, with the participation of Sheikh Yussuf Al
Qaradawy.

Elections Will Go Forward

4. (SBU) At noon on November 24 the SCAF held a joint press conference with election officials confirming earlier
commitments from SCAF Chairman Field Marshall Tantawi and Army Chief of Staff Enan that elections would start next
week. SCAF Generals Mamdouh Shahin and Mokhtar Al Molla led the conference. They were joined by Higher Election
Commission Chairman Judge Abdel Moez Ibrahim, MOI election expert General Rifaat Qomsan, and a representative
from the MFA there to talk about overseas voting. SCAF representatives and the HEC also encouraged voters to
participate on election-day. SCAF representatives denied reports that MOI El Essawy had claimed the MOI was not able
to secure the elections. Judge Ibrahim denied reports that thousands of judges have said they will not participate in the
election due to security concerns and opened his remarks by extending condolences to those injured in the last
week. MOI's General Qomsan displayed ballots and explained voting procedure.

5. (SBU) Generals Molla and Shahine did not stick only to elections and spent some time during the conference justifying
the SCAF's leadership of the transition and defending the military's reputation. Both cited the popular mandate for the
military's rule, pointing to the constitutional referendum. Molla denied anyone was tried in military courts for political
reasons and complained that human rights groups were biased in their reporting. They both complained that SCAF
decision-making was hampered by lack of agreement among political forces. Molla was critical of protests as
unrepresentative of the will of all Egyptians. He denied the army had ever fired on civilians and blamed an unknown 10
percent of protesters for the violence in Tahrir.

6.(SBU) Molla also reviewed the commitments made in Tantawi's speech and in Enan's meeting with political forces and
said several of where already being implemented. He said the SCAF was still working on selecting a PM but that the new
PM would select his own cabinet not the SCAF.

Rights Groups Join Those Calling for a Presidential Council

7. (SBU) Rights groups and several prominent Egyptian commentators/activists issued a statement today critical of the
SCAF calling for an end to police action against protesters, "swift" transfer to a presidential council and the formation of a
national salvation government and "preventing the SCAF" from a role in day to day governance. The statement also
called for the release of all political detainees and cancellation of verdicts issued by military courts against civilians.



From: Shea, Peter T
To: NEA-ELA-DL; Wailes, Jacob; 'Steven_N_Simon                   <Steven N Simon
'Prem_G._Kuma                   <Prem_G._Kumar                                                                     SES-
0; Schwartz, Larry; Wittes, Tamara C; Biome, Donald A; Caudill, Mark A
Cc: Patterson, Anne W; Sievers, Marc J; ECPODistribution; Kabra, Patricia; Gollner-Sweet, Katharina; North, Walter
(Cairo/DIR); Beed, John (Cairo DIR);
Brown, Todd J
Sent: Wed Nov 23 19:43:08 2011
Subject: Cairo Update 11/23, 1830

1. (SBU) The number of demonstrators in Tahrir Square increased throughout the day, reaching about 10,000
by mid-afternoon. Severe clashes continued on Mohamed Mahmoud Street near the Interior Ministry
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784589 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784589 Date: 10/30/2015




headquarters until Army troops replaced police and a "truce" was establish by mid-afternoon. However,
shortly before 6:00 PM contacts reported that fighting had resumed, this time reportedly involving the
Army. The Ministry of Health issued a new statement listing 35 deaths.



Temporary Truce Near Interior Ministry



2. (SBU) A "truce" was established for a couple hours this afternoon on Mohamed Mahmoud Street after
Army soldiers replaced Central Security Forces (CSF) riot police protecting the Interior Ministry building. Some
media reported that "Al Azhar scholars" (likely referring to the Al Azhar Scholars Front, a Salafi group not
formally associated with Al Azhar) brokered the truce after separating demonstrators and police. However
fighting started again just before 6:00 PM. Embassy security staff reported that about 300 protestors charged
the MOI headquarters, and some were killed in an Army counter-attack. However other contacts at the scene
claimed that security services used the respite to launch a "surprise attack."

3. (SBU) Egyptian press reported this afternoon that PM Sharaf issued orders to MOI El Essawy, following the
Ministerial Council meeting on November 20, to halt the use of violence against protesters in Tahrir Square
and other cities. Sharaf asked El Essawy to refer all those who committed violations against demonstrators to
the Public Prosecutor for investigation. The authority of both ministers is questionable, however, since Sharaf
has now resigned and is serving in a caretaker capacity.



Elections/New Cabinet



4. (SBU) Press reported that a number of "major political parties" are in discussions with the SCAF to
postpone the first round of parliamentary elections for two weeks or more. Media also quoted Army Chief of
Staff Sami Anan saying that the SCAF is in the process of forming a new government. According to some press,
Mohamed El Baradei set conditions for heading a government, including that elections proceed as planned on
November 28. (full report Septel)



Investigations in Tahrir



5. (SBU) In fulfillment of one of the promises made by Field Marshal Tantawi in his November 22 address to
the nation, the Public Prosecutor's Office dispatched a team to Tahrir Square begin investigating the killing of
protesters during the past several days.

6. (SBU) The SCAF issued Statement No. 83 today denying the use of "gas bombs" against
demonstrators. Health Minister Dr. Amr Helmy, who visited Tahrir Square to investigate the type of tear gas
used by security forces, said the spent canisters his team collected were manufactured in the United States
and were not expired. He repudiated claims that nerve agents have been used and noted that some MOH
personnel had been exposed to the tear gas used in Tahrir Square and reacted normally to it. Helmy
announced that he was forming a committee to examine the samples and to report its findings. After making
these remarks, Helmy was attacked by a group of demonstrators and fled in his vehicle.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784589 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784589 Date: 10/30/2015




7. (SBU) In another goodwill gesture, the SCAF announced the pardoning of 324 persons—all of whom appear
to be civilians—convicted in military trials since January 28. Blogger Maikel Nabil Sanad, who began a three-
year prison sentence on April 10 after he was convicted in a military court of "insulting the military institution
and distributing false news that disturb the public security," was not among those pardoned.



AMCIT Detainees




SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784589 Date: 10/30/2015
