         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785137 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                          Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                          Saturday, December 17,2011 7:42 AM
To:
Subject:                                       Fw: Iraq sends delegation to Syria for crisis talks (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Saturday, December 17, 2011 05:27 AM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Subject: Iraq sends delegation to Syria for crisis talks (Reuters)



BAGHDAD (Reuters) - Iraq has sent a delegation to meet Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's government and
his opponents in an attempt to help end months of violence in its neighbour, a senior government official said
on Saturday.

  Iraq's Shi'ite-led government has resisted Arab League calls for sanctions against Assad, and Iraqi leaders are
worried that unrest in Syria will spill across the frontier and upset Iraq's own delicate sectarian balance.

   Earlier this month, Arab League Secretary General Nabil Elaraby said he has asked the Iraqi government to
help influence Syria to agree to an Arab League-proposed peace plan.


   "We are going to meet government officials. The approval is there from both parties," Prime Minister Nuri
al-Maliki's media advisor Ali al-Moussawi told Reuters.

  "The delegation will meet representatives of the Syrian opposition inside Syria. And we ready to meet
members of the opposition outside Syria," he said of the visit headed by Iraq's national security advisor.

   State-owned Iraqiya television said that the delegation would meet with Assad. But Moussawi did not
confirm that. Iraq has said it would be willing to use its close ties to the Assad government to help negotiate an
end to the turmoil.

   Already hit by economic sanctions imposed by the United States and Europe, Syria now faces further
sanctions from neighbouring Arab nations in response to its violent crackdown on protests against Assad. The
United Nations says more than 5,000 people have been killed by security forces in the unrest.


News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785137 Date: 10/30/2015
