       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769901 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL




From:                         Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Sent:                         Wednesday, May 5, 2010 12:13 PM
To:                           H; Lew, Jacob
Subject                       FW: obey!




Obey won't seek reelection
By: David Rogers
May 5, 2010 11:33 AM EDT

In a major blow to Democrats, House Appropriations Committee Chairman David Obey
has told close associates that he will not seek reelection and an announcement of his
plans is expected as early as Wednesday.

The Wisconsin Democrat faces tough poll numbers at home, but until Tuesday night his
staff had insisted he was running aggressively and had hired campaign staff. But a person
close to him confirmed the decision to POLITICO Wednesday and said Obey was
preparing to make a statement.

A press conference has been called at 1 p.m. and Obey staff indicated that he would
announce his plans then.

Elected in 1969, the liberal is a major institutional figure who played a leading role in the
anti-war and reform movement of the House in the 1970's. As the Appropriations
chairman, he has been a close ally to Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) who came up
through the same panel before moving into the leadership. And his departure follows on
the death of Rep. John Murtha (D-Pa.) this winter, a second Pelosi ally veteran of the
powerful committee.

Indeed, the death of Murtha—and a second Obey associate—former Rep. Charles Wilson
of Texas— may have influenced the chairman's decision. At 71, he is only about five
years younger than his late friends and given the hard road ahead this election year, "he's
bone tired and reached a point in his life where he has to think about how much time he
has left."

Obey's frustration with the White House has been no secret either, and his unhappiness
helps explain the repeated delays in the House over moving ahead with new funding for
the war in Afghanistan. He himself is torn about the President Barack Obama's
commitment of increased U.S. troops at a time of continued economic troubles at home.
And after first setting a Memorial Day deadline, Democrats admit privately that Congress
may not complete action on the package until the July Fourth recess.

The combination of his retirement—and Murtha's death—means a major change in the
hierarchy of the Appropriations panel itself. And if Democrats retain power, Rep. Norman
Dicks (D-Wash.) will be pushed to the forefront after serving until recently as chairman of
the Interior and natural resources subcommittee, overseeing one of the smaller of the
dozen annual bills.


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769901 Date: 10/30/2015
