     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789925 Date: 10/30/2015

                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                 B6



From:                             Robert Russo
Sent:                             Monday, March 26, 2012 10:35 PM
To:
Subject:                          Re: Erdogan Speech
Attachments:                      Erdogan AL Speech.docx



MS: Attached and below is a readout of the speech. We are still trying to obtain a transcript.

Erdogan's Arab League Speech

Media Highlights from Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan's September 13 speech at the Arab League
Summit:

Israel/Palestinian Territories:

•   PM Erdogan called on Arab states to support Palestine's UN membership bid, saying such membership
would contribute to securing peace and stability in the Middle East.

Palmer Report:

•    PM Erdogan said it was out of the question for Turkey to normalize relations with Israel unless Israel
apologized for the flotilla raid, paid compensation to victims' families, and lifted the Gaza blockade.

     Describing Israel as seeing itself as above the law, PM Erdogan equated the nine Turks killed in the flotilla
raid with the five Egyptians recently killed in an Israeli cross border raid against militants.

Libya:

     Turkey supports the TNC and believes the TNC should represent Libya at the UN.

Arab Spring:

•   Regarding recent uprisings in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, and Syria, PM Erdogan said, "The legitimate
demands of the people cannot be repressed with force and blood...Freedom and democracy and human rights
must be a united slogan for the future of our people."

Minutes of Erdogan Speech at the Arab League from Embassy Cairo:

      We shared the same culture with Arabs for a long time.

      We are two people who drew their cultures jointly.

      The Palestinian kid crying in Gaza breaks the heart of the entire nation.

      We are a part of the same body, and are a huge base, and we share happiness and sadness.

      We are at a historic transformation period.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789925 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789925 Date: 10/30/2015



     We understand each other well more than before.

•     We the Turkish and Arab people take our power from each other, and this should unite our lines. We
should be the owners of the future, and show interest in the next generation. Freedom, democracy, human
rights, all these items should be our united slogan.

•    We should not oppress the legitimate demands for rights using force, and we will see that this oppression
is wrong. Mohamed Bou-azizi was only protecting his dignity and Arabism.

•    The distance between us is difficult, and there are some sides that want to obstruct this march. We have to
be careful from these sides.

     Arabs have to be truthful in justice. The victory of God will be to our sides.

     We have to achieve justice, responsibility, security and safety.

     I praise this honorary Arab position and recognizing the Libyan NTC.

•    I hope for this change in Arab communities to happen. We have not to delay in conducting reforms
according to the legitimate demands of the people.

     We have an accumulation of experiences.

•    We, Turkey, 'cannot ignore the developments in the Middle East. Not because we are part of this
geography but because we share history in this area.

•    All these developments will affect a wide geography. We cannot think of the Middle East as an
independent geography. This is not correct.

•   The change in the region allows us to extend our hand of help and friendship. Some accepted our hand and
some didn't. I want to remind you of this truth. In exchange of the legitimate demands of the people, only the
people can pose this question.

•     Israel is achieving its legitimacy in the region, and is making irresponsible steps, and is confiscating the
humanitarian dignity, and attacks on international convoys carrying food and toys for the kids. 9 civilians were
killed in these waters, and a few days ago 5 Egyptians were killed. There Egyptians and Turkish people are
equal here.

•    Palmer's report was leaked, and right after this, we began taking some procedures and resolutions. Turkish
Israeli relations were decreased to 2nd secretary. Military relations were reduced. Turkey, which has huge
shores in the Mediterranean, will be able to take many procedures in these waters.

     We will offer all the necessary support for initiatives by those affected by Israeli attacks.

     International law will not be supervised by Israel, and so they have to pay for their attacks and crimes.

     We Turkey, in exchange of these attacks, will be patient, and will take procedures.

     I thank AL SYG for his support for the procedures we took with Israel.

     We will continue our efforts at the ICJ in this context.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789925 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789925 Date: 10/30/2015



•    The Palestinian case is a case for raising the dignity of the human being. This case should be joint for
everyone, and not a normal issue or case. This is a purely humanitarian case.

•    Regarding world peace, the issue of Palestine is very important. The Israeli Palestinian conflict is at the
core of world peace.

     The continuation of the current situation is not possible and so is using oppression, and they will lose.

•    The issue is very clear. The Palestinians have to announce their independent state, and this is why their
country has to be recognized. We will together support this case. We will find before the end of this month,
Palestine in a different situation. We should work hand in hand with Palestine.

•    It is time to have a Palestinian flag at the UN. Come to raise the Palestinian flag in this period. Let this flag
be the sign for peace and stability and justice in the Middle East.

     Hope your meeting is successful, and achieves good results for the region and the world.

     Thank you and May Allah bless you.


On Mon, Mar 26, 2012 at 9:35 PM, Robert Russo                                > wrote:                                    B6

> MS:

> My blackberry is not letting me send e-mails, but I just wanted to let you know I received your request for a
copy of PM Erdogan's speech in Cairo last year, and am working on getting you a copy.

> -Rob




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789925 Date: 10/30/2015
