     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784436 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL




From:                               Kennedy, Patrick F <KennedyPF@state.gov >
Sent:                               Monday, December 12, 2011 8:39 AM
To:                                 H.
Cc:                                 Nides, Thomas R; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject:                            COMPLETE TEXT of UK Travel Warning



We advise against all but essential travel to the whole of Iraq, except to the Kurdistan Region, where there are no
restrictions. There is a high threat of terrorism in Iraq. This includes violence and kidnapping targeting foreign nationals,
including individuals of non-Western appearance.



There are no restrictions in place against travel to the Kurdistan Region (the provinces of Dohuk, Erbil and Sulaimaniyah),
as the risk of terrorism in these provinces is markedly lower than elsewhere in Iraq. However, you should seek local
advice before travelling to the remote areas bordering Turkey and Iran, where there have been incidents of shelling,
unexploded ordnances and mines. Turkish security forces carried out air strikes and an incursion into the border areas of
Kurdistan, targeting the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) in August and October 2011. See Safety and Security - Kurdistan
Region.



You should employ a professional security company and take all necessary security precautions if you intend to travel to
areas of Iraq which are subject to travel restrictions. You should exercise extreme caution at all times in these areas.
See Safety and Security - Travel in Iraq.



There are ongoing, regular demonstrations in all regions of Iraq, particularly after Friday prayers. Demonstrations in
Sulaimaniyah in February 2011 resulted in the deaths of several protestors. You are advised to avoid large gatherings,
crowds and demonstrations.



Curfews can be and are imposed at short notice, often around religious holidays. When in place curfew times must be
strictly adhered to and large gatherings should be avoided. See the Safety and Security - Curfews.



27 British nationals required consular assistance in Iraq in the period 1 April 2010 - 31 March 2011. See General -
Consular Assistance Statistics.



The British Embassy in Baghdad is able to offer only limited consular assistance. The British Embassy Offices in Basra and
Erbil are able to offer limited consular assistance, in the event of an emergency. You should register your presence with
LOCATE.



You should seek professional advice and it is strongly advised that you take out comprehensive travel and medical
insurance before travelling. See General - Insurance.

Safety and security (back to top)
Safety and Security - Terrorism




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784436 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784436 Date: 10/30/2015




Despite a decrease in the level of violence across Iraq, there is a high threat of terrorism in Iraq We advise against all but
essential travel to the whole of Iraq, except the Kurdistan Region (the provinces of Dohuk, Erbil and Sulaimaniyah)
where the risk from terrorism is markedly lower than elsewhere in Iraq.

Terrorists and insurgents maintain the ability to conduct attacks throughout Iraq, including regular attacks in Baghdad,
Basra, Mosul and Kirkuk.

Major attacks include:




On 5 December 2011, bomb attacks against Shi'a pilgrims marking Ashura in al-Hilla and Baghdad killed and injured over
70 people.
On 28 November 2011 in Baghdad international zone, a car exploded near the Council of Representatives VIP entrance
which killed one person and injured several others.
On 26 November 2011 in Baghdad, three improvised explosive devices in Rusafa district killed 8 and injured 13, and an
attack on the Abu Ghaib-Fallujah road to the west of Baghdad killed 7 and injured 28.
On 24 November 2011, three improvised explosive devices exploded in a Basra marketplace killing 19 people and
injuring 65.

On 27 October 2011, a double road-side bombing In the Urr neighbourhood of Baghdad resulted in 36 civilian deaths
and more than 75 injuries.

On 28 August 2011, a suicide bomb attack on Umm al-Qura Mosque in Baghdad during Ramadan prayers killed 29 and
injured 38 people.
15 August 2011 a coordinated series of suicide and car bomb attacks took place in over a dozen cities across 10
provinces in Iraq resulting in around 300 deaths and injuries.
On 13 June 2011, a double suicide car bombing near Basra Central Police Station killed 10 ISF and wounded 30 civilians
and Iraqi Security Forces (ISF). There are also regular attacks in the northern cities of Mosul and Kirkuk.
On 3 June 2011, a suicide car bombing near government buildings in Tikrit, followed by a suicide bombing at the local
hospital at which the injured were being treated, killed 23 and injured 70 people.
On 29 March 2011, suicide bombers attacked government buildings in Tikrit (northern Iraq), killing 12 ISF and injuring
over 60 civilians and ISF.
In January 2011, two bombs exploded near the cities of Tikrit and Karbala, resulting in the deaths of over 100 people.




See our Terrorism Abroad page.

Safety and Security - Targets



As a foreigner in Iraq, you are a high value target to terrorists, insurgents and criminals who conduct frequent and
widespread lethal attacks in Iraq (except in the Kurdistan Region). On 19 July 2010, a British national was killed in a
roadside improvised explosive device attack on a British private security company convoy in Mosul. Commercial,
aviation and maritime facilities, government buildings and other related political and security facilities are also at a high
risk of attack. There have been attacks on the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), the United Nations (UN),
journalists, foreign contractors and other visitors to Iraq. There have also been attacks within Baghdad's International
(or Green) Zone. Indiscriminate attacks against Iraqi civilian targets also occur.

Targets have included hotels and restaurants where westerners congregate. In January 2010 there were major bomb
attacks against a number of hotels in Baghdad that are popular with British and western organisations. Terrorists and
insurgents continue to attack mosques, large gatherings, churches, army recruiting centres, public transport, police

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784436 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784436 Date: 10/30/2015




stations, government buildings and party political offices. Ceremonies to mark Islamic and Christian festivals have been
targeted, including near churches or holy areas. Rocket and mortar attacks occur sporadically in Baghdad (including the
International Zone).

Civilian and military aircraft arriving in and departing from Baghdad International Airport and flying to other major cities
in Iraq have been subject to attack by small arms and missiles. The standard of security at Baghdad International
Airport's civilian terminal has improved. However, there are still concerns and you should exercise caution if using the
civilian terminal. In Basra, there is a continuing threat of rocket attacks against the airport.

Methods of attack include shootings, bombings, suicide bombs, vehicle bombs, rockets and mortars.

Safety and Security - Kidnap
There remains a high threat of kidnapping across Iraq and caution should be exercised throughout the country.
Individuals have been kidnapped at their residence, at work and in transit. Kidnappers do not discriminate on the basis
of nationality, religion, gender, age or profession. Large numbers of people, including British nationals, have been
kidnapped in Iraq Many kidnappings have ended with the death of hostages.

The provision of close security protection is extremely important for those working in and moving around Iraq. But this
in itself does not remove the threat - a number of those who have been kidnapped include individuals who had security
arrangements in place.

If you are in Iraq, you are strongly advised to regularly reassess your security arrangements and consider carefully when
planning movements throughout Iraq, especially when moving outside the International Zone in Baghdad.

The motives of hostage takers vary from political to profit. British nationals should be aware that the long-standing
policy of the British Government is not to make substantive concessions to hostage takers. The British Government
considers that paying ransoms and releasing prisoners increases the risk of further hostage taking.

Safety and Security - The Kurdistan Region



There are no travel restrictions in place on travel to the Kurdistan Region (the provinces of Dohuk, Erbil and
Sulaimaniyah).

The three provinces of Dohuk, Erbil and Sulaimaniyah form the Kurdistan Region (KR) and are administered by the
Kurdistan Regional Government which, under the 2005 constitution, has considerable powers of autonomy within a
federal Iraq. The KR is significantly more stable than the rest of Iraq and has been largely successful in its counter-
terrorism efforts. The threat of terrorism and kidnap in the KR nevertheless remains, although it is markedly lower than
elsewhere in Iraq, Islamist terrorist groups, including al-Qaida in Iraq (AQ-I) and Ansar al-Islam, have infrequently carried
out attacks in the KR. A network of Iranian-based Kurdish extremists, affiliated with AQ-I, also mount occasional cross-
border attacks. Where they have occurred, attacks have generally targeted the Kurdistan Regional Government.

The last civilian death to terrorism in the KR was in 2007. On 10 March 2008, a suicide vehicle bomb exploded outside
Sulaimaniyah Palace Hotel. Throughout 2010 and 2011, sporadic roadside bombs have targeted the Peshmerga (Kurdish
security forces). Ten people (8 demonstrators and 2 policemen) were killed during demonstrations in Sulaimaniyah
during February and March 2011. These demonstrations have since come to an end and the situation is now calm. You
should still consider taking appropriate security precautions.

Shelling in the border areas with Turkey and Iran in the Kurdistan Region still occurs. In August and October 2011,
Turkish security force's carried out air strikes and an incursion into the border areas of Kurdistan, targeting the Kurdistan
Workers' Party (PKK). You should seek advice locally on the situation in these remote border areas before travelling
there.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784436 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784436 Date: 10/30/2015




Safety and Security - Curfews



There are currently no countrywide curfews. However, curfews and vehicle bans can be enforced at short notice,
particularly around religious holidays, pilgrimages and key political dates, such as elections.

Ensure you check with the relevant local authorities for curfews before travelling.




Safety and Security - Travelling to Iraq



The British Government considers that the threat to British officials serving in Iraq is serious enough that they must live
and work under strict security rules. All British officials working in Iraq live in secure, guarded accommodation and must
travel with close protection teams at all times. Depending on the threat level, they may also be prevented from
travelling to certain areas of Iraq.

Similarly, if you decide to travel to areas of Iraq to which we advise against all but essential travel, you should take
appropriate security precautions before travelling. You are strongly advised to employ a private security company, make
arrangements for secure accommodation and transport and consider pre-deployment training on travelling under close
protection.

Appropriate security arrangements will not fully remove the risks of travelling to areas to which we advise only essential
travel..You should exercise extreme caution at all times and remember that the UK can only offer limited consular
support in Iraq. See General - Consular Services.

International and British companies do operate in and visit Iraq. If you are working for British or other businesses and
intend to travel to any part of Iraq, you should follow the above advice and contact UK Trade & Investment (in Iraq: +964
(0)7901 904987 or baghdad.commercial@fco.gov.uk; in the UK: 020 7215 4949 or carl.bruce@ukti.gsi.gov.uk).




Safety and Security - Transport
International commercial carriers serve Baghdad and Erbil International Airports. These airports are generally
considered secure, but you should exercise caution within the terminals and not leave Baghdad International Airport
without adequate security precautions (see Safety and Security - Travelling to Iraq).

Maritime and sailing craft should exercise extreme caution if entering the northern Persian Gulf.

The Government of Iraq has closed four border crossings with Iran at Kella, Saranban-Golle, Taiwella and Parweez Khan.
The Kuwait/Iraq border is open in both directions at Safwan (Iraq) and al-Abdali (Kuwait) 0800-1600 (local) on most
days. These border posts have previously been closed at short notice for indefinite periods.

Road travel within Iraq remains highly dangerous and there continue to be fatal roadside bombings and both random
and premeditated attacks on military and civilian vehicles. False vehicle checkpoints have been used to launch attacks.
In addition to the threat from terrorism/kidnapping, there is also a risk of carjacking, robbery and road traffic accidents.

Local laws and customs (back to top)
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784436 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784436 Date: 10/30/2015




Local laws reflect that Iraq is a predominantly Islamic country. You should respect local traditions, customs, laws and
religious customs at all times, especially during the holy month of Ramadan or visits to places of religious significance.

See our Travelling During Ramadan page.

See our Your Trip page.



Entry requirements (back to top)
Entry Requirements - Visas and Documentation You must have a visa before travelling to Iraq. You can apply for a visa at
Iraqi missions overseas, including the Iraqi Embassy in London. See the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs website. If you
are only travelling to the Kurdistan Region, you may obtain a visa on arrival.

Ensure that you have the appropriate documentation for entering Iraq. This includes, but is not limited to, a valid visa,
in-date Weapon Authority Cards (WAC) (if carrying weapons) and registration documentation from the Ministry of the
Interior and/or military ID if using military routes. The Department of Border Enforcement (DBE) has made a number of
arrests, including of British nationals, for failure to provide the appropriate documentation when requested. For more
details on required documentation, you should see the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs website or contact the Iraqi
Embassy in London.




Entry Requirements Passport Validity
You must hold a valid passport to enter Iraq. Your passport must be valid for a minimum period of three months from
the date of entry into Iraq.



Entry Requirements - Blood Test
All visitors to Iraq, with the exception of those travelling on a tourist visa, are required under Iraqi health regulations to
submit to a blood test within ten days of arrival. The test is for HIV and hepatitis. Guidance on where to go for the blood
test is available at your airport of arrival. In the Kurdistan Region, this is only required for those staying for more than
ten days.



Health (back to top)
Limited medical facilities are available. In the event of serious accident or illness, an evacuation by air ambulance may be
required.

Malaria is common in some rural areas in the north and in Basra province in the south.

In 2008, twelve out of the eighteen provinces across Iraq had outbreaks of cholera. As a precaution you should drink or
use only boiled or bottled water and avoid ice in drinks. If you suffer from diarrhoea during a visit to Iraq seek immediate
medical attention. If you are travelling to Jordan, you may either be asked to prove you have been vaccinated against
cholera or be required to take antibiotics.

The temperature in summer months can exceed 50 (2C (1222F), which can result in dehydration and serious health
problems. Drink plenty of water. Weather conditions are arduous.

You should exercise precautions to avoid exposure to HIV/AIDS. See our HIV and AIDS page.

You should seek medical advice before travelling and ensure that all appropriate vaccinations are up-to-date. NHS Direct
(0845 46 47) can provide you with advice on the vaccination requirements for Iraq.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784436 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784436 Date: 10/30/2015




For further information on endemic diseases, like malaria, health outbreaks and vaccination requirements for Iraq you
should check the websites of NaTHNaC or NHS Scotland's Fit For Travel. See our Travel Health page.



General (back to top)
General - Insurance
You should take out comprehensive travel and medical insurance for your proposed trip prior to travel, however long
you plan to stay in Iraq. You should check any exclusions and that your policy covers you for medical assistance and
repatriation, and all activities you want to undertake. See our Travel Insurance page.

If things do go wrong while you are overseas see our When Things Go Wrong page.



General - Consular Services
The British Embassy in Baghdad operates a limited consular service by appointment only, due to security constraints at
our current location. If you require consular assistance, emergency passports or notarial services, you must book an
appointment before coming to the Embassy. You can book an appointment by contacting us directly on +964 (0)7901
911684 between 08.00 and 16.00, Sunday-Thursday. For all other services, including if you have been arrested or
hospitalised, please speak to the Consular Section within these hours. If you have a consular emergency outside these
hours, please contact the British Embassy's Duty Officer on +44 (0)7901 935149; the Basra Consulate's Duty Officer on
+964 (0)7400 248868; or the Erbil Consulate's Duty Officer on +964 (0)781 883 7576.

Due to the security situation in Baghdad, it is highly unlikely that the Consular Section will be able to assist with the
following:

i) Any Iraqi visa-related matters on entry into Iraq. You are responsible for ensuring that your Iraqi visa and immigration
arrangements are in good order before you travel to Iraq. It is extremely unlikely that we will be able to intervene
should you encounter immigration difficulties at Baghdad International Airport, either on arrival or departure.

ii) Provide routine consular assistance in unsecure areas of Baghdad outside the International Zone, due to the risk to
our consular staff of travelling to these areas.

In line with our policy elsewhere in the world, we cannot provide legal advice. We can, however, provide a list of
English-speaking lawyers.

If you need information on how to apply for a UK visa, you should visit www.visa4uk.fco.gov.uk. The Consular section is
unable to intervene in UK visa issues.




The British Consulates in Erbil and Basra are unable to accept personal callers without appointments, or telephone calls
about visas. If you have a query about visas please visit the website www.visa4uk.fco.gov.uk. Alternatively, for enquiries
in Erbil, you can email Erbil.VisaEnquiries@fco.gov.uk and receive an auto-reply with general advice and details of useful
websites.




General - Registering Your Presence in Iraq You should register your presence in Iraq. You can do this in the UK before
you leave by using our LOCATE service to tell us when and where you are travelling abroad (or if you live abroad) so that
our consular and crisis staff can provide better assistance to you in an emergency.

For general enquiries please contact the Iraq Team in writing at Iraq Team, Foreign & Commonwealth Office, London,
SW1A 2AH; by telephone on 020 7008 1500; or by email to: iraqtraveladvice@fco.gov.uk.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784436 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784436 Date: 10/30/2015




General - Forced Marriage and Child Abductions Some of our consular assistance is provided to victims of forced
marriage or international parental child abduction. See our separate guidance on forced marriage and child abduction.

General - Purchasing Property
We are often asked to give assistance in land or property ownership disputes. You should consider taking legal advice
before entering into any agreement over the ownership or use of property or other assets. The British Embassy cannot
help in these matters.




General - Consular Assistance Statistics



27 British nationals required consular assistance in Iraq in the period 1 April 2010 - 31 March 2011. This included three
deaths, four hospitalisations, and six arrests.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784436 Date: 10/30/2015
