      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789710 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL



From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Wednesday, March 21, 2012 9:29 AM
To:
Subject:                         FW: Developing nations to name two candidates for World Bank




From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Wednesday, March 21, 2012 9:25 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Developing nations to name two candidates for World Bank

» Print


This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to
colleagues, clients or customers, use the Reprints tool at the top of any article or visit: www.reutersreprints.com.


Developing nations to name two candidates for
World Bank




2:33am EDT

By Lesley Wroughton

WASHINGTON (Reuters) - Nigerian Finance Minister Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala and former Colombian Finance
Minister Jose Antonio Ocampo are set to be nominated to lead the World Bank, sources with knowledge of
emerging market efforts to find candidates said on Tuesday.

The candidacies of Okonjo-Iweala and Ocampo, who have credentials as both economists and diplomats and
according to sources the respective backing of Brazil and South Africa, pose a challenge to the United States,
whose hold on the top post has never been contested.

But with its majority of votes and the expected support of European countries, the United States is still likely to
ensure that another American will succeed Robert Zoellick, who plans to step down when his term expires at
the end of June.

Washington has held the presidency since the Bank's founding after World War Two, while a European has
always led the International Monetary Fund. It has yet to publicly identify a nominee to succeed Zoellick.
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789710 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789710 Date: 10/30/2015




The deadline for submitting nominations is Friday, and the Obama administration has said it will name a
candidate by then.

All of the World Bank's 187 members nations have committed to a merit-based process to select Zoellick's
successor.

Emerging and developing economies have long talked up their desire to break U.S. and European dominance of
the Bretton Woods Institutions, but have until now have failed to build a coalition large enough to change the
status quo.

Three sources said Ocampo, currently a professor at Columbia University in New York, would be formally
nominated by Brazil.

One source said Okonjo-Iweala could be nominated on Wednesday, while two other sources said it would be
Friday.

Nominations will be submitted to the 25-member World Bank board, which has said it will decide on the next
president within the next month.

Two sources said Okonjo-Iweala's candidacy had the blessing of Nigerian President Goodluck Jonathan, who
convinced her to join his cabinet last year to lend more weight to his reform agenda.

"IMPRESSIVE CREDENTIALS"

The decision to nominate Okonjo-Iweala and Ocampo followed weeks of discussions among emerging and
developing countries at the World Bank board including China and India.

Two sources said South Africa's director at the World Bank board, Renosi Mokate, who also represents Nigeria
and other English-speaking African countries, personally flew to Abuja to consult with Okonjo-Iweala about
her nomination.

"The impressive credentials of both Ocampo and Okonjo-Iweala puts tremendous pressure on the White House
to come up with a candidate of at least equivalent standing," said Domenico Lombardi, a former World Bank
board official now at the Brookings Institution in Washington.

"This signals a big shift and really reflects a game change," Lombardi added. "This is the first time in history we
have a truly contested election."

Okonjo-Iweala, who left the World Bank as managing director last year to become Nigeria's finance minister,
and Ocampo, a former U.N. under-secretary for economic and social affairs, will join American economist
Jeffrey Sachs, who has the backing of a handful of small countries, on the nomination list.

Sources with knowledge of the administration's thinking say Washington has focused on convincing a woman
to enter the race, which could go some way to address calls by emerging market nations for change. A woman
has never led the bank.

Susan Rice, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, was a leading contender, however, it is not clear she
wants the job, sources have said. Former adviser to President Barack Obama, Lawrence Summers, has also been
short-listed for the job. He has declined to comment.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789710 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789710 Date: 10/30/2015




U.S. Senator John Kerry and PepsiCo's Indian-born CEO Indra Nooyi also made an Obama administration
shortlist, according to a source, although Kerry has publicly ruled out the job and Nooyi is no longer in
contention, according to another source.

Sachs has said he aims to challenge with his candidacy what he sees as a history of political appointments by
the White House and acknowledges he does not have the support of the Obama administration. He was formally
nominated by Bhutan and a grouping of developing countries including East Timor, Jordan, Kenya, Namibia
and Malaysia.

Lombardi said the test was whether large emerging economies like China would rally support for Ocampo and
Okonjo-Iweala, or in the end vote for a U.S. nominee.

FAILED RALLY AT IMF

Last year, Brazil and China failed to rally around Mexico's central bank chief, Agustin Carstens, for the top post
at the IMF, instead favoring former French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde, who now heads the institution:

The United States has insisted that to keep funding flowing from Congress for the World Bank, it is important
to retain the presidency.

It is unclear if big emerging nations such as China and India would support a fellow developing nation
candidate.

He Fan, deputy director of the institute of world economics and politics at the Chinese Academy of Social
Sciences, a top government think-tank, said he thought Beijing would do so.

But Yi Xianrong, an economist at the same institute, said "the most important thing is to have a capable person
with energy and expertise...it doesn't matter whether the candidate is from the United States, Germany or
developing countries."

"We need to see whether the candidates' value standards and judgment are in line with the World Bank's goals.
We can increase our influence in the World Bank through increases in our voting rights," Yi added.

A senior Indian government source said it didn't "have any favorites, no probables."

With just two days left, India is not planning to change that position. Asked whether India would support a
developing world candidate, the source said, "If it comes up we will decide; let's see."

(Additional reporting by Kevin Yao in Beijing and Frank Jack Daniel in New Delhi; Editing by Richard Borsuk
and Jonathan Hopfner)

© Thomson Reuters 2011. All rights reserved. Users may download and print extracts of content from this
website for their own personal and non-commercial use only. Republication or redistribution of Thomson
Reuters content, including by framing or similar means, is expressly prohibited without the prior written
consent of Thomson Reuters. Thomson Reuters and its logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of the
Thomson Reuters group of companies around the world.

Thomson Reuters journalists are subject to an Editorial Handbook which requires fair presentation and
disclosure of relevant interests.



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789710 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789710 Date: 10/30/2015




This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to
colleagues, clients or customers, use the Reprints tool at the top of any article or visit: www.reutersreprints.com.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789710 Date: 10/30/2015
