        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784064 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                                                          RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Saturday, October 22, 2011 9:17 PM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: Libyan PM says wishes Gaddafi had not been killed (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Saturday, October 22, 2011 07:51 PM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Libyan PM says wishes Gaddafi had not been killed (Reuters)

LONDON, Oct 22 (Reuters) - Libya's Prime Minister Mahmoud Jibril said in an interview with the BBC on
Saturday he wished former dictator Muammar Gaddafi had not been killed and instead had been put on trial for
his crimes.

    Gaddafi's body remained on public display in Libya on Saturday, bearing wounds assumed to have been
inflicted by fighters who hauled him from a drain in his hometown Sirte.

   "To be honest with you at the personal level I wish he was alive. I want to know why he did this to the
Libyan people," the BBC quoted Jibril as saying in remarks made available ahead of broadcast early on
Sunday.

    "I wish I were his prosecutor in his trial, you know," he added. "Because this is the question which is in
everybody's mind: Why? Did the Libyan people deserve what he did throughout 42 years of oppression, of
killing, of everything?"

  UN Human Rights Commissioner Navi Pillay has called for an investigation of the killing. Asked whether he
would conduct a full investigation and allow an international team to monitor it, Jibril said:

   "Yes, that would be absolutely okay with us you know, but for the body when it's buried, you know,
according to Islamic rule ... when it's buried, it's buried.

   "We got the coroner's report, I saw the body myself. I can testify that there were no bruises on his face or on
his body."

    Jibril acknowledged there had been "some limited violations of human rights" in Libya's revolution.

   He also suggested Libya's interim authorities might welcome continued support from NATO beyond the end
of October, when it plans to conclude its air campaign.

   "I don't think there will be a need for that, but just in case," he said.

NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784064 Date: 10/30/2015
