      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789560 Date: 10/30/2015

                                                                                                RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                B6




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, March 15, 2012 11:20 AM
To:
Subject:                           FW: quick note on nbc story




From: Klevorick, Caitlin B
Sent: Thursday, March 15, 2012 10:54 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: quick note on nbc story

By the time the piece ran pretty much everything was already posted in stories on the website. This was clearly an
agenda-laden job that brian Williams and kate snow didn't seem to comfortable with. It was bad. There's no question,
but toria's tone and poise were incredibly clutch. On the most recent case they mentioned, from December/Montana,
the facts we have contradict those NBC has but did not know until too late and would have had to provide emails to
prove our side which I'm sure would have to go through rigorous legal vetting. One thing to note, none of the kids
mentioned the state department or usg. Only Jessica Vaughan who is at the center for immigration studies and has long
been a critic (and was a former junior FSO) mentioned State with incredible disdain and explicit culpability. They used a
bunch of broil of S without saying anything to me, despite my grilling, but the broil is public footage and it never blames
S if anything it shows her "fix it now" mentality and that this can't be tolerated. They also continually said that the vast
majority have great experiences. Both Brian and Kate said that in the live follow-up on the piece. Surprisingly the person
who was the worst during the day was Andrea Mitchell who teased the piece on her show. And again, this was only
about the private sector exchanges not the ones that are usg-funded.

Bottom line:
So, was it bad? Yes
Could it have been worse? Yes

And the show literally went from Toria sayng zero tolerance and the talk back in the studio to a story about the gifts
office and the grill obama gave Cameron...



Caitlin Klevorick
Senior Advisor to the Counselor and Chief of Staff
U.S. Department of State
KlevorickCB@state.gov




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789560 Date: 10/30/2015
