     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787846 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                          Anne-Marie Slaughter <
Sent:                          Sunday, January 8, 2012 6:12 PM
To:
Cc:                            Abedin, Huma; Cheryl Mills; Jacob J Sullivan (SullivanJJ@state.gov)
Subject:                       weekend reading (at the end of the weekend)



The following has been published in different languages in 38 different newspapers around the world through
Project Syndicate (I'm now writing for them once a month — they send their columns all over the world). They
asked me to write something in December about "Obama at Bay," weakened by US domestic politics. I took the
opportunity to make a very different case.

On another front, I'm coming to town on Jan 26th and hoping very much that your schedule will allow a visit. If
that doesn't work, just have Lona name the day for dinner and I'll take the train down!

All best,
AM



While the world may see Barack Obama as a leader weakened by the intractability of
American domestic politics, the American public sees him as a strong and capable leader
in foreign affairs. 49% of Americans approve of his overall handling of foreign affairs,
with 63% approving his approach to terrorism and 52% approving his withdrawal from
Iraq. Contrast that with the 30% of Americans who approve his handling of the economy
and the scant 26% who are willing to give him a vote of confidence on the federal budget
deficit.

With numbers like that, it would hardly be surprising if the White House tries to keep
voters firmly focused on foreign affairs for as much of 2012 as possible, with high-profile
initiatives like sending Secretary Clinton to Burma, carefully brokered diplomatic deals,
and high profile international conferences in the U.S., such as the NATO summit in Chicago
in April. (Presidential trips overseas in an election year, particularly with unemployment
over 9%, are likely to backfire). They know the iron law of American politics - it's the
economy, stupid - as well as anyone else. But highlighting the President's ability to get
things done abroad is more than an attempt at distraction; it also sends the message that
the impasse at home is not of his making.

So expect plenty of foreign policy news coming out of the White House and the State
Department in coming months. Election year tactics aside, however, American voters are
right. Obama has had a much better run in foreign policy than domestic policy. His
achievements are all the more surprising given the weak hand he was dealt at the outset,
with an America that had lost its moral authority, its military invincibility, and its
credibility as an economic model. The weak economic recovery and the political paralysis
of hyper-partisan politics have only added to his burdens in reputational terms.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787846 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787846 Date: 10/30/2015




Yet look at the record. It is easy to focus on what has not been achieved, precisely because
Obama himself raised high expectations and then failed to deliver. On his second day in
office he went to the State Department to appoint two Special Representatives: George
Mitchell for Middle East Peace and Richard Holbrooke for Afghanistan and Pakistan. A
month later Dennis Ross was named Special Advisor to the Gulf and Southwest Asia (read
Iran). The Administration set its own agenda: a peace settlement between Israel and
Palestine, a resolution to the war in Afghanistan, and a new era of engagement with Iran.
Three years later, Dennis Ross and George Mitchell have resigned with no agreement in
sight in the Middle East; Richard Holbrooke tragically died without having brought the
Taliban, the Afghan government, and the Pakistani government to the negotiating table;
and relations between the U.S. and Iran are frostier than ever.

It is worth noting, however, that none of Obama's predecessors achieved any of these
goals either. And in the positive column, Obama can count the death of Osama bin Laden
and the killing of over half of Al Qaeda's top leadership, to the point that the Pentagon
predicted in September 2011 that with continuing sustained counter-terrorism operations
Al Qaeda could fragment cease to exist as a military organization within two years.
Destroying al Qaeda was the original purpose of the U.S. invasion of Afghanistan in 2001.
He has improved relations with Russia and negotiated a major arms control treaty.

The Obama administration has also dramatically increased the U.S. presence in Asia,
including signing a Treaty of Amity and Cooperation with the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations and joining the East Asia Summit. It has moved quickly and flexibly in
response to the revolutions across the Middle East: changing a thirty-year relationship
with the Egyptian government in the space of a week; helping convince the Egyptian
military not to fire on their citizens in the first round of the revolution; assembling and
enabling a successful coalition to intervene in Libya to protect Libyan civilians, working
closely with Turkey, the EU and Saudi Arabia to increase pressure on the Syrian regime in
many different ways; working with Egypt to broker a settlement in Yemen; and working
behind the scenes to convince the Bahraini government to undertake an investigation of
its own violence against Shiite protester.

Moving south, the U.S. dedicated considerable diplomatic and development resources to
ensure that the Comprehensive Peace Agreement that ended the civil war between north
and south Sudan was actually implemented, allowing the peaceful secession of South
Sudan and its establishment as an independent state. And although engagement may have
failed with Iran and North Korea; the Obama Administration has helped engineer a
historic breakthrough with Burma. Finally, the Senate has finally ratified trade
agreements with Korea, Panama, and Colombia, clearing the way for a new Trans-Pacific
trade partnership.



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787846 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787846 Date: 10/30/2015




The common thread in all these achievements is adroit old-fashioned diplomacy. In
choosing Hillary Clinton to be Secretary of State, President Obama appointed one of the
most respected and admired women in the world. She has lived up to her reputation.
Susan Rice has also had a remarkable run at the UN, consistently delivering votes in the
Security Council and the Human Rights Council, an organization that the Administration
rejoined with a commitment to restoring its credibility. And countless talented career
foreign service officers and political appointees have worked intensively behind the
scenes.

On a deeper level, the administration is effectively pursuing a coherent grand strategy.
President Obama and used his inaugural address to call for a "new era of responsibility."
On the international side, he announced in his national security strategy that "the burdens
of a young century cannot fall on American shoulders alone" and then proclaimed a U.S.
strategic commitment to an "international order based on rights and responsibilities,"
including a "broader voice - and greater responsibilities" for emerging powers and the
imposition of real consequences on those nations who violated their international
obligations. The strategy is to build and strengthen international order by making more
room at the table for 21st century powers but then insisting that they participate actively
in enforcing the rules and obligations they are charged with upholding.

Within two years of taking office President Obama presided over the transformation of the
G-8 into the G-20, the re-weighting of votes on the IMF Board away from Europe and
toward new economic powers, and a commitment to support India as a member of a
reformed UN Security Council, as well as japan. Equally important, his administration has
put enormous energy into building and strengthening regional institutions. For the first
time ever, the Arab League is playing an active role in addressing the political upheavals
and government brutality in its midst, as is the Gulf Cooperation Council. The African
Union has been active in helping to restore democracy in Madagascar, forcing the
President of the Ivory Coast out of office after losing an election, and sending troops to
Somalia. And the East Asian Summit, along with a host of smaller East Asian institutions, is
becoming a forum for region-wide security discussions, from the resolution of maritime
disputes to fighting pirates. U.S. diplomats are actively engaging members of these
institutions, both bilaterally and "regionally, alongside EU and other regional. diplomats.

To return to American electoral politics, Republican candidates love to hammer home the
phrase "leading from behind." But they completely miss the point, imagining leadership as
the equivalent of a 19th century cavalry charge where the general is either out front
carrying the flag or following along in the rear. Obama is actually far out front in shaping
the norms and expectations of a world of 194 states and billions of newly empowered
social and economic actors. He leads from wherever he needs to lead to get results. And
he's gotten plenty.



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787846 Date: 10/30/2015
