      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789975 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                             B6



From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MiIlsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Wednesday, March 28, 2012 5:30 PM
To:
Subject:                         FW: FT (Jim Yong Kim op-ed): My call for an open, inclusive World Bank




FYI

From: Scott.Morris              [mailto:Scott.Morris                                                                 B6
Sent: Wednesday, March 28, 2012 11:42 AM
To: Gayle E. Smith               Matthewman, Robin H (EEB); Crocker, Bathsheba N
Cc: Lyndsay.Huot
Subject: FW: FT (Jim Yong Kim op-ed): My call for an open, inclusive World Bank

Oped just out.

From: Gudmundson, Erika
Sent: Wednesday, March 28, 2012 11:39 AM
To: _DL_FYI; _DL_World Bank Press
Subject: FT (Jim Yong Kim op-ed): My call for an open, inclusive World Bank

http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/e2adc88c-7733-11el-baf3-00144feab49a.html#axzzIAQUpMUxq


My call for an open, inclusive World Bank
By Jim Yong Kim

We live in a time of historic opportunity. Today more people live in fast-growing economies than at any time in
history, and development can take root anywhere — regardless of whether a country is landlocked, just emerging
from conflict or oppression, large or small. If we build on this, we can imagine a world in which billions of
people in developing countries enjoy increases in their incomes and living standards. Given our collective
experiences, successes and resources, it's clear that we can eradicate global poverty and achieve in our lifetimes
what for generations has been a distant dream.

My own life and work have led me to believe that inclusive development — investing in human beings — is an
economic and moral imperative. I was born in South Korea when it was still recovering from war, with unpaved
roads and low levels of literacy. I have seen how integration with the global economy can transform a poor
country into one of the most dynamic and prosperous economies in the world. I have seen how investment in
infrastructure, schools and health clinics can change lives. And I recognise that economic growth is vital to
generate resources for investment in health, education and public goods.

Every country must follow its own path to growth, but our collective mission must be to ensure that a new
generation of low and middle-income countries enjoys sustainable economic growth that generates
opportunities for all citizens.

As co-founder of Partners in Health and director of the World Health Organisation's initiative to treat
HIV/Aids, I will bring practical experience to the World Bank. I have confronted the forces that keep more than
lbn people trapped in poverty. I have worked in villages where fewer than 1 in 10 adults could read or write,
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789975 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789975 Date: 10/30/2015




where preventable diseases cut lives short and where lack of infrastructure and capital held back entrepreneurs.
In all those villages, the local people knew where improvement was needed.

But for change to happen, we need partnerships between governments, the private sector and civil society to
build systems that can deliver sustainable, scalable solutions. And as we work for global prosperity, we must
draw on ideas and experience from around the globe.

My message is simple: an era of extraordinary opportunity requires an extraordinary global institution. I want to
hear from developing countries, as well as those that provide a big share of the resources to development, about
how we can together build a more inclusive, responsive and open World Bank.

A more inclusive World Bank will have the resources to advance its core mission of poverty reduction. It will
have a governance structure that provides legitimacy and fosters trust and confidence. The Bank has recently
achieved a historic capital increase and begun an ambitious programme to modernise its operations. It has also
taken important steps to increase the voting power and participation of developing countries. If I am entrusted
with the responsibility of leading the World Bank, I shall ensure this continues. If the World Bank is to promote
inclusive development, it must give developing nations a greater voice.

A more responsive World Bank must meet the challenges of the moment but also foresee those of the future.
The World Bank serves all countries. My focus will be to ensure that it provides a rapid, effective response to
their needs. I will come with an open mind and apply my medical and social-science training to take an
evidence-based approach.

Finally, a more open World Bank must recognise it does not have all the answers and listen closely to its clients
and stakeholders. I have led
a world-renowned higher education institution and I will ensure that the World Bank provides a platform for the
exchange of ideas. It is already working more closely with a diverse array of partners and it can build on these
changes. The Bank has taken significant steps to become more transparent and accountable: it must continue on
this path of openness.

Opportunity is nothing without action. In the coming weeks, I look forward to hearing the views of the World
Bank's constituents — clients, donors, governments, citizens and civil society — as we forge a common vision to
build an even stronger institution, prepared to meet the world's needs in the 21st century.

The writer is president of Dartmouth College and the US nominee for the presidency of the World Bank




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789975 Date: 10/30/2015
