      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789569 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                         B6




From:                               Campbell, Kurt M <CampbellKM@state.gov>
Sent:                               Friday, March 16, 2012 2:24 PM
To:
Subject:                            Fw: Amelia Earhart Project



We had a good meeting with the Smithsonian guys.today and they are now supportive of the event next week. Frankly
they were shocked by our background work, level of detail, outside advice, and innovative application of new
technologies. The General (who I worked with when I was a junior officer in the Navy) is a fan of Ballard and by the end
of our meeting he wanted to go on the expedition!

Still we will be very careful in the preparation of materials and comments. I sincerely think this will be a terrific event.

Now back to NK. Best Kurt


From: Campbell, Kurt M
Sent: Friday, March 16, 2012 02:08 PM
To: 'Dailey, John'                   ; Lieberman, Evelyn                           ; pellej        <pellej
Cc: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Loi, James L; Stout, Jennifer P; Jakab, Peter                     Crouch, Tom

Subject: RE: Amelia Earhart Project

Thank you very much for your note General and we appreciated your time this morning. I think it was a very useful
meeting and we have taken your good counsel and will focus on the Amelia Earhart legacy, the 75th anniversary, our
Pacific legacy, and the spirit of adventure all this conjures, in our event next week. We will also take great care when
discussing the expedition — part hopeful but also restrained and very realistic about the challenging odds. And we fully
recognize and support the position of your institution.

Again, I want to thank you for being so supportive of a young Navy officer on his first tour in the Pentagon many years
ago. It made a difference then and it does today.

Very best wishes and thanks for running the greatest show in Washington. Best regards, Kurt.



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Dailey, John [mailto:
Sent: Friday, March 16, 2012 1:30 PM
To: Campbell, Kurt M; Lieberman, Evelyn; pellej
Cc: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Loi, James L; Stout, Jennifer P; Jakab, Peter; Crouch, Tom
Subject: RE: Amelia Earhart Project



Kurt,
Thank you for taking the time to meet with us this morning. The information you provided on the planned event to
celebrate the 75th Anniversary of Amelia's flight clarified several issues for us and I hope I was able to adequately explain
the purpose of my E-Mail. For the benefit of those who did not attend the meeting but were included on my original
message, I want to restate its purpose. When I received the information that members of our Aeronautics Department
were going to be invited to the event I was concerned that it would create an opportunity for the press to interview
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789569 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789569 Date: 10/30/2015



members of our staff, who have well established levels of skepticism about the probable success of such a venture,
which would then detract from the celebration of the anniversary and question the credibility of the expedition. The
press will probably contact our folks anyway, but I didn't want it to be at the ceremony which is why I was
recommending that we not go. It had nothing to do with the value of the expedition nor did I intend to reflect a lack of
support for exploration. There is no organization in the world that would be more pleased than ours if they are
successful in solving one of the great mysteries of aviation and we wish them the very best of luck.

We were very impressed with the research that has taken place and the level of preparation and technology that has
been applied to the planning. There have been some amazing technological breakthroughs in recent years that have
opened up new possibilities and we hope that will be the case with this mission. The Smithsonian serves the Nation by
ensuring the highest quality of historical and scientific scholarship. A careful degree of skepticism when evaluating all
evidence is a crucial component of fulfilling that responsibility. We'll watch with great interest as this latest effort to
find Amelia unfolds.

Best Regards,
Jack




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789569 Date: 10/30/2015
