     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787797 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                             Monday, June 20, 2011 6:17 AM
To:                               'mchaleja@state.gov'
Subject                           Re:



That is impressive. PIs leave a guidebook for how we keep the pressure on after you've left. Should we prepare policy
directives or other means to try to institutionalize?


From: McHale, Judith A [mailto:McHaleJA©state.gov]
Sent: Friday, June 17, 2011 05:08 PM
To: H
Subject:

Thought you might like to see the most recent weekly public diplomacy report from SCA. We've come a long way. Note
the first ever Pakistan social media summit --- that team just keeps on chugging despite all obstacles.

jm




                        SCA Weekly Public Diplomacy Report: June 16, 2011


SCA Posts Score Big with Facebook Fans: SCA has put a major push on social media, and
we were proud to learn that three SCA posts now rank among the Department's 10 most
popular Facebook pages worldwide, with Embassy Colombo ranking number four (35,208 fans)
and Consulates General Karachi and Lahore coming in at number seven and 10,
respectively. Overall, six SCA embassies and consulates, including Islamabad, Dhaka, and
Kathmandu have over 10,000 fans.

Embassy Tashkent Launches Twitter Account and Links Universities in Webchats: Now
that two of the three major cell providers in Uzbekistan support Twitter short codes, Embassy
Tashkent launched its own Twitter account this week. While Twitter is still very new to
Uzbekistan, over 50 people have already signed up. In other social media outreach, PAS
Tashkent hosted two webchats linking Uzbek students to the University of Texas and
Valparaiso University, allowing students to directly ask about student life and study in the
United States. Since the Uzbek Government prohibits Embassy academic outreach activities
outside of the capital, transcripts of these webchats will be reposted on the Embassy Facebook
page, reaching many more young people. Embassy Tashkent raced past the 4,000 Facebook
fans mark this month.

PAS Karachi and Lahore Lead Public-Private Partnership to Organize Pakistan's First-
ever Social Media Summit: Just one year after the government briefly banned Facebook, PAS
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787797 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787797 Date: 10/30/2015




Karachi and Lahore organized Pakistan's first-ever international social media
summit. "Network! !" brought together bloggers from Pakistan, Egypt, Malaysia, Indonesia,
and the U.S. The event was co-sponsored by Intel, Apple, Newsweek, PC World magazine, and
the Express Group, Pakistan's second largest media house. The event greatly expanded post's
contacts in and understanding of Pakistan's burgeoning social media community and received
extensive coverage in print, broadcast, and online media. The buzz extended to Washington,
where Pakistan's Ambassador blogged extensively about "Network! !"

Deputy Secretary Nides in Pakistan: "The Future is in Good Hands": During his June 13-
15 visit to Pakistan, Deputy Secretary Nides met with several alumni of the Department's
largest bilateral exchange program. Meeting Fulbright alumni in Islambad, he remarked: "To
see so many impressive Pakistani young people — each of you talented representatives of this
great nation's bright future — is inspiring. To think my country has had some role in advancing
your education and helping your nation's prospects makes me feel very good. You are the real
deal of Pakistan, and I can see the future is in good hands."

"Public Art" Hits the Streets of Dushanbe Thanks to ECA Initiative: Our embassy in
Tajikistan, the city of Dushanbe, and the Ministry of Culture launched "Public Art" this week,
an initiative that is the outcome of an earlier ECA Visual Arts Initiative program with artist and
curator Kendal Henry. In 2010, Henry hosted an innovative month-long workshop with local
artists to design art to be placed on the main streets of Dushanbe. He stressed that anyone can
become an art-maker, and demonstrated how public art can produce social change. The works
that were created will now be mounted around the city, a departure from Tajikistan's (and
indeed the Soviet Union's) past when most art was created with government support and with
little input from the public.

"The Last Three Feet in India" — Locally Tailored Engagement: The American Center in
Kolkata organized a two-week exhibition entitled "Face of Bengal" featuring photographs taken
by outgoing Consul General Beth Payne during her tour in Kolkata. The top brass from the city
turned out for inauguration, which received abundant coverage in vernacular and national
media. Meanwhile, PAS Hyderabad arranged for two consular officers to go live on popular
FM Radio Mirchi's morning show "Hi Hyderabad." The officers did one show each in which
they showed off their Telugu language skills in answering questions about student visas from
listeners who called in. The morning program has an estimated audience of 200,000, and
feedback was very positive from callers and listeners who were impressed to hear our officers
conversing in the local language.

U.S.-Kyrgyzstan Annual Bilateral Consultations in Washington: Kyrgyz Republic Foreign
Minister Ruslan Kazakbayev led a delegation of Kyrgyz government officials to Washington
June 9-10 for the inaugural session of Annual Bilateral Consultations, hosted by Assistant
Secretary Blake. The Annual Bilateral Consultations are a structured policy dialogue designed
to advance our common agenda and opportunities for cooperation across the full range of
bilateral and regional issues. In addition to the government meetings, the consultations
included a dialogue with representatives from non-governmental organizations and a round
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787797 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787797 Date: 10/30/2015




table discussion with U.S. and Canadian businesses interested in trade and investment
opportunities in Kyrgyzstan. These sessions were widely reported in the Kyrgyz media.

Uzbekistan: Hundreds of English Teachers Converge for Skills Training: Over 200
English teachers from Uzbekistan gathered in Tashkent for the bi-annual USG-funded FORUM
Conference (June 10-11) and Access Teachers' Workshop (June 11-13). Regional English
Language Officer Harold Samuels, English Language Specialist Donna Brinton, and English
Language Fellows Dennis and Ingrid Johnson led interactive workshops on how to improve
your English speaking ability independently, the essentials of creative writing, submitting
abstracts for a professional conference, and becoming a TESOL professional. In Uzbekistan's
increasingly non-permissive environment for public diplomacy outreach, English language
training is an area where post continues to gain impressive access and traction.

Higher Education Outreach in India Amplified through Social Media: PAS Mumbai
joined forces with the U.S.-India Educational Foundation (USIEF) on a "Building Partnerships"
workshop which attracted representatives of 29 colleges, universities, and institutes from
throughout western India to discuss the Fulbright program. Meanwhile in Chennai, PAS hosted
their most successful live-stream yet, in coordination with USIEF, on the topic of student
visas. Over 75 students gathered at the Consulate, while 100 viewers joined the program on
post's Livestream.com page. The session was led by two vice consuls who answered questions
online, in person, and on the Livestream.com's chat page. Post also led active Twitter
discussions and Facebook chats, tweeting Q&As, which were then re-tweeted by our consulates
in Hyderabad and Mumbai.

Online Course for Aspiring Journalists in Tajikistan Improves Television
Broadcasting: The American Corner in Khujand recently held online courses for students
interested in journalism with the assistance of an English Teaching Assistant and two journalists
from a prominent local television station. The course culminated with a tour of the station and a
roundtable with editors and journalists about writing stories for broadcast and the challenges
facing the media in Tajikistan today. Many of the participants volunteered to work for the
station without compensation in order to gain experience.

James R. Moore
Deputy Assistant Secretary
South and Central Asia
Department of State
202-736-4331
moorejr@state.gov




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787797 Date: 10/30/2015
