     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791376 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Sunday, February 26, 2012 7:35 AM
To:
Subject:                           Burns-Denisov



Reached First Dep FM Denisov at 630 am DC time. In lengthy and sometimes contentious call, pressed hard along lines
of pts provided by Phil and Jake W. Emphasized that this msg came from highest levels of USG, and repeated several
times that situation increasingly desperate in Horns (esp Baba Amr), and temporary humanitarian ceasefire desperately
needed. Russia has publicly called for attention to humanitarian situation. Now is time to act. We still have deep
differences over broader issue, but we ought to be able to set those aside to produce this basic, time-limited
humanitarian action. The alternative is a human catastrophe, and growing radicalization of the situation.

Denisov listened carefully. He acknowledged our serious differences, and made a passing reference to "the harsh
rhetoric from your side." He insisted that Russia is also concerned about the human plight of Horns, although he claimed
that R understands that some wounded and children are getting out. I told him bluntly that's not what we understood.

I emphasized again the urgent need to act, and R's unique ability to act with Assad.

Denisov said he appreciated and shared that concern, "speaking personally.". He would relay the message immediately
to Lavrov and Kremlin. He said he urged us, in turn, to press oppositionist fighters to cease fire too around Horns, and to
"get your friends who are supplying them, like the Turks" to also press same message. I said it is bombardment from
regime forces which is preventing humanitarian access. Key to temp ceasefire in Horns is to get to Asad right away,
before it is too late.

Denisov said he would try to get approval for Syrian embassy in Damascus to weigh in later today. I urged him to press
Assad at highest level, since nothing else would likely get through. He said he understood, but made no promises. We
agreed to stay in touch today, and I told him Mike also stood ready to talk further.

Very hard to say whether any of this sunk in. D's claim that humanitarian sit not as bad as portrayed is disturbing. About
all I can say is that D registered high level and urgency of our concern, and that this is moment to try to focus on
immediate humanitarian problem and set aside continuing political differences between us. We'll see -- am not very
optimistic.

Would be good for Denis to follow up with Kislyak, if possible, to reinforce msg.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791376 Date: 10/30/2015
