      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788933 Date: 10/30/2015

                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL


world of states and the world of societies that I was talking about in my farewell remarks — your emphasis on
development, women, Internet freedom, 21st century statecraft, and public-private partnerships are all about a
relationships between governments and their citizens that deliver for their people (I'd be happy to write that up in a
separate memo       -1). If this is the tide of history, then you are perfectly positioned to ride the wave.

This position has a number of advantages. First, it can remain constant across all the countries of the region, whereas
the "who" and the "when" will vary country by country. Second, we can start getting very concrete, looking at things
that governments have done successfully in the region to empower their people, fight corruption, expand opportunity,
etc and emphasizing those as evidence that governments can deliver. Third, we can emphasize that a transparent,
accountable, and participatory government is the best bulwark against extremism, thereby putting the onus of blocking
violent extremism on what governments actually deliver. Fourth, taking this position puts us in the best strategic
position vis-a-vis China, which will become increasingly relevant as these protests spread to African countries (already
happening in Sudan). We want to frame the debate as "who stands with the people in terms of their right to connect,
right to basic services from their government, transparency, and accountability versus the Chinese position of
"assistance with no strings attached." What they portray as a violation of sovereignty or interference in domestic affairs"
is in fact insisting on a relationship between a government and its people based on universal rules and rights.

Now is also the time to play up the many things we are doing to fight corruption. Your OECD speech in May was already
going to focus on anti-corruption and domestic finance for development, but it's time to start owning this agenda more
now, talking about the percentage of taxes the Egyptian elite pay, for instance, just as you did in Pakistan, and
celebrating specific anti-corruption measures (like putting civic licensing-obtaining records and permissions of various
kinds—on line) that governments in various Indian provinces have taken. Peter Harrell has been pushing an anti-
corruption fund with Tom Nides and doing a lot of work on this issue with Jeremy Weinstein at the White House. Great
opportunity to put a major collaborative network together with both NGOs and American corporations who chafe at the
restrictions they are under versus the much looser restrictions on their foreign competitors.

Finally, and I know that I am ever the optimist, I think this is the time to change the game on Middle East Peace. We
should come out and say that Israel and Palestine now have the opportunity to be an island of prosperity and stability in
a turbulent sea, and an example of open societies, open economies, and open governments for others in the region.
Now is the time to go for broke — we are not going to be able to hold back these massive floods of political, economic,
and social aspirations which have been dammed up for decades. We need to get ahead of them, creating channels for to
guide their path. If we stick to endless incrementalism, we're done. It's ironic that you should be the one pushing POTUS
on this, but it's the right thing to do (and not a bad story). That's what leadership means — shaping, influencing, making
our own luck. Making that push will also help us with protesters/societies around the region as we would be removing
one of the standard ways their governments deflect attention from their own bad performance. Given how turbulent
everything is, everyone's instincts are to hunker down rather than introducing yet another variable into the equation.
But we can turn all this turbulence to our advantage, particularly with both Israeli and Palestinian leaders who think
their days in office are numbered. Netanyahu may be riding high, but the pictures of young secular Arabs demanding
basic rights and freedoms is going to undermine the Likud narrative of fear pretty quickly.

AM




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788933 Date: 10/30/2015
