       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767027 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL


From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Wednesday, December 30, 2009 5:00 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: POTUS Statement


Per yesterday's cony

    Original Message
From: Reines, Philippe I
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Kennedy, Patrick F; Verma, Richard R; Sullivan, Jacob J; Crowley, Philip J; Jacobs, Janice L; Donahue,
David T; Kirby, Michael D
Sent: Tue Dec 29 17:47:29 2009
Subject: POTUS Statement

REMARKS BY PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA SUBJECT: FURTHER UPDATES ON THE INVESTIGATION AND SECURITY
PROCEDURES PRESIDENT OBAMA:

Good morning. Yesterday I updated the American people on the immediate steps we took -- the increased screening and
security of air travel -- to keep our country safe in the wake of the attempted terrorist attack on Christmas Day. And I
announced two reviews, a review of our terrorist watch list system and a review of our air travel screening, so we can
find out what went wrong, fix it and prevent future attacks. Those reviews began on Sunday and are now under way.
Earlier today I issued the former (sic) guidelines for those reviews and directed that preliminary findings be provided to
the White House by this Thursday. It's essential that we diagnose the problems quickly and deal with them immediately.
And the more comprehensive formal reviews and recommendations for improvement will be completed in the coming
weeks, and I'm committed to working with Congress and our intelligence, law enforcement and homeland security
communities to take all necessary steps to protect the country. I wanted to speak to the American people again today
because some of this preliminary information that has surfaced in the last 24 hours raises some serious concerns. It's
been widely reported that the father of the suspect in the Christmas incident warned U.S. officials in Africa about his
son's extremist views. It now appears that weeks ago this information was passed to a component of our intelligence
community but was not effectively distributed so as to get the suspect's name on a no-fly list. There appears to be other
deficiencies as well. Even without this one report, there were bits of information available within the intelligence
community that could have and should have been pieced together. We've achieved much since 9/11 in terms of
collecting information that relates to terrorists and potential terrorist attacks. But it's becoming clear that the system
that has been in place for years now is not sufficiently up to date to take full advantage of the information we collect
and the knowledge we have. Had this critical information been shared, it could been compiled with other intelligence,
and a fuller, clearer picture of the suspect would have emerged. The warning signs would have triggered red flags, and
the suspect would have never been allowed to board that plane for America. The professionalism of the men and
women in our intelligence, counterterrorism, and law-enforcement and homeland-security communities is
extraordinary. They are some of the most hard-working, most dedicated Americans that I've ever met. In pursuit of our
security here at home, they risk their lives -- day in, day out -- in this country and around the world. Few Americans see
their work, but all Americans are safer because of their successes. They have targeted and taken out violent extremists.
They have disrupted plots and saved countless American lives. They are making real and daily progress in our mission to
disrupt, dismantle and defeat al Qaeda and other extremist networks around the world. And for this, every American
owes them a profound and lasting debt of gratitude. Moreover, as Secretary Napolitano has said, once the suspect
attempted to take down Flight 253, after his attempt, it's clear that passengers and crew, our homeland-security
systems and our aviation security took all appropriate actions. But what's also clear is this: When our government has
information on a known extremist, and that information is not shared and acted upon as it should have been, so that
this extremist boards a plane with dangerous explosives that could have cost nearly 300 lives, a systemic failure has
occurred. And I consider that totally unacceptable. The reviews I've ordered will surely tell us more, but what already is

       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767027 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767027 Date: 10/30/2015




apparent is that there was a mix of human and systemic failures that contributed to this potential catastrophic breach of
security. We need to learn from this episode and act quickly to fix the flaws in our system, because our security is at
stake and lives are at stake. I fully understand that even when every person charged with ensuring our security does
what they are trained to do, even when every system works exactly as intended, there's still no 100-percent guarantee
of success. Yet this should only compel us to work even harder, to be even more innovative and relentless in our efforts.
As president, I will do everything in my power to support the men and women in intelligence, law enforcement and
homeland security, to make sure they've got the tools and resources they need to keep America safe.

###




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767027 Date: 10/30/2015
