      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788322 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                        Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                        Saturday, January 14, 2012 2:07 PM
To:
Subject:                                     Fw: Hezbollah rejects call by U.N.'s Ban to disarm (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Saturday, January 14, 2012 12:31 PM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0
Subject: Hezbollah rejects call by U.N.'s Ban to disarm (Reuters)


BEIRUT (Reuters) - Hezbollah leader Sayyed Hassan Nasrallah dismissed on Saturday a United Nations call
for his militant anti-Israel movement to disarm, saying it was determined to maintain a military capacity to
defend Lebanon.

   "I affirm today, firmly, decisively and with the greatest conviction ... the choice of armed resistance,"
Nasrallah said. "These weapons, along with the Lebanese people and army, are the only guarantee of Lebanon's
protection."

  Mocking a demand by visiting U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon that Hezbollah lay down its weapons,
Nasrallah said he was happy that Hezbollah's military prowess was a cause for concern.

   "Your concern, Secretary-General, reassures us and pleases us. What matters to us is that you are worried,
and that America ... and Israel are worried with you," he said in a televised speech marking a Shi'ite holy day.

    On Saturday, as Nasrallah addressed a Hezbollah rally in the town of Baalbek by video link, Ban visited the
headquarters of U.N. peacekeeping forces in southern Lebanon, close to the border with Israel and a stronghold
of Hezbollah.

   "In my meetings with government officials I called on them to increase protection for you," Ban told
UNIFIL members, adding that the 293 fatalities since the force was set up in 1978 was the highest death toll
suffered by a U.N. peacekeeping force.

    "This weighs heavily on my heart," he said.

   The Lebanese army has taken on a bigger role in the south since 2006, but given the tensions between Israel
and Hezbollah, there is no sign of an exit strategy for the U.N. force there.

   Ban, who was in Lebanon for a three-day visit, was due to address a conference in Beirut on Sunday on
"reforms and transitions to democracy."

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788322 Date: 10/30/2015
