       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785815 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                             RELEASE IN
                                                                                                             PART B6


From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                               Thursday, April 7, 2011 6:36 AM
To:                                 'JilotyLC@state.gov'
Subject:                            Fw: H: Holbrooke Berlin event memo. Sid



PIs print.


From: sbwhoeop
Sent: Tuesday, April 05, 2011 11:55 AM
To: H
Subject: Re: H: Holbrooke Berlin event memo. Sid

Yes, he will be there. Also, Bill Drozdiak plans to be there, too. They are looking forward to seeing you. Spoke with Jamie,
who is pleased you have been in touch, he'll send you ideas/criticism/etc; his new job is terrific for him and well-suited, at
last.

Max's latest piece (you have to go to the site to see the video, if you want):
http://maxblumenthal.com/2011/04/remembering-juliano-mer-khamis/


Remembering Juliano Mer Khamis
On 04.04.11, By Max
Juliano Mer Khamis was killed yesterday by a gunman in Jenin. I met him on a number of occasions. He exuded a unique
charisma that was bound up with unpredictable rage and spontaneous joy. Gideon Levy has done justice to his legacy in
a short but powerful obituary.
My friend Jen Marlowe helped create this video about Juliano's work with the Jenin Freedom Theater. Watching it is all
anyone needs to do to understand how much of a void his murder has created:
Juliano's documentary, "Arna's Children," is the best film I have seen about the occupation. There is really no other film
that approaches its emotional impact or captures the way in which the trasher of the occupation methodically destroys the
lives of everyone in its path — and how those in its way resist, it no matter what. So here it is, a testament to the genius of
Juliano, the courage of his mother, who founded the Jenin Freedom Theater in 1988, and the humanity of the children of
Jenin:
Juliano was born to a Jewish Israeli woman, Arna Mer, who dedicated the last years of her life to challenging the
occupation, protesting at checkpoints and traveling to and from the Jenin refugee camp, even while in the terminal stages
of breast cancer. His father was a Palestinian Christian bureaucrat, Saliba Khamis, who met Ama in the Israeli
Communist Party, which was for decades the only party in Israel that promoted co-existence between Arabs and Jews.
Mer and Khamis named their son after Salvatore Giuliano, a strikingly handsome, swaggering Italian bandit who led a
small band of landless peasants against powerful oligarchs, earning himself a reputation as "the Italian Robin Hood" and
eventual media stardom.
After making Ama's Children and appearing in films like Amos Gitai's "Kippur" (not the best Gitai film but still worth
watching), Juliano set out to revive his mother's Jenin Freedom Theater. The theater had been in ruins since the Israeli
army destroyed it while reducing Jenin to a post-apocalyptic moonscape of destruction. Once the Second Intifada was
crushed, the camp was transformed into a laboratory for Tony Blair and General Keith Dayton's cynical security plan. Now
Jenin was ringed by electrified fences, a virtual prison inhabited by thousands of children with post-traumatic stress
disorder.
Juliano's return to Jenin was a rebuke to the promise of former Israel Labor Minister Shlomo Benizri to "convert the life of
Palestinians into hell," as he restored a creative outlet for a generation the occupation had sought to demoralize and
destroy. In turn, he brought young Israelis (including Palestinian Israelis) and international activists over the Green Line to
help him build the theater, promoting a model of co-existence based on solidarity with the Palestinian grassroots.
With assistance from Zacharia Zubbeidi, a former leader of the armed insurgency during the Second Intifada, the theater
allowed young people from the camp to take aim not only at the occupation, but at the internal problems plaguing
Palestinian society. The next Intifada would consist of theater, music, poetry — the struggle of a dispossessed,
dehumanized generation asserting itself through culture. That was Juliano's vision.


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785815 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785815 Date: 10/30/2015




Through their work in the theatre, young Jenin residents challenged traditions and entrenched social mores like corporal
punishment and the relegation of young women to secondary social roles. "For me freedom is the occupation ending and
the army leaving," a young boy who participates in the theater said. "But it's also playing snooker and not having anybody
hit me."
Juliano's final play, a production of "Alice in Wonderland," was filled with themes and symbols that explicitly challenged
patriarchal authority. I wish I had traveled to Jenin with Matan Cohen when he invited me to see the play; the reviews I
heard from those who attended it were glowing.
Was Juliano's murder motivated by religious extremism? For now no one knows. The theater has been attacked with
molotov cocktails and Juliano has been denounced as a Zionist agent by militant elements. He knew the risks of his work
and was committed enough to risk paying the ultimate price.
"At the end, there's a feeling that the spirit [of freedom] is already here, it's already seeded," he said during an interview in
Jenin. "And I don't believe that someone or anyone can stop it."




    Original Message
From: H <HDR22Qclintonemail.com>
To: 'sbwhoeop
Sent: Tue, Apr 5, 2011 11:50 am
Subject: Re: H: Holbrooke Berlin event memo. Sid

Thx for this--and pls thank John whom I hope to see there.

From: sbwhoeop
Sent: Tuesday, April 05, 2011 09:58 AM
To: H
Subject: H: Holbrooke Berlin event memo. Sid




                                           CONFIDENTIAL



                                                    April 5, 2011



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Holbrooke Memorial at American Academy/Berlin


        I am enclosing below what amounts to a memo from John Komblum on the Holbrooke event. I've adapted an
email he sent me and attached two articles he sent, one on Holbrooke and Europe and another on Holbrooke and the
Academy (published in the Academy's journal). You can use this material as the basis for your talk there.


    1. Kornblum on American Academy event, Westerwelle and political context.


Hillary is undoubtedly aware that she will be flying into a hornets' nest in Berlin next week. Big losses in the regional
elections have caused Westerwelle to be forced out of his position as FDP chairman. No one gives him much chance of
staying on long as foreign minister either. But he will still be in office next week for the NATO ministerial and will give the
Secretary his party award on Friday aftemoon. This is a prize thought up by the FDP to create publicity and to flatter
someone they want to get along with. It is a nice gesture to give it to the Secretary, but it loses much of its oomph after
Westerwelle's collapse. I would recommend that she be positive and polite in her remarks, but go very light on praise for
Guido. He is very unpopular right now and is not long for this world.
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785815 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785815 Date: 10/30/2015




We are all very pleased that she will come to the Holbrooke event. It will be much along the lines of the Kennedy Center
piece. Ms. Ashton will also be there. There will also be a much too long list of FOD's who will talk about
themselves. Gary Smith (Academy director) knows that he cannot time Hillary's arrival perfectly. If she is delayed too
long, he will start with other speakers. He would be very grateful for a chance to show her around the Academy, which
can take as little as ten minutes.

As for her remarks, she has done this gig a few times already. I have attached a piece I did for the Academy's magazine,
which gives some thoughts about the Academy itself and how it reflects RCH's personality and visions. It really is the
place which puts his character all together. It shows a much more thoughtful side of him than the many Milosevic war
stories do. You may recall that the Academy wasn't mentioned at all at Kennedy Center. This will be the only time a
senior person remembers this part of Holbrooke's legacy.

The final three or four paragraphs of my piece give the most important points from my point of view

  RCH is always known as a crisis manager, but he also cared deeply about building institutions for
understanding. During his short tenure in Bonn he rediscovered his Central European roots and became deeply
convinced that the United States and Germany must form the core of a permanent Atlantic community.

-- The American Academy is the embodiment of Richard's commitment's It reflects his eclectic interests, his belief that
scholarship and dialogue can help build peace and his commitment to Berli and Germany. Living humanity was his
slogan and the American Academy is what he was all about.

    2. Ambassador Richard Holbrooke and the American Academy, by John C. Kornblum


I have always thought there was one fact which described Richard Holbrooke's success more than any other. Persons
who have only met or talked with him briefly, or in fact sometimes have never met him, feel that he has touched their lives.
The numbers of people who consider themselves to have been his "good friends" runs into the thousands — more than he
ever could even have talked seriously to. Those who felt that he had touched their lives or contributed to their well being
can be counted in the millions.

All of these groups were somehow moved by his voracious desire to know who they were and what was important to
them. This ability to created instant empathy gave him an unmatched talent to build bridges to others. Nations he had
never visited were brought back from despair by his commitments to the fight against AIDS or his peace efforts in the
Balkans. Others have made similar contributions, but missed the human impact of Richard Holbrooke. The reason?
Richard cared so much about the world and its condition that he instinctively absorbed the personal messages from
others and transformed them into mutual understanding . His prodigious intellectual and rhetorical skills did the rest.
One could never forget a conversation with him or not take seriously a request for assistance.

Exposure to this force of personality did not always win Richard friends or admirers. Those who were bruised, unhappy or
just plain jealous of his talents were also numerous. But in almost every case, even those who were less than thrilled with
his treatment could not deny the power of his ideas.

Once, at a very important Washington meeting, Richard accused a very senior general of disloyalty for not following the
President's goals -- goals which Richard had of course written for him. A year later, this general was one of Richard's
most loyal deputies Most successful was Richard's two year massaging of Serbian dictator Slobodan Milosevic.
Milosevic was a true sociopath. He cared little for the lives of others. His only goal was to amass as much power and
control as possible. .

 Richard met Milosevic when the ugly Balkan war was in its fifth year. Several teams of negotiators had tried to stop the
killing and'had failed. Richard had decided that Milosevic and only Milosevic was the key to success. He hit him with
every ounce of his matchless powers of analysis, persuasion and coercion. Milosevic, being no slouch, gave much the
same in return. It was a contest, which Milosevic could not win, and he probably knew it. Richard understood that he
needed Milosevic to help implement the agreement. He made it possible for Milosevic to lose gracefully by ensuring that
the interests of the Serbian people were also protected. By the time it was over, the Dayton Agreement had pieced back
together a human and historic puzzle, which had burdened Europe for decades.

Richard's other main advantage was his discipline. Much of his cajoling of Milosevic took place after a tragic accident on
Mount Igman, on the road to Sarajevo. The American delegation was forced to take this treacherous mountain road,
because Milosevic personally had refused them safe passage through Serbia checkpoints. Richard said farewell to the

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785815 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785815 Date: 10/30/2015




three colleagues who died in the accident and returned to Belgrade within two weeks for the next round of debate. His
first meeting was with Milosevic.

The American Academy in Berlin is the most enduring result of Holbrooke's "specialness." It is a unique binational
institution crafted from little more than a commitment to the unique relationship which grew between Berlin and the United
States after 1945. But its foundations are more than idealistic. The underlying goal of the Academy was very practical in
nature. It was to ensure that the United States and Germany never forget the need to build on the deep cooperation
forged in divided Berlin. The seemingly random mixture of culture and politics; history and vision which the Academy
projects has for more than a decade transmitted the special Holbrooke method to a new generation. Each views it in his
or her own terms, and in fact the number of people who claim to understand exactly what Richard had in mind for the
Academy rarely agree with each other, but they are still all right. . The message is the method rather than the content. It
is neither cultural, nor scientific nor political — it is human. Living humanity is what Richard Holbrooke was all about. The
American Academy is the living essence of his life's work.

    3. The Diplomacy of Richard Holbrooke: America as a European Power, By John C. Kornblum


Richard Holbrooke's last mission in Afghanistan added further to his reputation as a negotiator and crisis manager. But
remembering him solely in this role would be to overlook some of his most important contributions to American diplomacy.
He was equally successful as a strategist in areas not in crisis. Building a constructive relationship with China was one of
his early roles. His success in returning US funding for UN commitments in 2000 was another excellent example.

But especially important for today's purposes was his success during the 1990's in laying the foundation for a permanent
post-Cold War American role in Europe. At a time when a proliferation of crises seems to be causing the United States
and Europe to drift steadily apart, Holbrooke's push for an American initiative to help build a solid post-Cold War trans-
Atlantic structure of security and cooperation is looking more important with each passing day.

When Richard Holbrooke took over the State Department's European Bureau in September of 1994, the situation in
Europe was deteriorating badly. The giddy days of the "end of history" had sunk into war in the Balkans, stagnation in
NATO and a growing sense of alienation between the United States and its closest allies. The final withdrawal of both
Russian and Western troops from Berlin had left a major strategic gap in the heart of Europe.

True to form, Holbrooke focused less on celebrating the victory than on dealing with its consequences His short tenure as
Ambassador to Germany left a lasting impression on him. He was moved by arguments of Chancellor Kohl and Defense
Minister Volker Ruhe who favored strong efforts to build democracy in Central and Eastern Europe. Without extension of
Western institutions, the new democracies in Central Europe would be pulled mercilessly back and forth in the power
vacuum left by the end of the Cold War.
Although he was preoccupied with devising a new Balkan strategy, Holbrooke turned almost instinctively to the task of
filling this empty space. A promise of NATO enlargement was designed to focus these countries on pushing forward with
democratization and to offer a framework for building a new relationship with Russia. Holbrooke set forth a
comprehensive strategy in an article entitled America, A European Power, which was published in the spring 1995 issue
of Foreign Affairs magazine.

In this article, Holbrooke suggested that rather than pulling back after the fall of Communism, "the United States has
become a European power in a sense that goes beyond traditional assertions of American `commitment' to Europe. In the
21St century, Europe will still need the active American involvement that has been a necessary component of the
continental balance for half a century."
Recalling the surge of creativity which defined America's postwar engagement in Europe, Holbrooke argued that a "post-
Cold War engagement must focus again on structures, old and new. This time, the United States must lead in the creation
of a security architecture that includes and thereby stabilizes all of Europe -- the West, the former Soviet satellites of
central Europe, and, most critically, Russia and the former republics of the Soviet Union.
America as a European power? To many, Holbrooke seemed out of touch with his times. Post- Cold War America
wanted solutions rather than long-term commitments. Europe was rich and stable. It could take care of itself.
Holbrooke was also criticized for focusing on NATO at the cost of missing a chance to bring Russia into a non-military
mutual security partnership. But he and Russia Coordinator Strobe Talbott argued that by removing for Russia the
temptation to dominate former satellites, NATO enlargement would actually facilitate dialogue. As Holbrooke noted in
Foreign Afffairs: " Stability in central Europe is essential to general European security, and it is still far from assured."

But he also added forcefully: "All the key participants in the new security equation in Europe -- the United States, the West
and central European countries, and the other nations of the former Soviet Union -- desire a peaceful, stable, and
democratic Russia, integrated into the institutions of an undivided Europe. No more important political goal has existed in

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785815 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785815 Date: 10/30/2015




Europe since a newly democratic West Germany was successfully integrated into the European political and security
structure after World War II. "

Fifteen years later, this conviction that NATO and the European Union must work in tandem to ensure democracy in
Central Europe, looks especially prescient. Despite repeated threats and crises, democracy has taken root and trans-
Atlantic institutions have held firm. America has became a charter member of an enlarged Euro-Atlantic community of
democracies which now extends from the Finnish border in Europe to the Aleutian Islands in the Bering Strait. This is a
community of nearly a billion persons which dwarfs even China in size and strength. There is excitement in the newness
of a rapidly changing Europe united in democracy for the first time in history.

But European political and economic unity is being severely strained by the pressures of a continuing economic crisis.
We are again puzzling about the emergence of a more independent-minded Germany and worrying about the financial
weakness of the nations of southern Europe. Russia's conflicts with neighbors suggest a backwardness which is as
worrisome as was its strength during the Cold War. Clearly, the trans-Atlantic project is not yet complete.

Today US interests are more deeply entwined in the Atlantic world than Holbrooke could ever have imagined in 1995.
We are networked in ways which did not even exist 15 years ago. However important Asia or Latin America become,
America's own influence and self-confidence will depend to a surprising degree on a continuing sense of common
purpose with European partners.

Here is where the United States has too often dropped the ball. Both Bush and Obama seem to have taken the
achievements of the 1990's for granted. Each in his own way projected the US more as a separate power which
cooperates with Europe rather than as a constituent part of a Euro-Atlantic community. President Obama's speeches -
Berlin, Strasbourg, Oslo, and Prague - dominated European debate. But they did little to define how the United States
intends to behave as a European power.

Ronald Reagan's famous speech at the Brandenburg Gate was at first ridiculed as being naïve and unrealistic. It became
historic only when the results were evident. Here, Richard Holbrooke's judgment would be clear and penetrating.
Obama's skillful rhetoric will also be forgotten if engagement and action do not soon follow.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785815 Date: 10/30/2015
