        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784480 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL


From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivanil@state.gov>
Sent:                             Wednesday, November 23, 2011 7:20 PM
To:
Subject:                          FW: DRC Conflict Minerals Question
Attachments:                      Fact Sheet: Public-Private Alliance for Responsible Minerals Trade (5.58 KB); PPA
                                  Overview 091511.pdf



On conflict minerals...

We will follow up as Matt (one of my guys) suggests.


From: Walsh, Matthew P
Sent: Wednesday, November 23, 2011 11:57 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob
Cc: Crocker, Bathsheba N; McAuliffe, Marisa S; Valliani, Amira
Subject: DRC Conflict Minerals Question

Jake,

On your DRC conflict mineral certification question, the 2010 Dodd-Frank act included a provision that was intended to
prevent U.S. companies from sourcing conflict minerals from the DRC. However, the measure has actually backfired to
some degree, in the sense that U.S. companies have largely responded by stopping to source any minerals from the DRC
to make life easier for themselves (and because the SEC still has not issued the regulations for U.S. companies to follow,
creating a foggy regulatory environment).

The Department has responded by doing quite a bit. EEB has a working level person whose sole purpose in life is to
work on this issue (and the KP). Last week, U/Ss Hormats and Otero launched, in a widely attended signing ceremony at
USIP, the U.S.-led Public-Private Alliance for Responsible Minerals Trade, aimed at working with the private sector and
civil society to find a solution that works. The attached documents include brief background info on the PPA. The below
(pulled from G's background paper for last week's launch) provides brief background on Dodd-Frank and the PPA.

Given the petition handed to Cheryl, I suggest tasking AF with a response, and asking that they coordinate it with EEB,
DRL, G, and others. On that note, I talked to G about this, and they find the petition very odd given that some of the
groups, such as ENOUGH, cited as organizing the petition attended the PPA launch last week and were very supportive
of our effort. So, perhaps this petition is just dated, or perhaps they just want more to be done (in typical ENOUGH
fashion).

Matt

Dodd-Frank

         The U.S. government is actively engaged in efforts to break the link between the illicit minerals trade in the
Great Lakes region and violent armed groups in the eastern DRC. Section 1502 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform
and Consumer Protection Act provides that if a company that reports to the SEC uses a supply of tin, tungsten, tantalum
or gold that originates from the DRC or an adjoining country, the company must disclose what due diligence measures it
performed on its supply chain. The same is true if the company is unable to confirm the minerals' origin. These
companies will begin to disclose this information to the Securities and Exchange Commission after their first full fiscal
year following the issuance of the regulations. The legislation is not an embargo and does not prohibit trade. Although
Section 1502 called for the SEC to issue the implementing regulations for Section 1502 in April 2011, the Commission

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784480 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784480 Date: 10/30/2015




announced an extension through the end of 2011. We now expect that the implementing regulations will be released in
December.

Public Private Alliance (PPA)

         Efforts by the U.S. advocacy groups and the international community to promote due diligence, including the
passage of Section 1502 of the Dodd-Frank law, have by all accounts proved to be an important catalyst for traceability
and certification initiatives and due diligence implementation in the mineral sector regionally and internationally. At the
same time, citing the current lack of systems to facilitate certification and traceability and the concern that Dodd-Frank
requires 100% certitude of conflict-free minerals„ some companies have decided to respond'to this disclosure
requirement and other related initiatives by instructing their suppliers to ensure that none of the four minerals from the
affected countries enter their supply chains. One effect of such has been a dramatically reduced demand for minerals
sourced from the DRC or neighboring countries that cannot be shown to beconflict-free." , The U.S has led an effort to
establish a Public Private Alliance dedicated to harmonizing efforts across the private sector,, regional governments, and
civil society to develop credible and efficient systems that can assist companies in sourcing "conflict-free" minerals. The
PPA will launch November 2011 in Washington.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784480 Date: 10/30/2015
