     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787756 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Thursday, January 5, 2012 6:22 PM
To:
Subject:                          Statement



                                    STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON

                                            21' Century Defense Priorities

This morning, President Obama and Secretary of Defense Panetta unveiled new strategic guidance that reflects our 2V
century defense needs and secures America's leadership for the future. The Defense Department and State Department
continue to work side-by-side to bring the full range of American assets to bear on our foreign policy. As the new
strategy notes, meeting our challenges cannot be the work of our military alone. Diplomacy and development are equal
partners with defense in our smart power approach to promoting American interests and values abroad, our economic
prosperity, and protecting our national security.

This new guidance is a critical element in our integrated approach to strengthening American leadership in a changing
world. It enhances the capabilities and relationships we need to lead and meet our responsibilities for years to come. And
it promotes our strategic priorities, including sustaining a global presence while strengthening our focus on the Asia-
Pacific region; deterring our adversaries and fulfilling our security commitments; investing in critical alliances and
partnerships, including NATO; combating violent extremists and defending human dignity around the world; and
preserving our ability to respond quickly to emerging threats. As we move forward with this strategy, we will continue to
consult our allies and partners to address our shared concerns, seize new opportunities, and bolster global stability.

I look forward to continuing the close partnership between the Departments of State and Defense as we work together to
realize President Obama's vision for the security of the United States and its people.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05787756 Date: 10/30/2015
