      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789931 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                       RELEASE IN
                                                                                                       PART B6


From:                              Reines, Philippe I <reinesp@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, February 23, 2012 3:20 AM
To:
Cc:                                 Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject:                            Re: H: FYI, re: NYT. She should be given scoop early. S



My people control the banks too




From: H [maitto:HDR22@dintonemail.com]
Sent: Wednesday, February 22, 2012 07:44 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J; Reines, Philippe I
Subject: Fw: H: FYI, re: NYT. She should be given scoop early. S

Had you seen this?


From: sbwhoeop              [mailto:sbwhoeop
Sent: Saturday, February 18, 2012 09:57 AM
To: H
Subject: H: FYI, re: NYT. She should be given scoop early. S

http://walt.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2012/02/17/the_preemptive_strike_on jodi_rudoren




The preemptive strike on Jodi Rudoren
Posted By Stephen M. Walt Friday, February 17, 2012 -

In our book on the Israel lobby, John Mearsheimer and I emphasized that it was "wrong -- and objectionable -- to argue
that Jews or pro-Israel forces 'control' the media and what [it] says about Israel." Instead, we argued that groups and
individuals in the lobby work overtime to monitor what the media says about Israel, and to bring pressure to bear on
reporters and editors who said things these groups or individuals didn't like. The lobby didn't "control" the media in a direct
or conspiratorial fashion; it just sought to influence media coverage in a variety of sometimes heavy-handed ways, much
as some other interest groups do. We documented numerous incidents where media organizations faced pressure to alter
their coverage. As a former spokesman for the Israeli consulate in New York put it, "Of course, a lot of self-censorship
goes on. Journalists, editors, and politicians are going to think twice about criticizing Israel if they know they are going to
get thousands of calls in a matter of hours. The Jewish lobby is good at orchestrating pressure." (Note: "Jewish lobby"
was his term, not ours). As an anonymous interviewee told journalist Michael Massing, "the pressure from these groups is
relentless. Editors would just as soon not touch them."
Discourse about this topic has opened up a lot in recent years, but the same tactics are still on display. Case in point: the
warning shots fired at the New York Times' new bureau chief in Jerusalem, Jodi Rudoren, which began when the ink on
the press release announcing her appointment was barely dry.
What was Rudoren's scandalous transgression? She had the temerity to send a pleasant (but hardly effusive) response to
a tweet from All Abunimah, who is the author of a book advocating one state for Israel and Palestine. Whatever you may
think of Abunimah's views (I happen to think he's wrong on that issue), he's not a violent extremist and there's nothing
inappropriate about Rudoren responding to him as she did. Rudoren also tweeted some positive things about Peter
Beinart's forthcoming book The Crisis of Zionism.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789931 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789931 Date: 10/30/2015



Well, before you could say "hasbara," Rudoren was being chastised by a familiar list of commentators, including Adam
Kredo of the Washington Free Beacon, Shmuel Rosner of the Jerusalem Post, and Josh Block, the former AIPAC staffer
who recently led a despicable effort to smear the Center for American Progess. And of course Jeffrey Goldberg of the
Atlantic, self-appointed Supreme Jurisprudent of What is Permissible to Say about Israel, got into the act as well.
(Goldberg's sudden interest in fair-minded reporting is especially amusing, given his penchant for making up lies about
those with whom he disagrees.)
Rudoren had done nothing wrong, of course. Her job as a reporter is to reach out to a wide variety of interested parties, to
describe the situation on the ground as she sees it, and to render intelligent judgments about what she observes. I frankly
don't envy her the job given how politicized the issue is. It remains to be seen how good a job she will do, but the obvious
purpose of this little exercise in intimidation was to put her on notice. Her critics were sending a message: "If you write
things that we don't like (and especially anything that might present Israel in a negative light), then we're going to raise a
stink and try to get you to start pulling your punches."
As I've said ad nauseum, this situation is not healthy for the United States or for Israel. If Americans get a one-sided diet
of reportage about this conflict, we are going to misunderstand it and we are going to keep making stupid or ill-informed
decisions. We're also going to be less capable of giving our Israeli friends sensible advice, which all states need from time
to time. Israel's staunchest backers shouldn't want a cheerleader at the Times' Jerusalem bureau; in fact, the more you
care about Israel, the more you want someone who'll tell you the truth, even when some of it might not be pleasant to read
or hear. Otherwise, you might not find out what's really happening until it is too late.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789931 Date: 10/30/2015
