          UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784149 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                     B6



    From:                              Anne-Marie Slaughter
    Sent:                              Friday, December 2, 2011 2:12 PM
    To:
    Cc:                                Cheryl Mills; Abedin, Huma; Jacob J Sullivan (SullivanJJ@state.gov)
    Subject:                           one more to read on Egypt



    This is very close to the piece I have been contemplating writing on why I think we are heading in a bad direction on
    Egypt. Marc Lynch and Steven Cooke are two of the most thoughtful and knowledgeable analysts around, in my
    view. Note their positive proposal that we should issue a strong statement spelling out exactly what a transition to
    civilian government means, and do it now when the regime is probably breathing a sigh of relief and thinking that it
    dodged a bullet. Until they release the thousands of protesters they have detained, they are not serious about any kind
    of real civilian rule.

    FROM THE NYT ON LINE.
    OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR

    U.S. Policy on Egypt Needs a Big Shift
    By MARC LYNCH AND STEVEN A. COOK

    Published: November 30, 2011

    Egyptians lined up this week to vote in the first Parliamentary elections since the fall of President Hosni
    Mubarak. The high turnout in a peaceful, orderly election contrasted sharply with the violence and chaos
    of the previous week, when hundreds of thousands returned to Tahrir Square after security forces killed at
    least 42 people and left 3,000 injured. But Washington should not be fooled by the peace that has
    returned to Egyptian streets. Even successful elections can not erase months of political mismanagement
    by the ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (S.C.A.F.) or the bloodshed committed under its
    auspices.

    Enlarge This Image




                                                                                                                     Al Jabbaro

    Related in News

•   After Second Day of Voting in Egypt, Islamists Offer Challenge to Generals (November 3o, 2011)
•   Times Topic: Egypt News — Revolution and Aftermath
    Related in Opinion

•   Times Topic: Middle East
•   Op-Ed Contributor: In Bleak Cairo, a Call for Optimism (November 29, 2011)
•   Room for Debate: Egypt's Fall in the Arab World (October 7, 2011)


          UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784149 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784149 Date: 10/30/2015




The U.S. State Department condemned the violence in Tahrir, and has called on the S.C.A.F. to transfer
power to civilians as soon as possible. That is a good start, but is not enough. Egypt's military rulers clearly
believe that they have survived the political crisis, and have resisted calls for a more fundamental political
change. The generals may prevail in the short term, as the numbers in Tahrir dwindle and Egyptians turn
their attention back to the elections and political squabbles.

Still, the violence last week demonstrates that the S.C.A.F.'s leadership has created the conditions under
which even small problems and challenges can spark massive instability. And it has shown that
Washington's present approach to Egypt, which has placed a premium on private diplomacy at the
expense of public pressure, must change.

Overall, the Obama administration has done better with Egypt than most critics recognize. It has sought to
shape the generals' behavior by praising them in public while quietly pushing them from behind the
scenes. This approach has sometimes worked, but it has lowered America's status in the eyes of many
Egyptians. Few Egyptians (or Americans) know what motivates U.S. policy toward Egypt or what it has
done. Most revolutionaries assume that Obama is conspiring with the generals against them.

Until this week, arguments could be made either way on the balance between private influence and public
pressure. Yet the unacceptable, systematic violence in Tahrir Square and the ratcheting repression across
the country against protesters, journalists and foreigners changes that equation. The U.S. was virtually
silent as dozens of Egyptians died and tons of U.S.-made tear gas bombarded Tahrir Square. Only after a
few days did it muster a demand for restraint on both sides — which caused outrage among peaceful
protesters — and a call for free and fair elections. Washington has toughened its language in recent days,
including a White House statement calling on the S.C.A.F. to transfer power to a civilian government "as
soon as possible." But few Egyptians even noticed.

This cautious, passive response has done considerable damage to President Obama's admirable efforts to
place the United States on the side of Arabs who want to live in democratic societies. It is time for the
Obama administration to rise to the moment, recognize that Egypt's transition is at stake, and shift its
focus.

The events of the last week demonstrate that the military is quite capable by its own machinations and
miscalculations of fostering the instability that U.S. officials seem to fear most. Yet the S.C.A.F.'s actions
are not the only compelling reason for a policy change.

The administration has articulated a new standard of legitimacy in its responses to Libya and Syria,
among other countries, that leaders who use violence against their own people forfeit their standing to
rule. Although Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi and his officers are hardly in the same category
as Muammar el-Qaddafi and Bashar al-Assad, the same standard should apply to Egypt.

The Obama administration's response should begin with a clear, public presidential statement specifying
what transferring power to a civilian government means. This would not involve micromanaging Egyptian
politics in a manner that risks a nationalist backlash in Egypt, but Washington should put the Egyptian
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784149 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784149 Date: 10/30/2015




military, which receives $1.3 billion annually from the United States, on notice that the officer's efforts to
carve out a post-transition political role for themselves is unacceptable.

In addition, Washington should now throw its weight behind early presidential elections, a demand
shared by virtually all Egyptian political forces and which the S.C.A.F. recently agreed to under pressure. It
should also insist on a rapid response to the long-standing demand to end the military trials for civilians
and the application of emergency law, which makes those trials and other means of repression possible. It
should speak out against recent moves to censor the media and to incite citizens against protesters and
foreign journalists. And, crucially, the administration should demand real accountability for those
responsible for violence against civilians.

Egypt is now entering months of elections that hold out the promise of delivering the democratic system
that Egyptians want and deserve. Now is the time for Washington to push Egypt's military leaders to make
the political changes needed to deliver on that hope.

Marc Lynch is an associate professor of political science at George Washington University. Steven A.
Cook is a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784149 Date: 10/30/2015
