UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                           RELEASE IN PART
                                                                           B5


    MEMORANDUM FOR SECRETARY HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON

 From:         Miguel
 Date:         March 12, 2010
 Re:           Health Care Update & Blue Dog Analysis


       This memorandum provides a brief status update on the Congressional
 debate over health care reform.

       As discussed below, the House is in the midst of charting the course forward
 on health care reform.




        On May 12, 2009, the Blue Dog Coalition released their principles for health
 care reform. In addition to providing a brief summary of the current state of play
 on health care, this memorandum also outlines those principles and demonstrates
 how the President's health reform proposal meets the Coalition's goals. Talking
 points for use in a conversation with            and other Blue Dog Coalition
 members are part of this analysis.


 I. BACKGROUND

       The House is positioning for a final vote on health care reform legislation as
 soon as next week, though it is still unclear that they will be able to secure the 216
 members needed to pass the measure.

         CB0 scores of the final bill are expected today (Friday, March 12th).




                                              (1)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015




 II.    BLUE DOG ANALYSIS AND TALKING POINTS

       On May 12, 2009 the Blue Dog Coalition released their principles for health
care reform. The analysis below outlines those principles and demonstrates how
the health reform Proposal meets almost all of these goals.


                                             (2)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015




        A.     Controlling Costs

     • Blue Dog Principle: Comprehensive health care reform must be deficit
       neutral. Finding savings within the current health care system is a critical
       first step to achieving this goal.

        President's Proposal: The Proposal is not only deficit neutral, but
        according to the Congressional Budget Office, it will reduce the deficit by
        roughly $100 billion by 2019 and about $1 trillion in the second decade.


     • Blue Dog Principle: Payment incentives should be realigned to improve the
       quality of patient care and reduce inefficiencies.

        President's Proposal: The Proposal includes many significant policies that
        will realign payments to emphasize quality and efficiency. These include:

         o Establishing Value-Based Purchasing Programs: The Proposal
           establishes a value-based purchasing program for inpatient hospital
           services linking Medicare payments to performance measures for
           common, high-cost conditions such as cardiac, surgical and pneumonia
           care. Beginning in FY 2014, other Medicare providers including long
           term care hospitals, inpatient rehabilitation facilities and hospice will
           participate in the program. Providers who do not participate will be
           penalized. In addition, the Secretary of HUB is required to submit a plan
           to Congress on how to move skilled nursing facilities and home health
           agencies into a value-based purchasing payment system.

         o Addressing Geographic Inequities: The Proposal also begins to address
           geographic inequities by directing the Secretary of HHS to develop and
           implement a budget-neutral payment system that will adjust Medicare
           physician payments based on the quality and cost of the care they deliver.
           Quality and cost measures will be risk-adjusted and geographically
           standardized. The new payment system will then be phased-in over a 2-
           year period beginning in 2015.

         o Extending and Expanding Physician Quality Reporting: The Proposal
           extends the Physician Quality Reporting Initiative (PQRI) program
           through 2014. This program provides incentives to physicians who


                                              (3)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015




            report Medicare quality data. Beginning in 2014, physicians who do not
            report their data will have their payments reduced.

        o Creating a National Pilot Program on Bundling Payments: The Proposal
          establishes a national pilot program on payment bundling and allows the
          Secretary of EIFIS to increase the scale and scope of the program if
          certain cost and quality goals are met.

        o Providing Physicians with Improved Feedback Information: The
          Proposal expands the Medicare physician resource use feedback program
          to provide for the development of individualized reports so physicians
          can compare their per capita utilization to other physicians in their area.

        o Reducing Payments to Hospitals with High Rate of Hospital Acquired
          Infections: The Proposal reduces Medicare payments to hospitals with
          high rates of hospital acquired infections for certain high-cost and
          common conditions. In addition, the plan requires the Secretary of HHS
          to submit a report to Congress on the appropriateness of establishing a
          healthcare acquired condition policy for other Medicare providers
          including skilled nursing facilities, inpatient rehabilitation facilities, long-
          term care hospitals, ambulatory surgical centers and others.

        o Promoting Accountable Care Organizations: The Proposal rewards
          Accountable Care Organizations (AC0s) that take responsibility for the
          costs and quality of care received by their patient panel over time. ACOs
          that meet quality-of-care targets and reduce the costs of their patients
          relative to a spending benchmark are rewarded with a share of the
          savings they achieve for the Medicare program.

        o Reducing Payments to Hospitals for Preventable Readmissions: The
          Proposal reduces payments to hospitals for potentially preventable
          Medicare readmissions for the three conditions with risk adjusted
          readmission measures that are currently endorsed by,the National Quality
          Forum (NQF). Under the Proposal, the Secretary of IIHS has the
          authority to expand the policy to additional conditions in future years and
          directs the Secretary to calculate and make publicly available information
          on all patient hospital readmission rates for certain conditions.

        o Establishing a CMS Center for Innovation: The Proposal establishes a
          Center for Medicare & Medicaid Innovation within the Centers for
                                             (4)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015




            Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) at HHS. The Innovation Center
            will research, develop, test, and expand innovative payment and delivery
            arrangements to improve the quality and reduce the cost of care provided
            to patients in each program. Innovations that are found to work could
            then be rapidly expanded and applied more broadly—helping to
            transform the health care system into one that provides better care at
            lower cost.


     • Blue Dog Principle: Public reporting of the costs and quality of care
       should be examined to increase transparency.

        President's Proposal: The Proposal includes several provisions to increase
        transparency for both costs and quality of care. These include:

        o Allowing Private Sector Purchasers to Obtain Medicare Data to Measure
          Provider/Supplier Performance: The Proposal authorizes the release and
          use of standardized extracts of Medicare claims data to measure the
          performance of providers and suppliers in ways that protect patient
          privacy. Employers have argued for years that they need this type of
          data to ensure that they are driving quality and efficiency in the health
          plans in which their workers participate, and the Proposal finally
          establishes a pathway for this to occur.

         o Establishing Medical Reimbursement Data Centers: The Proposal
           authorizes the establishment of medical reimbursement data centers to
           develop fee schedules and other database tools that reflect market rates
           for medical services in various geographic areas. These Centers will also
           make health care cost information readily available to the public on the
           interne.

         o Requiring Hospitals to Publish a List of Standard Charges: The Proposal
           requires hospitals to annually publish a list of the hospital's standard
           charges for items and services provided, including diagnosis related
           groups (DRGs), the standard unit that hospitals use to bill Medicare and
           other payors for inpatient services.


     • Blue Dog Principle: Medicare, Medicaid and CHIP program integrity
       should be strengthened by reducing waste, fraud and abuse.
                                              (5)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015




        President's Proposal: The Proposal includes an unprecedented number of
        fraud and abuse policies:

        o Medicare, Medicaid, and CHIP Program Integrity Provisions: The
          Secretary will establish procedures to screen high-risk providers and
          suppliers enrolling in Medicare, Medicaid, and CHIP. Providers and
          suppliers enrolling or re-enrolling will be subject to new requirements
          including a compliance program, disclosure of current or previous
          affiliations with any provider or supplier that has uncollected debt, has
          had their payments suspended, has been excluded from participating in a
          Federal health care program, or has had their billing privileges revoked.
          The Secretary is authorized to deny enrollment in these programs if these
          affiliations pose an undue risk.

        o Enhanced Medicare and Medicaid Program Integrity Provisions: New
          penalties will exclude individuals who order or prescribe an item or
          service, make false Statements on applications or contracts to participate
          in a Federal health care program, or who know of an overpayment and do
          not return the overpayment. Each violation would be subject to a fine of
          up to $50,000. The Secretary may suspend payments to a provider or
          supplier pending a fraud investigation. Health Care Fraud and Abuse
          Control (HCFAC) funding will be increased by $10 million each year for
          fiscal years 2011 through 2020. The Secretary will establish a national
          health care fraud and abuse data collection program for reporting adverse
          actions taken against health care providers, suppliers, and practitioners,
          and submit information on the actions to the National Practitioner Data
          Bank (NPDB). The Secretary will have the authority to disenroll a
          Medicare enrolled physician or supplier who fails to maintain and
          provide access to written orders or requests for payment for durable
          medical equipment (DME), certification for home health services, or
          referrals for other items and services. The HI-IS Secretary will expand the
          number of areas to be included in round two of the DME competitive
          bidding program from 79 of the largest metropolitan statistical areas
          (MSAs) to 100 of the largest MSAs, and to use competitively bid prices
          in all areas by 2016.

        o Additional Medicaid Program Integrity Provisions: States will be
          required to terminate individuals or entities from their Medicaid
          programs if the individuals or entities were terminated from Medicare or
                                             (6)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015




            another State's Medicaid program. Medicaid agencies will be required to
            exclude individuals or entities from participating in Medicaid for a
            specified period of time if the entity or individual owns, controls, or
            manages an entity that: (1) has failed to repay overpayments; (2) is
            suspended, excluded, or terminated from participation in any Medicaid
            program; or (3) is affiliated with an individual or entity that has been
            suspended, excluded, or terminated from Medicaid participation. Agents,
            clearinghouses, or other payees that submit claims on behalf of health
            care providers must register with the State and the Secretary. States and
            Medicaid managed care entities must submit data elements for program
            integrity, oversight, and administration. States must not make any
            payments for items or services to any financial institution or entity
            located outside of the United States.

        o In addition, the President's Proposal incorporates a number of additional
           proposals that are either part of the Administration's FY 2011 Budget
           Proposal or were included in Republican plans. These include:

            • Comprehensive Sanctions Database. The Proposal establishes a
              comprehensive Medicare and Medicaid sanctions database, overseen
              by the HHS Inspector General. This database will provide a central
              storage location, allowing for law enforcement access to information
              related to past sanctions on health care providers, suppliers and related
              entities. (Source: H.R. 3400, "Empowering Patients First Act"
              (Republican Study Committee Proposal))

            • Registration and Background Checks of Billing Agencies and
              Individuals. In an effort to decrease dishonest billing practices in the
              Medicare program, the Proposal will assist in reducing the number of
              individuals and agencies with a history of fraudulent activities
              participating in Federal health care programs. It ensures that entities
              that Proposal for Medicare on behalf of providers are in good
              standing. It also strengthens the Secretary's ability to exclude from
              Medicare individuals who knowingly submit false or fraudulent
              claims. (Source: H.R. 3970, "Medical Rights & Reform Act")

            • Expanded Access to the Healthcare Integrity and Protection Data
              Bank Increasing access to the health care integrity data bank will
              improve coordination and information sharing in anti-fraud efforts.
              The Proposal broadens access to the data bank to quality control and

                                              (7)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015




               peer review organizations and private plans that are involved in
               furnishing items or services reimbursed by Federal health care
               program. It includes criminal penalties for misuse. (Source: H.R.
               3970, "Medical Rights & Reform Act")

            • Liability of Medicare Administrative Contractors for Claims
              Submitted by Excluded Providers. In attacking fraud, it is critical to
              ensure the contractors that are paying claims are doing their utmost to
              ensure excluded providers do not receive Medicare payments.
              Therefore, the Proposal holds Medicare Administrative Contractors
              accountable for Federal payment for individuals or entities excluded
              from the Federal programs or items or services for which payment is
              denied. (Source: H.R. 3970, "Medical Rights & Reform Act")

            • Community Mental Health Centers. The Proposal ensures that
              individuals have access to comprehensive mental health services in
              the community setting, but strengthens standards for facilities that
              seek reimbursement as community mental health centers by ensuring
              these facilities are not taking advantage of Medicare patients or the
              taxpayers. (Source: H.R. 3970, "Medical Rights & Reform Act")

            • Limiting Debt Discharge in Bankruptcies of Fraudulent Health Care
              Providers or Suppliers. The Proposal will assist in recovering
              overpayments made to providers and suppliers and return such funds
              to the Medicare Trust Fund. It prevents fraudulent health care
              providers from discharging through bankruptcy amounts due to the
              Secretary from overpayments. (Source: H.R. 3970, "Medical Rights
              & Reform Act")

            • Use of Technology for Real-Time Data Review. The Proposal speeds
              access to claims data to identify potentially fraudulent payments more
              quickly. It establishes a system for using technology to provide real-
              time data analysis of claim and payments under public programs to
              identify and stop waste, fraud and abuse. (Source: Roskam
              Amendment offered in House Ways & Means Committee markup)

            • Illegal Distribution of a Medicare or Medicaid Beneficiary
              Identification or Billing Privileges. Fraudulent billing costs taxpayers
              millions of dollars each year. Individuals looking to gain access to a
              beneficiary's personal information approach Medicare and Medicaid

                                              (8)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015




               beneficiaries with false incentives. Many beneficiaries unwittingly
               give over this personal information without ever receiving promised
               services. The Proposal adds strong sanctions, including jail time, for
               individuals who purchase, sell or distribute Medicare beneficiary
               identification numbers or billing privileges under Medicare or
               Medicaid — if done knowingly, intentionally, and with intent to
               defraud. (Source: H.R. 3970, "Medical Rights & Reform Act")

            • Study of Universal Product Numbers Claims Forms for Selected Items
              and Services Under the Medicare Program. The Proposal requires
              HHS to study and issue a report to Congress that examines the costs
              and benefits of assigning universal product numbers (UPNs) to
              selected items and services reimbursed under Medicare. The report
              must examine whether UPNs could help improve the efficient
              operation of Medicare and its ability to detect fraud and abuse.
              (Source: H.R. 3970, "Medical Rights & Reform Act", Roskam
              Amendment offered in House Ways & Means Committee markup)

           • Medicaid Prescription Drug Profiling. The Proposal requires States to
             monitor and remediate high-risk billing activity, not limited to
             prescription drug classes involving a high volume of claims, to
             improve Medicaid integrity and beneficiary quality of care. States
             may choose one or more drug classes and must develop or review and
             update their care Proposal to reduce utilization and remediate any
             preventable episodes of care where possible. Requiring States to
             monitor high-risk billing activity to identify prescribing and utilization
             patterns that may indicate abuse or excessive prescription drug
             utilization will assist in improving Medicaid program integrity and
             save taxpayer dollars. (Source: President's FY 2011 Budget)

           • Medicare Advantage Risk Adjustment Errors. The Proposal requires
             in statute that the HES Secretary extrapolate the error rate found in
             the risk adjustment data validation (RADV) audits to the entire
             Medicare Advantage (MA) contract payment for a given year when
             recouping overpayments. Extrapolating risk score errors in MA
             Proposals is consistent with the methodology used in the Medicare
             fee-for-service program and enables Medicare to recover risk
             adjustment overpayments. MA plans have an incentive to report more
             sever beneficiary diagnoses than are justified because they receive


                                             (9)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015




                higher payments for higher risk scores. (Source: President's FY 2011
                Budget)

             • Mod Certain
                       Certain Medicare Medical Review Limitations. The Medicare
               Modernization Act of 2003 placed certain limitations on the type of
               review that could be conducted by Medicare Administrative
               Contractors prior to the payment of Medicare Part A and B claims.
               The Proposal modifies these statutory provisions that currently limit
               random medical review and place statutory limitations on the
               application of Medicare prepayment review. Modifying certain
               medical review limitations will give Medicare contractors better and
               more efficient access to medical records and claims, which helps to
               reduce waste, fraud and abuse. (Source: President's FY 2011
               Budget)

             • Establish a CMS-IRS Data Match to Ident0; Fraudulent Providers.
               The Proposal authorizes the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
               Services (CMS) to work collaboratively with the Internal Revenue
               Service (IRS) to determine which providers have not filed Federal tax
               returns to help identify potentially fraudulent providers sooner. The
               data match will primarily target certain high-risk provider types in
               high-vulnerability areas. This proposal also enables both IRS and
               Medicare to recoup any monies owed to the Federal government
               through this program. By requiring the Internal Revenue Service
               (IRS) to disclose to CMS those entities that have evaded filing taxes
               and matching the data against provider billing data, this proposal will
               enable CMS to better detect fraudulent providers billing the Medicare
               program. (Source: President's FY 2011 Budget)

             • Undercover Health Professionals to Weed out Fraud and Abuse. The
               Proposal includes a provision to allow medical professionals to
               conduct random undercover investigations of health care providers
               that receive reimbursements from Medicare, Medicaid, and other
               Federal programs. (Source: Senator Coburn Amendment #87 during
               HELP Committee Mark Up)


        B.      Increasing Value



                                             (10)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015




    • Blue Dog Principle: The role of primary care providers should be
      strengthened and prioritized. Patient care should be coordinated across
      settings and focus on the entire course of a patient's illness.

     sf President's Proposal: The Proposal includes a number of provisions to
        strengthen the role of primary care providers and encourage the coordination
        of care across different settings. These include:

        o Promoting Accountable Care Organizations: The Proposal rewards
          Accountable Care Organizations (AC0s) that take responsibility for the
          costs and quality of care received by their patient panel over time. ACOs
          that meet quality-of-care targets and reduce the costs of their patients
          relative to a spending benchmark are rewarded with a share of the
          savings they achieve for the Medicare program.

        o Supporting Primary Care Teams: The Proposal includes a new
          demonstration program for chronically ill Medicare beneficiaries will test
          payment incentives and integrated service delivery models relying on
          physician and nurse practitioner-directed home-based primary care
          teams.

        o Creating a Primary Care Extension Program: The Proposal creates a
          primary care extension program to educate and provide technical
          assistance to primary care providers about evidence-based therapies,
          preventive medicine, health promotion, chronic disease management, and
          mental health.

        o Supporting Patient-Centered Medical Homes: The Proposal creates a
          program to establish and fund the development of community health
          teams to support the development of medical homes by increasing access
          to comprehensive, community based, coordinated care.

        o Expanding Access to Primary Care Services and General Surgery
          Services: The Proposal provides primary care practitioners, as well as
          general surgeons practicing in health professional shortage areas, with a
          10 percent Medicare payment bonus for five years.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015




    • Blue Dog Principle: Financial incentives should be implemented to
      encourage beneficiaries to follow recommended prevention and wellness
      services.

        President's Proposal: The Proposal includes several provisions to
        incentivize individuals and Medicare beneficiaries to follow recommended
        prevention and wellness services.

        o The Proposal expands proven employer-wellness programs by allowing
          employers to vary premiums by up to 30 percent for employee
          participation in certain health promotion and disease prevention
          programs.

        o Under the Proposal, Medicare beneficiaries will not have to pay
          coinsurance (including co-pays and deductibles) for preventive services
          delivered in all settings.

        o The Proposal provides coverage under Medicare, with no co-payment or
          deductible, for an annual wellness visit and personalized prevention plan
          services, including a comprehensive health risk assessment, such as:

            • A five- to ten-year screening schedule;
            • A list of identified risk factors and conditions and a strategy to address
              them;
            • Health advice and referral to education and preventive counseling;
              and
            • Community-based interventions to address modifiable risk factors
              such as physical activity, smoking, and nutrition.


     • Blue Dog Principle: Additional investment should be made to research
       cures and improve treatments for health conditions.

        President's Proposal: The Proposal authorizes the Cures Acceleration
        Network, within the National Institutes of Health (NIH), to award grants and
        contracts to develop cures and treatments of diseases. In addition, the
        Proposal includes a two-year temporary credit subject to an overall cap of $1
        billion to encourage investments in new therapies to prevent, diagnose, and
        treat acute and chronic diseases.

                                             (12)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015




        C. Improving Access

    • Blue Dog Principle: Individual and small businesses should be provided
      with a targeted tax credit to use toward the cost of health care coverage.

        President's Proposal:
           o Individuals and families: The Proposal provides refundable tax
              credits for Americans with incomes up to 400 percent of poverty (up
              to about $88,000/year for a family of four) to purchase coverage
              through the Exchange. The credit will be calculated on a sliding scale
              beginning at 2 percent of income for those at 100 percent of poverty
              and phasing out at 9.5 percent of income between 300-400 percent of
              poverty.

            o Small businesses: The Proposal provides $40 billion in tax credits to
              help small businesses purchase coverage for their employees. Under
              the provision, small businesses with fewer than 26 workers and
              average annual wages of less than $50,000 with a sliding scale tax
              credit of up to 50 percent of the employer contribution toward the
              total premium cost. Tax-exempt small businesses meeting similar
              requirements are also eligible for tax credits.



    • Blue Dog Principle: Payments to rural health care providers and
      community health centers should be modernized in order to meet the unique
      challenges that these entities face.

        President's Proposal: The Proposal extends a number of important
        provisions to maintain access to essential services for beneficiaries in rural
        areas.
           o Community health centers: The Proposal invests an unprecedented
               $11 billion in community health centers, recognizing the critical role
               they play in providing quality care in underserved areas. About 1,250
               centers provide care to 20 million people, with an emphasis on
               preventive and primary care.




                                            (13)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015




            o Physician payments in rural areas: The Proposal extends the floor on
              geographic adjustments to Medicare physician payments in rural areas
              to more appropriately reflect practice costs.

            o Outpatient protections: The Proposal extends the outpatient hospital
              "hold harmless" provision, allowing small rural hospitals and sole
              community hospitals to receive this adjustment through FY2010.

            o Rural Community Hospital Demonstration: The Proposal extends the
              Rural Community Hospital Demonstration Program for five years and
              expands eligible sites to additional States and hospitals.


     • Blue Dog Principle: Loan assistance and forgiveness programs should be
       improved to increase the number of physicians, nurses and other health care
       professionals in rural and underserved areas.

        President's Proposal: The Proposal creates, expands, and improves several
        health care workforce programs. These include:

        o National Health Service Corps: The Proposal reauthorizes and
          appropriates funding for to the National Health Service Corps, which
          provides scholarships and loan repayment for clinicians who provide
          medical, dental, and mental health care in urban and rural Health
          Professional Shortage Areas (HPSAs) throughout the country. The
          Proposal also increases the loan repayment benefits for each Corps
          member.

        o Health Professions Education and Training in Primary Care, Pediatrics,
          and Dentistry: The Proposal establishes a primary care training and
          capacity building program, and it enhances faculty development in
          primary care and physician assistant programs. The Proposal eases
          current criteria for schools and students to qualify for loans, establishes a
          grant program to help eligible entities recruit students most likely to
          practice medicine in underserved rural communities, and supports dental
          education and training. The Proposal also establishes a loan repayment
          program for pediatric subspecialists and providers of mental and
          behavioral health services to children and adolescents who work in
          underserved areas or with underserved populations.


                                             (14)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015




        o Nursing Education and Training: The Proposal awards grants to nursing
          schools to strengthen nurse education and training programs and to
          improve nurse retention, increases nurse student loan amounts, and
          addresses nurse faculty shortages by making nurse faculty eligible for
          loan repayment and scholarship programs and reauthorizing the nurse
          faculty loan program.

        o Public Health Workforce: The Proposal establishes a Public Health
          Workforce Recruitment and Retention Program Corps to address public
          health workforce shortages, provides funding to support training of the
          public health workforce and preventive medicine physicians, establishes
          a Ready Reserve Corps within the Commissioned Corps for service in
          times of national emergency, supports fellowship training in public
          health, and authorizes grants to promote the community health
          workforce.


     • Blue Dog Principle: Access to telemedicine programs should be promoted
       and expanded

        President's Proposal: The new CMS Center for Innovation has broad
        authority to search, develop, test, and expand innovative payment and
        delivery arrangements to improve the quality and reduce the cost of care
        provided to patients in each program. The Proposal specifically directs the
        Center for Innovation to consider testing telehealth expansions.


     • Blue Dog Principle: The ability of insurance companies to deny coverage
       to individuals with pre-existing conditions should be eliminated.

         President's Proposal: The Proposal prohibits denials of coverage based on
         pre-existing conditions for children within months of passage. Starting in
         2014, the Proposal prohibits all denials of coverage based on pre-existing
         conditions.


     • Blue Dog Principle: Access to long-term care services should be improved
       Patients should be provided with the option of home-or community-based
       care, along with increased efforts to educate the public about end of life
       care and long-term care insurance.
                                             (15)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015




        President's Proposal: The Proposal includes several provisions to improve
        access to long-term care services, including home and community-based
        care.

        o CLASS Act for voluntary long-term care insurance: The Proposal creates
          a voluntary long-term care insurance program, which will provide a cash
          benefit to help seniors and people with disabilities obtain services and
          supports that will enable them to remain in their homes and communities.
          The Proposal will include a number of improvements that ensure that the
          program is financially and actuarially sound.

        o "Community First Choice" Option for People with Disabilities: A new
          optional Medicaid benefit will be created through which States may offer
          community-based attendant services and supports to Medicaid
          beneficiaries (<150% of poverty) with disabilities who would otherwise
          require care in a hospital, nursing facility, or intermediate care facility for
          the mentally retarded.

        o Additional Long-Term Care Options: A number of new State options
          would be created including: allowing States to provide home- and
          community-based services (HCBS) and full Medicaid benefits to people
          with long-term care needs; extending the "Money Follows the Person"
          rebalancing demonstration; protecting recipients of home- and
          community-based services against spousal impoverishment; and
          increases funding for State Aging and Disability Resource Centers. The
          Proposal also removes barriers to providing HCBS by giving States the
          option to provide more types of HCBS through a State plan amendment
          to individuals with higher levels of need, rather than through a waiver,
          and to extend full Medicaid benefits to individuals receiving HCBS under
          a State plan amendment.




                                             (16)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768791 Date: 10/30/2015
