UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                           B6




          United States Department
                  of State
              2003 International Visitor Program


               CHEN Guangcheng and YUAN Weijing:
                   Advocacy for the Disabled
                      People's Republic of China


                       July 19, 2003 to August 17, 2003


                    United States Department of State
               Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs
                            Mr. John Anderegg
                             Program Officer

                     Academy for Educational Development
                        Program Officer: David Kammerer
                       Program Associate: Peter Phrydas


                                Report Prepared by
                                    Annie Wang
                               US Escort Interpreter
                            Wednesday, August 27, 2003




                                                                                          1
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015




                                   Perceptual Changes:

            Mr. CHEN Guangcheng and his wife YUAN Weijing truly
       represent the younger generation of the Chinese citizens who
       have different work styles from the older generations. They
       have the critical thinking ability, and are vocal and
       assertive. They also have a strong sense of entitlement of
       their rights.
            In professional meetings, Mr. Chen always took in
       control, guiding the directions of the conversations. He
       had a good understanding of the importance of two-way
       communications. He was not shy asking questions or talking
       about himself.. He was chatty and eloquent, often enjoying
       the dominant role as an active talker more than a passive
       listener.

            As an advocate for the disabled in China, Mr. Chen
       observed very carefully of the treatment of the disabled in
       America, especially blind people. He didn't miss any chance
       to check details such as whether a building had Braille on
       the elevator, whether Braille mails were free of charge,
       whether disabled people could travel for free on bus, or
       whether the beep sounds were installed in crosswalks.

            Being a political activist who has seen much injustice
       in his own country, Mr. Chen was very keen on meeting with
       his counterparts who were equally politically active. He
       demanded to meet with representatives from powerful
       political organizations such as the National Federation For
       the Blinds and the American Foundation for the Blinds. At
       the airports, he would prefer to be treated as a blind
       person on his own. In doing that, he wanted to find out
       what type of services would be provided to him.

            He loved the meetings with the Independent Living
       Centers, the organization that help disabled people to take
       their cases to court. He told them that they should have
       their centers being established in China.

            Mr. Chen is also very aware of the importance of
       networking. One of his major goals from this trip was to
       build up a bigger network. After every meeting, he'd ask
       for useful contacts and friends from the interlockers. In
       international organizations such as the United Nations and
       the Lighthouse International, he said how importantly he
       thought that they should care about the disabled in China,
       especially in rural China. Mr. Chen also had the ability to .


                                                                                          2
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015




       identify the potential partners. After each meeting, he'd
       say this organization/person was useful or not so useful.

            Mr. Chen wasn't shy. After getting phone numbers of
       some China experts from his Chinese friends, he called them
       up and requested meetings with them in his spare time. He
       called Andy Nathan from Columbia University, Perry Link from
       Princeton University, Orville Schell from the University of
       California at Berkeley, and the Chinese political dissident
       Liu Binyan. All of meetings actually took place and became
       quite effective.

            Mr. Chen and Ms. Yuan are fast learners that they even
       pick. up many English words during the trip. This four-week
       program allowed them to have a good understanding of the
       American Disability Act, the civil rights concepts, the
       enforcement of the laws, various governmental programs
       geared toward disabled people, the functions of grassroots
       organizations and NGOs, how these organizations are funded
       and managed, the difference between specialized school for
       the blind and the deaf vs. public school education for the
       disabled.

            However, Mr. Chen could be belligerent, impatient and
       too demanding sometimes. He'd become unhappy sometimes if
       his interlockers focused on explaining their own programs,
       instead of showing interests in his work in China.
       Sometimes, when other people were talking to his wife or
       others, not to him, he'd interrupt and said to his wife or
       me, "Let's go. Don't wait." Several times, he asked the
       organizations that he visited to send materials and
       information by mail to China. He'd tell them to do so again
       and again. After the meetings were finished, he'd ask me to
       translate: "tell them send those stuff RIGHT NOW!" He also
       requested the program agency to buy him a MD player and a
       digital recorder which was declined.

            Another problem rising from varies meetings was that
       sometimes Mr. Chen gave different answers to the same
       question and it was difficult to know which one was the
       correct answer. For example, at first, he told people that
       he lost his vision completely due to a high fever before he
       was one-year-old. Later, he changed the story to that he
       lost his complete vision when he was a teenager. Another
       example was related to the Newsweek article that featured
       him on the cover. At the beginning, he said it was a man
       who interviewed him. Later, he said it was a woman who


                                                                                          3
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015




      interviewed him. At the ending of the trip, he told me that
      no one really went to his village to interview him. They
      only sent a freelance photographer to take pictures of him.

           In professional meetings, he said only 5% of the blind
      people in China have education. But whether this percentage
      referred to the blind people in rural China or the overall
      blind population in China was unclear in his speech.
      Sometimes, he also said that 5% of the disabled people in
      China have some sort of education. The inconsistence and
      lack of accuracy makes the data he provided somewhat
      questionable.

           In Berkeley, he had a meeting with Ann Fagan-Ginger
      from the Meiklejohn Civil Liberties Institute. Ms. Fagan-
      Ginger was a socialist who. had different political views
      from Mr. Chen. When Ms. Fagan-Ginger suggested Mr. Chen
      that he writes a report of the violation of the rights of
      the disabled people in rural China, he promised that he
      would definitely do it and send it to her. He told Ms.
      Fagan-Ginger that if she didn't receive the report, it meant
      that Chinese government confiscated his letter. But after
      the meeting, he said that he'd never send any letters to Ms.
      Fagan-Ginger because he wasn't interested in her proposal at
      all. It was apparent that he misled Ms. Ginger during the
      meeting.

           However, in general, Mr. Chen is a passionate, smart
      spokesperson for the disabled in rural China. His
      understanding of democracy and human rights is more
      sophisticated than that of most visitors from his region.
      He has collected a lot of written materials from the
      meetings. He has learned a lot from the four-week program
      which would definitely help empower his advocacy work in
      China.

          His major perceptual changes are:

      ♦ American families are not close to each other.

          Mr. Chen said that although there are a lot of things he can learn from
          America and there is injustice in his own country, he'd prefer to live in China.
          He said that American families are not close. American seniors become very
          lonely.

      ♦ America is in the stage of fighting for the equal opportunities for the disabled
        where as in China, they are fighting to unload the heavy duties illegally


                                                                                         4
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015




         imposed on the disabled by the government. China's situation is like
         America in the 1930s.

           He said the ADA protects the disabled people's equal rights for education,
      employment and accessibilities to public places. His American counterparts are
      working on suing people who have violated such rights of the disabled. In China,
      however, he is fighting to get the money illegally collected by the local
      governments back to the disabled. Two countries are in different stages. China
      is like America in the 1930s.

      ♦ American governments from federal to local level try to help the disabled by
        giving money to different programs where as Chinese government, especially
        the local governments illegally collect money from the disabled who cannot
        work.

           Mr. Chen was amazed at how many good programs federal and state
      governments provide for the disabled. He said in China, the local governments
      illegally collect taxes that should be exempted from the disabled and often see
      the disabled as the burden of the society.

      ♦ Many laws in America such as section 504, the Education Act was passed
        thanks to the political protests of the disabled people. It reflected the wills of
        the disabled people. In China, the Chinese Disability Law was passed
        because of the international call for equal rights for the disabled. The law was
        passed under the international pressure. In other words, it was due to the
        external force, China passed its own disability law.

         Mr. Chen was very excited to hear how citizens in our country get their voices
         heard by sitting-ins and protests. He was impressed that people in the
         organization ADAPTED chained themselves in government buildings for days
         and organized sitting-ins for three weeks in order to have Section 504 passed.
         In China, he said that within three hours, the protestors would be arrested. A
         more effective way to push Chinese government to change is through
         international pressure. He said that U.S. should care about the Chinese
         disabled like we do for the Iraqi people.

      ♦ American government not only passed the American Disability Act, but also
        provides all kinds of funding to support the Act. Chinese government only
        has funding for educational programs. It makes the enforcement of the law
        difficult to take place.

         Mr. Chen was very impressed to see that the government has technical
         assistance for the disabled at school and working places such as the talking
         software called JAWS, the Braille light for note-taking, etc.



                                                                                         5
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015




       ♦ American government helps its disabled citizens to understand their rights
         protected by ADA and the different governmental programs that can help the
         disabled. In China, however, the local governments try to hide the
         information of their rights from the disabled.

          In China, Mr. Chen said that the local governments lock the brochure of the
          Chinese Disability law in their drawers instead of distributing them to the
          disabled. They are afraid that the disabled would know their rights and
          demand their rights. In America, he found that the government works very
          hard to educate people about their rights.

       ♦ NGOs in America are often supported by governmental funding. In China,
         the government doesn't only provide no money for grassroots organizations.
         They discourage Chinese citizens to form their own NGOs.

          Mr. Chen has tried for three years to register a NGO, a legal aid center for the
          human rights of the disabled and has not been successful. He said the
          government doesn't OK the organization and it is difficult to raise funding
          without a legitimate organization. It is how the Chinese government controls
          and limits the development of NGOs in China.

       ♦ It's so green and clean here!

       Both Mr. Chen and Mrs. Yuan are intrigued that our country has so many trees,
       grass and greenery, with little trash, flies and mosquitoes. In their region,
       mountains are barren with little plantations. Trees are logged.

       ♦ Few pedestrians on the streets.

       By visiting to different cities, they were shocked that the downtown of each city is
       usually very quiet, without many pedestrians, whereas in their region, streets are
       packed with people.

       ♦ Most of the disabled people in America go to public schools and prefer public
         school to specialized schools for the blind and the deaf. In China, there is a
         heated debate on whether disabled students should be able to go to regular
         schools. Although many disabled people in China go to specialized schools,
         thing will change in the future.

          Mr. Chen supports the idea of sending disabled students to regular schools.
          He thinks that because disabled students can go to regular public schools in
          America, many of them have the opportunity for going to college later on. In
          China, however, the opportunity for disabled people to go to college is rare
          due to the physical check-up system. Top universities only take regular
          students, not disabled students.


                                                                                          6
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015




      ♦ Lawyers play an important role in American life. Some political
        organizations such as the powerful National Federation for the Blind was
        founded by a blind lawyer. His dream of becoming a lawyer in China is
        difficult to come true. He'd like to study law in America someday.

         Mr. Chen said that American government and universities provide Braille
         textbooks and audio books for blind students so that they can get higher
         education. Those blind people who become lawyers fight very hard for their
         rights. In China, his chances of becoming a lawyer are thin. He hopes to
         come to America to study some day.

      ♦ Something is seriously wrong with American food and American agriculture.

         Mr. Chen studied Chinese medicine in college. Living in the countryside, his
         family grows organic food and vegetables. He was not used to American
         food and said that chicken and beef here had hormone, which was bad for
         one's health.


      City-by-city descriptions

      Washington, D.C., July. 19 - July 24, 2003. Mr. David
      Kammerer and Mr. Peter Phrydas Meridian International Center

      The programs were very successful in DC. In his spare time, Mr. Chen also met
      with his friends from Radio Free Asia and other organizations.

      ♦ Dr. Patricia Morrissey, Commissioner, Administration on Developmental
        Disabilities. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

         "The best meeting took place in DC." Said Mr. Chen. The Administration on
         Developmental Disabilities is the federal agency that administrators programs
         for the nearly four million Americans with developmental disabilities. Mr.
         Chen was able to understand that developmental disabilities are severe,
         chronic conditions attributable to mental and or physical impairment which
         manifest before age 22 and are likely to continue through life. Mr. Chen
         learned about the three major federal programs the agency has in partnership
         with state and local governments. Dr. Morrissey was very interested in Mr.
         Chen's work in China and planned to invite him to a conference that would
         take place in Beijing next year. She also gave some suggestions for Mr.
         Chen on how to find good and powerful officials from the Chinese government
         to work with and how to turn such officials into allies.

      ♦ Gallaudet University



                                                                                         7
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015




         GU is to serve as a comprehensive, multipurpose institution of higher
         education for deaf and hard of hearing citizens of the United States and the
         world. Mr. Chen talked to three students from China. They compared their
         life in China to life in the States. They felt that they are much more respected
         as deaf people in America than in China. They enjoyed their school life in GU
         very much. Mr. Chen found that the three students were all from big cities of
         China and their knowledge of the disabled who lived in rural China was very
         little. He gave an introduction on the poverty that disabled people endure in
         rural China.


      Burlington, Vermont. Ms. Radha Buko and Carol Casey.
      Vermont Council On World Affairs. July 24-29 2003.

      Mr. Chen and Ms. Yuan loved the environment of Vermont very much. They
      learned about the local programs provided for the disabled. They also had the
      chance to have dinner with American families.

      New York City, New York. July 29 to Aug 3. Mr. Jean Paul
      Turco. State Department.


      ♦ Ms. Christina Curry, Harlem Independent Living Center.

         Mr. Chen and Ms. Curry had a sense of camaraderie. The nature of their
         work was similar. Both them had the same belligerent temperament and
         "enjoyed suing people and taking them to court" (citing Ms. Curry). Mr. Chen
         believed that Ms. Curry's political and legal experiences must make her
         center more effective serving the disabled population better than many other
         independent living centers.

      ♦ Mr. Jerome Cohen. Law Professor at NYU

         According to Mr. Chen, this was the best meeting of the entire program and
         also probably the most useful contact he had during this trip. Mr. Cohen
         spoke Chinese and he took a strong interest in the lawsuits Mr. Chen and his
         legal friends and farmer friends presented against the local governments. Mr.
         Cohen believed these cases could be very useful research topics. They also
         discussed the Administration Procedure law in China. Mr. Cohen agreed to
         meet with Mr. Chen when he goes to China in October. Mr. Chen also
         wanted to talk about the possibility of coming to the United States to study law
         with Mr. Cohen when he goes to China.

      ♦ Andrew Nathan, Columbia University




                                                                                         8
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015




         Mr. Chen added this meeting through his personal contact. At the meeting,
         two staff members from Human Rights China and one staff member from
         Human Right Watch came. The topic evolved human rights in China,
         especially that of disabled farmers, a disadvantaged group that have been
         ignored. After Mr. Chen expressed the difficulty of his work, Human Rights
         China issued him a check of 1,000 dollars.

      ♦ United Nations

         After arriving in New York, Mr. Chen called his friend in the United Nations
         who introduced him to the officials who were in charge of the disability issues.
         They gave him many useful contacts and talked about the International treaty
         for the rights of the disabled with him.

      Cincinnati, Ohio. Aug. 3-6 2003. Ms. Marianne Crotty,
      International Visitors Council of Greater Cincinnati.

      ♦ Ms. Ginny Backscheider, Director of Programs Services, Cincinnati
        Association for the Blind.

         Cincinnati Association for the Blind did a good job in the community offering
         comprehensive services from young children to older adults who lose vision
         due to age-related causes. Mr. Chen visted their computer access center,
         employment in manufacturing jobs, low vision service, radio reading room
         and talking book service. He thought such a tour was useful because he was
         able to see what specific programs were offered and how they were managed.

      Austin, Texas. Aug. 6- Aug. 10, 2003. Ms. Pam Bohamed,
      International Hospitality Council of Austin.

      ♦ Mr. Ed Kunz, Criss Cole Center.

      Criss Col Rehabilitation Center offers intensive vocational and independent living
      training to Texans who are blind. Mr. Chen found it was very helpful to build
      confidence for blind people by teaching them useful skills from woodwork to art
      crafts.


      Spokane, Washington. Aug. 10-13, 2003. Spokane
      International Exchange.


      ♦ Maria W. Local chapter president of the National Federation of the Blind

          This meeting was added upon Mr. Chen's request of meeting someone from
          either the National Federation of the Blind or American Consul for the Blind.


                                                                                          9
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015




          Mr. Chen enjoyed meeting with three blind activists from the region. They
          were excited meeting him as well. Mr. Chen felt that his interlockers had a
          strong sense of belonging in NFB. The feeling for NFB was almost religious.
          He realized how successful the NFB is as an organization. He was especially
          joyful to hear that NFB has its program stretched worldwide. He would like to
          start a NFB chapter in China someday. The local chapter gave him some
          useful materials for him to bring back.


      San Francisco. California, Aug. 13-16 2003. Ms. Christa
      Peccianti, International Diplomacy Council

      Since Mr. Chen arrived in San Francisco, he found that more people could speak
      Chinese and have been to China in this part of the United States than other cities
      he had visited.

      ♦ Ms. Susan Mizner and Mr. Ken Stein, San Francisco Mayor's Office on
        Disability.

         The Mayor's Office on Disability works to provide accessibility to programs,
         activities, benefits, services and facilities of the city and county of San
         Francisco by people with disabilities including residents and visitors. This
         mission is consistent with the duties of the Mayor to provide mandated
         services to citizens and to assure those services are provided fairly and
         equally under the law. By talking to the staff members, Mr. Chen found the
         city has done a great job helping the disabled. He was introduced to a new
         talking device to help blind people identify building's names and locations.

      ♦ Ann Fagan-Ginger, Meiklejohn Civil Liberties Institute

         MCLI's missions are to respond to calls for help from grassroots activists on
         how to raise the strongest legal issues in campaigns, to report to the United
         Nations about any abuse of human rights. Ms. Ann Fagan-Ginger was a
         socialist who criticized American government and its policy openly. As Mr.
         Chen criticized about the Chinese government, Ms. Ann Fagan-Ginger said
         that every government had problems. Same violations of human rights could
         take place in America as well. Because the different political views they had,
         Mr. Chen was quite defensive during the professional meeting and Ms. Yuan
         joined in the conversation and toned it down. Although later Mr. Chen said
         that it was good to hear alternative opinions in America which reflected the
         diversity of the society, he wasn't happy with the criticism from Ms. Ginger.

      Logistics




                                                                                        10
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015




          Logistically, this trip was dumpy and it had been an
     uneasy job for the interpreter. There were always new
     unexpected problems rising during the travel.
          The first stop DC was perfect. After we arrived in
     Burlington, Mr. Chen didn't like the hotel we stayed. Being
     a blind person, he has a sensitive nose. He said that the
     hotel room he stayed smelled awful. We were placed in the
     rooms that face a noisy street. When he opened the windows
     to get fresh air, the room became nosier. He demanded the
     change of the room. I myself also found my room noisy. So
     I wanted to move too. I called the front desk and asked if
     we could move to other rooms. I was told there was no room
     avaible for us. Mr. Chen asked to talk to the local sponsor.
     I did. Then the hotel finally agreed to change the rooms,
     but we were given rooms with smaller beds. Mr. Chen sent
     his wife to see the new room. She wasn't happy. He asked
     me if it was okay to move to another hotel. I called the
     sponsor. The local sponsor suggested that she would buy ear
     plugs for them. Mr. Chen said for a blind person, his ears
     were important senses for him. He would rather be staying
     in a noisy place than having his ears blocked.
          He felt that the local sponsor weren't trying to help.
     He eventually decided not to move because the bed was too
     small for both of them. As Ms. Yuan returned the key to the
     front desk, she said that she felt they were rude to her.
     During the next few days, they also reported to me that
     their rooms were not cleaned. I called the local sponsor,
     but got no reply. Eventually, on the check-out day, we were
     informed that on weekends, we'd pay $65 dollar more per day.
     Normally, before we check in hotels, the front desk would
     ask us to initiate the rate. Because the local sponsor did
     the check-in for us when we were not present, we didn't know
     the difference in the weekday and weekend rate. The local
     program only printed the $89 rate, but not the $165 rate.
     But the front desk said that the local sponsor agreed the
     weekend rate. I then checked the program book, did find the
     two rates printed. But Mr. Chen and Mrs. Yuan refused to
     pay the difference. They said that they were only advised
     in the last minute. Nobody tried to explain it to them in
     Washington DC when the program opened or when they arrived
     here. They also did a calculation themselves saying that
     their per diem was given based on the $89 rate, not the $165
     rate. Finally, they said that the hotel provided such a
     poor service and was so unfriendly, they didn't deserve more
     pay. I tried to call both the local sponsor and•AED, but
     were not successful. The program officer was on a jury duty




                                                                                       11
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015




      that day. The local sponsor never returned phone calls. The
      hotel manager eventually agreed to charge $89 per day.
           The matter was settled, but Mr. Chen was still unhappy.
      Fighting was his nature. He said that he'd be willing to
      fight with the hotel toward the end. From this experience,
      we'd make sure that every time we arrived in a new hotel,
      we'd double check with the hotel rate before checking in.
      The same problem didn't rise again.
           After we arrived in New York, Mr. Chen used up the
      phone cards and I took them to buy new ones. We visited at
      least five stores, but they wanted to compare the price over
      and over again, which took a very long time. They were
      looking for the cheapest rate. Mr. Chen said that, his
      friends told him that to call China, it only cost less than
      two cents per minute. I went to China Town the next time to
      find the right cheap phone cards for them.
           Mr. Chen called his friends in the United Nations and
      Columbia University. Two more professional meetings were
      added through the connections of his friends. The schedule
      in New York was tight. Mr. Chen also took a day trip on
      Saturday to meet his contacts at Princeton University. Due
      to exhaustion, he had a fever on Saturday night. I was
      awakened up by his wife at four a.m. on Sunday morning. She
      asked that I took Mr. Chen to the hospital.    I checked Mr.
      Chen's health and bought them Advil over the counter.
           Mr. Chen became much better after taking the medicine.
      In Cincinnati, he attended the professional meetings without
      any healthy problems. He even wanted to climb up the
      mountains in his spare time. But his wife Ms. Yuan worried
      and suggested I take him to a hospital to have a thorough
      checkup.
           We went to the University hospital and stayed there for
      four hours. After hearing that Mr. Chen was from China, the
      doctors were very cautious. They had his chest x-rayed and
      two doctors examined him. They came to the conclusion that
      he was traveling and was exhausted, and just caught some flu
      virus. They gave him some IV and medicine.
           After Mr. Chen became recovered, both Ms. Yuan and I
      felt sick. I was sick and fatigued in the next two days.
           Thankfully, after arriving in warm Austin, we both felt
      better. Nothing emergent or bad came up in Austin in terms
      of logistics.
           But when we arrived in Spokane, Washington, there were
      new problems. My luggage didn't arrive. When we checked in
      at the front desk, they were told that the hotel didn't take
      traveler's check. Because it was 9:00 p.m. already. Mr.
      Chen and his wife didn't eat lunch in order to save money.


                                                                                       12
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015




      They were very hungry after a day's travel. I used my
      credit card to guarantee their room. After they went to
      their room, Mr. Chen called and complained that the bathroom
      smelled. I called and asked them to change the room. Ms.
      Yuan went to the second room, and the smell she said was bad.
      I called the local sponsor and the hotel manager talked to
      her. Eventually, we were placed in another hotel under the
      same hotel chain. By the time we settled there, it was
      almost 10:00 p.m. We decided to eat at the hotel restaurant.
      They said that they wanted to eat noodles. The closest
      thing to noodles was pasta. So they order pasta, but didn't
      eat it because it was too much cheese in it. The only thing
      they ate was the bread. They were not happy and didn't pay
      tips.
            The last stop San Francisco was nice. The hotel was
      very comfortable. But something expected happened on their
      last day at the airport. Mr. Chen and Ms. Yuan asked me to
      tell Northwest Airlines that they wanted to have better
      seats on the sides, not in the middle. So they checked
      their bag, and asked them to wait for the better seats and
      came back at 12:45. However, by 12:30 they came back, they
      were told to wait. Then at 1:00 p.m., they were told that
      the flight was oversold and they couldn't get on the flight.
      Because we checked in two hours before the taking off time,
      there was no reason for them not to get seats.
           I immediately phoned the headquarter of the Northwest.
      This was how they settled the case after I talked to them:
      they apologized Mr. Chen and his wife and issued an 800-
      dollar check to compensate them. They placed them on the
      next day's direct flight to China, business class. They
      arranged them to stay at the Crown Plaza overnight and gave
      them $60 worth of vouchers for lunch and dinner. The couple
      was very happy. Mr. Chen said that he would write the
      experience to introduce the good service of Northwest
      Airlines.




      Diversity Goals

           In Burlington Vermont, Mr. Chen and his wife met with
      three couples with sighed wives and blind husbands. They
      had the experience of American family life and the daily
      life of the blind in America. In Middlebury, he had lunch
      with students from all over the world who were studying
      Chinese. In New York, he visited the Harlem Independent


                                                                                        13
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015




      Living Center and had a tour of Harlem, an area with
      concentrated Hispanic and black population. In Spokane
      Washington, Mr. Chen had dinner with middle-class couples
      who just finished their trip to China. In Berkeley, he was
      able to meet a socialist who offered different political
      views from others. The diversity goal of the program was
      achieved.

      Names/Addresses of Americans to receive Thank You note:

      Dr. Patricia Morrissey
      Hubert Humphrey Building
      U.S. Department of HHS
      200 Independence Ave. SW
      Washington DC 20201

      Mr. Jerry Cohen
      Council on Foreign Relations
      58 East 68th St.
      New York, NY 10021

      Ms. Ginny Backscheider
      Cincinnati Association for the Blind
      2045 Gilbert Ave.
      Cincinnati, Ohio

      Mrs. Vicki Jones



      Ms.   Susan Mizner
      San   Francisco Mayor's Office On Disability
      401   Van Ness St. Room 300
      San   Francisco, CA 94102




                                                                                       14
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792891 Date: 10/30/2015
