        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785802 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                                                                           RELEASE IN
                                                                                                                                           FULL



From:                                         Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Thursday, December 22, 2011 1:12 PM
To:
Subject:                                      FW: UN's Bachelet deplores Egyptian attacks on women (Reuters)



Bachelet jumping on the bandwagon.


From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Thursday, December 22, 2011 1:08 PM
To: NEWS-I0; NEWS-SGWI; NEWS-Egypt; NEWS-Mahogany
Subject: UN's Bachelet deplores Egyptian attacks on women (Reuters)

UNITED NATIONS       (Reuters) - The head of the U.N. women's agency voiced serious concern Thursday about
the treatment of women and children by Egyptian security forces and urged authorities to ensure their rights are
respected.

   "I note with great concern the reports of direct attacks in the past few days on women, individually and
collectively, for exercising their political and civil rights to public assembly and expression," Michele Bachelet
said in a statement.

   "Women along with men and children have been victims of the excessive use of force against peaceful
protesters over this past weekend and this week," she said.

   Bachelet, a former president of Chile who now heads U.N. Women, appealed to political and military
authorities in Egypt "to guarantee women's political and civil rights, and to offer ... government support in
ensuring these rights are respected."

   U.S Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Monday criticized Egyptian security forces for "systematic
degradation" of women that "disgraces the state," some of the strongest U.S. language used against Egypt's new
rulers, who took power after President Hosni Mubarak stepped down in response to Arab Spring protests.

    Egypt responded by saying it would not accept any interference in its internal affairs.

   In one video that has been widely viewed on the Internet, soldiers were shown dragging a woman by her
black robe, worn by conservative Muslims, as she lay on the ground, revealing her bra. Then she was repeatedly
kicked and clubbed.

NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05785802 Date: 10/30/2015
