      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786355 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                  B6



From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Saturday, January 29, 2011 8:58 PM
To:                                'millscd@state.gov'
Subject:                           Re:



Bill talked to me about this and is quite worried about what I do and say tomorrow.

    Original Message
From: Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
To: H
Sent: Sat Jan 29 20:10:38 2011
Subject: FW:

Let's discuss this on plane

    Original Message----
From: laura
Sent: Saturday, January 29, 2011 7:54 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:

For what its worth-bc I think about this a lot. Does IC have a strategy to deal w those that oppose this solution-mms in
second round-preval staying? In event that the group of 12 and lavallas unify against this be their ultimate goal may be
cancellation of elections-new elections. I think you need to consider a message and outreach strategy to ensure that
different elements of haitian society (church leaders, business,
etc) buy into the mms solution and are out their on radio messaging why its good. You need to counter what appears to
be a building up and potential unifying of oppositon parties-naturally unusal alliances btw right and left who have
nothing to gain w current solution and at a minimum some hope with new elections and a provisional goh where they
may get a seat at the table and a chance to reset their campaigns for a new election a year or 2 from now. Seems to me
IC needs a complimentary message-outreach strategy to support this solution and in usg best interest to have this since
IC for many here equals USG. Additionally, the radio is 24-7 messaging against the current solution, turning RP and JC
from villans into patriots. Its unbelievable. These radio hosts and guests have forgotten that they cheated. The IC and
USG taking hits and looking like villan. Nationalism views on rise. HRC was specifically criticized today for imposing this
solution and pressuring RP.
Confidentially-i met with Mullet yesterday and raised this and he totally disregarded the unification of these groups. He
thinks that somehow the mms solution and RP staying will be accepted by all when it only serves the mms, RP. I think its
a risk to assume that. If you want it to work and be able to govern credibly I think you need enhance message and
outreach strategy w Haitian surrogates. No one is countering the daily drumbeat against IC right now. I know KM did
radio this am which was good but think you need a more comprehensive strategy w IC support and Haitian surrogates.
Just my thoughts. Thx for listening. Lg Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786355 Date: 10/30/2015
