     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789577 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                                 B6



From:                              Campbell, Kurt M <CampbellKM@state.gov>
Sent:                              Friday, March 16, 2012 3:24 PM
To:
Subject:                            Fw: Amelia Earhart Project



One last background piece Madame Secretary. Also need your guidance about the Asia stuff you discussed with Jamie
Rubin. Have a good weekend. Kurt


From: Campbell, Kurt M
Sent: Friday, March 16, 2012 09:21 AM
To: liebermane            <lieberman€>;                           <pellej       >; 'daileyjr        <daileyjr                  B6
Cc: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Loi, James L; Stout, Jennifer P
Subject: Amelia Earhart Project

Evelyn, General Dailey, Under Secretary Pell-

Cheryl Mills, our Chief of Staff here at the State Department, forwarded me your e-mails yesterday and asked me to set
up a meeting regarding the Amelia Earhart effort. I have asked my office to be in touch this morning to see if we can
find a good time. Evelyn, I currently serve as Secretary Clinton's Assistant Secretary for East Asia and Pacific, but you
might remember that we worked closely together on a few projects when I was in the White House during the Clinton
Administration (I am married to Lael Brainard now at the Treasury Department). General Dailey, I also had a chance to
meet with you on a few occasions during my time at the Pentagon, working for Secretary Perry, and before while in the
Navy.

I wanted to make sure I provided you background information before our meeting, and before I'm consumed by the
inevitable policy scramble over last night's statements from North Korea that they will be launching another missile in
April.

Our intention for the event next Tuesday is to highlight Amelia Earhart as part of Women's Heritage Month, our historic
role in the Pacific, and to celebrate the 75th anniversary of her launch for her fateful around-the-world flight.

As part of that effort, and as an example of intrepid diplomacy and adventurous spirit, we are planning to announce
some potentially exciting new developments in the long search for her aircraft. We have had a team here at the State
Department -- including historians, photo analysts, technical experts and diplomats -- supporting this effort for three
years. And we have also engaged extensively with many outside experts in underwater search, reconnaissance
capabilities, and DNA analysis. You will see from the forwarded email below that we are also working closely with
Robert Ballard (the discoverer of the Titanic, among many other notable achievements), who serves the State
Department as a formal advisor in this effort. He plans on being with us next Tuesday, and will be available today to
provide any background support for our meeting.

I myself have been to Kiribati on two occasions and have had very extensive dealings with TIGHAR over several
years. We have also done very substantial background work in vetting on every aspect of the search plan and
organization – scientific papers, books, satellite pictures, historical documents and their financial records . I am working
to ensure that our entire technical team and outside advisory group are available for any discussions today.

The goal here was in no way meant to suggest that these new clues are certain or even highly likely, but rather that in
the spirit of adventure of the American pursuit of knowledge it behooves us to explore.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789577 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789577 Date: 10/30/2015




TIGHAR (The International Group for Historical Aircraft Recovery) and its team have allowed their findings to be carefully
checked, and there is now an intense bidding war between National Geographic and the Discovery Channel underway
for the exclusive rights to cover the search. (The State Department is not involved in that part of the effort or indeed in
any other financial dealings of the search or associated organizations.) Lockheed Martin, the builder of the plane that
Amelia Earhart flew on her voyage, has seen enough to strongly support the effort, and they will be with us on Tuesday
next week as well.

You will note in Dr. Ballard's e-mail below that he mentions the photo of what we believe to be the strut in the
rediscovered 1930's black and white photo. We have asked five different technical experts from the US government and
intelligence community with decades of experience using our most sophisticated digital imaging and contour resolution
technology to judge the veracity of the photo. (This is the island where the artifacts were found — judged to be from the
mid- to late 1930's — including a broken pocket knife, a women's compact, and a jar of vanishing cream for
freckles.) Their judgment, with varying degrees of certainty, from clear possibility to probability, indicates that the
image seen in the water could indeed be the strut of a Lockheed Electra.

We have approached this effort with a healthy dose of skepticism and a need for corroboration at every step. I myself
was quite skeptical from the outset but have come around. My personal view is that this is an exciting potentially
historic find and deeply worthy of exploration. I've also come to know Ric Gillespie well and find him to be thorough,
scientific in his approach, honest, and deeply committed.

I look forward to discussing all of this with you today.

One final note that is unrelated to the State Department role in this but might have some bearing on the Air and Space
Museum. This search will proceed shortly under any circumstances. As part of this effort, TIGHAR has graciously
negotiated an important provision in their search agreement with the Government of Kiribati that, should they find
wreckage of Amelia Earhart's plane, it would be provided to the Smithsonian Air & Space Museum for public display. So
I think this means that we need to handle the search effort carefully and with professional respect.

My office will be in touch shortly to set up a meeting.

With all best wishes,
Kurt

Dr. Kurt M. Campbell
Assistant Secretary of State
For East Asian & Pacific Affairs



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Robert Ballard [mailtol
Sent: Thursday, March 15, 2011 9:5/ PM
To: Campbell, Kurt M
Subject: Amelia Earhart Project

Dear Secretary Campbell,

I want to thank you for giving me the opportunity to be involved in this potentially history search effort.

As you know, I have been involved in a number of search efforts over my 52-year career as an oceanographer
including the discovery of the RMS TITANIC, the German battleship BISMARCK, the USS YORKTOWN lost
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789577 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789577 Date: 10/30/2015




during the Battle of Midway, President John F. Kennedy's PT-109, and numerous warships lost during the
Battle of Guadalcanal.

Clearly, finding the wreckage of Amelia Earhart's Lockheed Electra ranks near the top of the list, if not at the
very top, of historic finds yet to be made.

Over the years, I have spent a considerable amount of time researching the facts surrounding her disappearance
as well as watched various groups attempt to locate her downed Electra both at sea and ashore.

I am well aware of the work done by Eric Gillespie and his group and find them to be dedicated individuals who
have approached their work in a truly scientific manner. I must say, I admire their "dogged" approach and
determination. Having spent some time on isolated atolls in the Pacific myself, I know working in such a
location can be a trying and exhausting experience that will test your determination to continue in pursue of
your quest year after year.

I have reviewed the evidence he and his team have collected over the years and find it a quite compelling
hypothesis that she in fact landed on the outer reef of Gardner Island instead of ditching at sea. Clearly, given
the choice of landing on the shallow water reef in protected waters of an island is much preferable to landing in
the open ocean.

The eye witness accounts he has documented from natives who moved to the island a few years after her
disappearance and the artifacts his team has collected are impossible to ignore.

I have also reviewed the recently rediscovered image taken by Eric Bevington during his photographic survey
of Gardner Island in 1937 just months after her disappearance and although I am not an expert in photo-analysis
there is little doubt that a vertical strut can be clearly seen protecting out of the water to the north of the SS
NORWICH CITY which ran around on Gardner Island November 29, 1929.

The fact that you have had this photograph analyzed by imaging experts who believe it is the landing gear of a
Lockheed Electra is yet another fact that can not be ignored.

I have recently been in contact with engineers at Pratt & Whitney that built the two R-85 Wasp Junior SB
Radial engines on her plane. These engines each weighed 865 pounds. 113-165 pounds of which consist of
aluminum parts but 700-750 pounds consist of steel.
If the vertical strut seen in Eric Bevington's 1937 photograph is in fact the Electra's landing gear then it must be
attached to one of these 865 pound engines which even if it is covered by subsequent coral growth, which is
more than likely the case, will be relatively easy to locate based upon it strong magnetic signature in a
surrounding area of coral limestone made of calcium carbonate that lacks any magnetic signature. A simple
proton magnetometer should do the trick.

Finally, I am an Explorer-in-Residence for the National Geographic Society and I have spoken with their senior
management about this recent evidence and they and I am sure others are willing to finance an expedition to
Gardner Island to verify whether or not the remains of Amelia Earhart Electra are in fact at this location without
costing the Federal Government anything.

Given this new evidence and the minor costs involved in verifying the presence of the aircraft remains, I find it
well worthwhile mounting an expedition to Gardner Island as soon as possible and I look forward to helping in
away possible.

Sincerely,

Dr. Robert D. Ballard
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789577 Date: 10/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789577 Date: 10/30/2015




Professor of Oceanography, Graduate School of Oceanography, University of Rhode Island and Director of the
Center of Ocean Exploration.




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789577 Date: 10/30/2015
