      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784026 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             Sullivan, Jacob.) <SullivanJJ@state.gov >
Sent:                             Sunday, November 20, 2011 2:38 PM
To:
Subject:                           From Anne



We sent in a cable and a couple of sitreps. Let me first say that while the Embassy was on a reduced schedule today, we
were moving around the city and carrying out routine business (saying goodbye to the Israeli ambassador at his
suburban home, going to the Foreign Ministry, etc.)

General observations:

1) The events in the square are sure to throw in doubt security for the elections and are likely to suppress turnout.

2) The demonstrations seem largely leaderless. Last night's encounters were aggravated by the appearance of "ultras"
who are disaffected soccer thugs with longstanding grievances against the police.

3) The political parties are keeping their distance from these demonstrations, condemning police excesses but not
embracing the protests. They suspect these demonstrations do not have public support.

4) The government has announced that elections will be held on time. The Muslim Brotherhood issued a statement
demanding that elections should go ahead. We have nothing elsewhere to indicate that the government is thinking of
postponing elections.

5) We are not exactly sure about the status of the negotiations on the "principles." They are still negotiating but the
process has probably been eclipsed by events in the square.

6) To state the obvious, the situation is volatile and could be immediately inflamed again by some random (or planned)
event. If the Muslim Brotherhood decides to join, the situation would become far more difficult. (The Muslim
Brotherhood went home Friday night, after a peaceful demonstration.)

I have a meeting with a couple of SCAF generals tomorrow.

It will be important to keep the focus on the elections.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784026 Date: 10/30/2015
