      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783940 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                RELEASE IN PART B6


From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Saturday, November 19, 2011 3:48 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: Bahrain COI—PROTECT


Fyi

    Original Message
From: Koh, Harold Hongju
Sent: Saturday, November 19, 2011 01:36 PM
To: Burns, William J; Sullivan, Jacob J; Sherman, Wendy R; Zeya, Uzra S; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Schwartz, Jonathan B; Posner,
Michael H; Orentlicher, Diane F
Subject: Fw: Bahrain COI—PROTECT




    Original Message
From: Harold Koh [mailto
Sent: Saturday, November 19, 2011 01:33 PM
To: Koh, Harold Hongju
Subject: Bahrain COI--PROTECT

I just got off the phone with a very distinguished member of the Bahrain Commission of Inquiry, which consists of Chair
Cherif Bassiouni, Nigel Rodley, Mahnoush Arsanjani, Phillipe Kirsch and BadriaAl-Awadhi. The member was calling to give
me a confidential heads up about the COI's forthcoming report, which will issue this Wed. in Bahrain (terms of reference
and website for the coi at the bottom of the email). Last editing sessions were concluded today in London. Mike Posner
has been in touch with this member as well, and can add details. This member agreed to send me reports as the rollout
proceeds, and any warning if this starts to go off track. They don't want "another Goldstone," i.e. public relations
firestorm. The highlights are as follows.

1. Timing
Report will be rolled out at ceremony in manama on wed. presented to king, and presented to public at same time.
There will be no press conference. Members fear that Chair Cherif doesn't know how to control his thoughts in speaking
to press--he is promising that he will speak based solely on intro to report, which says GOI are genuinely independent,
transparent, and have proceeded to do the work without interference from GOB. But will not draw substantive
conclusions.
There will be a press release as well

2. Content of Report:
Report is now basically adopted, but for typos, formatting etc. All in about 300-400 pages with annexes. Member was
worried about one or two parts of it before last editing sessions (just concluded today) but feels collective editing
process has fixed the real problems with it. "Not every part is perfect," but it is a respectable product and every
commissioner will now sign.

Elements are:
a. Intro: repeating basic terms of reference also on website (see bottom of this email) b. Historical Background leading
up to events c. Basic international and natl law background d. Long narrative chapter since Feb-end of March that tries
to capture both sides' narratives e. Chapter about events at the medical complex f. Chapter on killings, torture, arrests,
arbitrary detentions, dismissals from employments g. Chapter on misbehavior by opposition, Shiites attacking Sunnis,
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783940 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783940 Date: 10/30/2015




events at Bahrain university h. Conclusions and recommendations are virtually all directed to GOB, who commissioned
the coi. Report will draw a few basic conclusions, including re:
i. need to promote accountability for past and reform structures for the future so that justice is done to victims ii.
Breaking a "Cyclical problem:" GOB tends to take no holds bar approach when there is unrest, but then when things are
calm they liberalize; they need a concerted effort internally, and supported by allies, igos, and ngos to prevent them
from going back to these counterproductive old habits. In particular they need Training of Security personnel iii.
Significantly, no talk of report of crimes against humanity, not described as an attack against the civilian population but
says that there should be proper domestic investigation of prosecutions, as states are required to do under intl human
rights law

3. Followup: Commission goes out of business as soon as report issues. The COI members hope Cherif won't be overly
expansive with the press about issues outside the scope, but "Cherif is Cherif." So, any followup will have to come from
Friends of Bahrain and internal authorities.Most important thing is for Friends of Bahrain to read, to be comfortable w/
it, try to get behind it.This member requests:

a. for GOB: hard to tell re king--but crown prince apparently wants to move forward on a political development basis,
not a "security basis."
King/Crown prince need something to reassert control over the hardliners. Report gives road map not to a political
solution but accepting COI conclusions as recommendations and acting on them seriously would help a lot in terms of
confidence building and helping to ease incredible tension in that country to promote long term political development.
Commissioners' hope is that King/Crown Prince really do want report as a way to insert control over hardliners including
the hardliners like PM who are senior to the crown prince in the royal family. If this report can help isolate the
hardliners, that would be great.

b.Likeminded allies: e.g. Brits. FM Hague has been similarly briefed and plans to work with us to try to support
implementation of COI conclusions.

c. Regional allies
--Jordan: they should encourage same Message.
--Hardest nut to crack: majority in bahrain fear that real allies of hardliners are saudis--so try to get saudis on the right
side of the intra family dispute

d. UN: we should ask them to embrace coi report. UNHCHR was initially mistrustful of the report, but HC Navi Pillay
finally faced them down, and coi hopes they can now get behind it



Best
Harold

COI Mandate from website: http://www.bici.org.bh/

The Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry was established on 29th June 2011 in the Kingdom of Bahrain pursuant
to Royal Order No. 28 by His Majesty, Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa. The Commission has been tasked with investigating and
reporting on the events that took place in Bahrain from February 2011, and the consequences of those events.
The Commission has been asked to determine whether the events of February and March 2011 (and thereafter)
involved violations of international human rights law and norms, and to make the recommendations that it deems
appropriate. The Commission has been asked to provide a complete narrative of the events and the context for these
events; to describe any acts of violence that occurred, as well as the actors involved in such acts; and to investigate
instances of alleged police brutality and violence by protestors and demonstrators against others. The Commission has
been asked to explore the circumstances and appropriateness of arrests and detentions; to examine allegations of
disappearances and torture; to probe allegations of media harassment and other pressure tactics used against
participants in demonstrations and public protests; to discuss the alleged unlawful demolition of religious structures;
and to describe the alleged involvement of foreign forces and actors.
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783940 Date: 10/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783940 Date: 10/30/2015




Although Commissions of Inquiry are often created by external mandate, the Bahraini Commission of Inquiry is the
product of internal decision-making and has benefited from a consultation process with various bodies, including the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. The terms of reference set out in the Royal Order (please see
"Royal Order No. 28 of 2011" on the BICI website) contain a number of features that will contribute to the Commission's
integrity and independence, including the following:

the Commission is wholly independent from the Bahraini government and will be responsible for hiring its own staff and
administering its own budget; the Commission has been afforded full access to government agencies, officials and files;
the Commission has been granted the government's cooperation in giving the Commission access to all places and
people that the Commission deems appropriate; the Commission has the ability to meet with witnesses in secret and to
adopt protective measures for witnesses; the Commission has the authority to decide on all matters concerning the
scope of its work and its methods of operation; the Government has undertaken to ensure that no person will be
punished, penalized, harassed or embarrassed in any way; the Commission has been granted the ability to make any
recommendations that it sees fit; and the Commission's final report will be made public in its entirety.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783940 Date: 10/30/2015
