      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783404 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL



From:                           Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ©state.gov>
Sent:                           Wednesday, October 19, 2011 8:35 AM
To:
Subject:                        Fw: Iran Comments on Plot



FYI


From: Meehan, Bernadette M
Sent: Wednesday, October 19, 2011 08:19 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3; Wells, Alice G
Cc: S_SpedalAssistants
Subject: Iran Comments on Plot

From: Eyre, Alan E
Sent: Wednesday, October 19, 2011 8:01 AM
Subject: Iran Daily Brief, Wednesday October 19

MFA SPOKESMAN: U.S. ACCUSATIONS A PLOT, PROOF MUST BE PRESENTED...: Foreign
Ministry Spokesman Ramin Mehmanparast said in an October 18 press conference that the accusations against
Iran were a US plot and that the US should release any evidence that it has. In response to a reporter's question
about whether Iran's request for documents constituted a retreat from Tehran's original position on the matter,
he said, 'Our position has not changed. We believe that these claims are an American plot [...]. We believe that
if they have some claims in this regard, they must first present their evidence. This evidence must be reviewed
before their claim is proven.' He added, 'Before evidence is presented, it is not possible for an individual -
whose identity is in question, whose current conditions are not known, and whose declarations and the ensuing
analysis of the declarations are unknown — to make unilateral claims. He said that before such evidence had
been presented, 'They introduced an individual as a suspect, then they considered him to be guilty and took his
links to Iranian bodies for granted. They then began their threats and it is interesting that without any of those
preliminary steps having been taken, they decided about the way Iran would be punished and they said that
sanctions should be strengthened, and some even brought up the military option.' Referring to reports that US
authorities have agreed to give Iran consular access to arrested suspect Mansour Arbabsiar, he said, 'They must
show us the identity documents of this individual who it is claimed is an Iranian citizen. We have not received
anything in this regard yet, although we have twice asked for documents.' He added, 'The US State Department
Spokesman has made some comment in which it is not clearly stated how this consular access will take place.'

 ...WHILE DEPUTY ARMED FORCES CHIEF OF STAFF SAYS ACCUSATIONS A PRETEXT FOR
U.S. TO ENTER TALKS WITH IRAN...: Referring to US accusations against Iran, Deputy Joint Armed
Forces Chief of Staff General Massoud Jazayeri said on October 19, 'These actions carried out by the US are
for engaging in discussions with Iran.' But he added, 'Hostile actions towards Iran have removed any chance of
peaceful intercourse and talks will only take place with a new US.' (Note: Jazayeri, who is in charge of oint
Armed Forces Cultural and Publicity Affairs, is one of 29 Islamic Republic officials who are under new EU
sanctions since October 10.)

 ...AND FOREIGN MINISTER SAYS RELATIONS WITH SAUDI ARABIA BASED ON PEACE AND
BROTHERHOOD, AMAZED AT U.S. ACCUSATIONS: Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Salehi said in an
October 18 speech to foreign ambassadors stationed in Tehran that 'The Islamic Republic's constant and
avowed strategy regarding its neighbors, including the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, is based on peace,
brotherhood, cooperation, and the preservation and strengthening of security in the sensitive Middle East and

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783404 Date: 10/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783404 Date: 10/30/2015




Persian Gulf regions.' Salehi's address was devoted to US accusations that Iran had planned to assassinate the
Saudi Ambassador in Washington. Salehi said that he had been 'amazed' when he heard the charges. He said,
`A precise and complete review of the details of the documents that have been published by the US government
show that their accusations are based on the deductions of a security agent from the claims of individuals with
criminal records and links to international trafficking networks.' He criticized the fact that Iran had not been
given consular access to arrested suspect in the case, adding, 'Why, contrary to the norm, has no one made
televised comments as the suspect's lawyer?' Salehi also faulted American authorities for presenting the case to
the media before going through diplomatic channels




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783404 Date: 10/30/2015
