      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792318 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL


From:                                         Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Thursday, May 10, 2012 5:39 AM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: China's Chen says officials launch crazed reprisals on family (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Thursday, May 10, 2012 03:14 AM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Subject: China's Chen says officials launch crazed reprisals on family (Reuters)



BEIJING (Reuters) - Blind Chinese activist Chen Guangcheng and a family lawyer have accused local officials
of detaining two of his relatives and hounding and harassing others in revenge for his recent escape from house
arrest and for sparking an international furore.

   Chen, whose escape last month caused embarrassment for China and led to a diplomatic crisis in U.S.-Sino
relations, said a sister-in-law and nephew had both been detained, though the lawyer added that Chen's sister-in-
law had since been released.

  Chen has spoken previously of his fears for reprisals against his family, but his remarks to Reuters on
Thursday, corroborated by the lawyer, are the first time he has relayed details of what he says is a crazed
campaign of reprisals.

   "Now they're going crazy with reprisals," Chen said in a telephone interview from a Beijing hospital where
he is being treated for injuries suffered during his escape.

    "In fact, they've already started taking revenge."

   Chen's story has overshadowed Sino-U.S. diplomacy since he foiled guards and security cameras around his
home in Shandong province, in rural east China, and was taken by supporters to Beijing where he sheltered in
the U.S. embassy for six days.

  Chen is also being treated in hospital for an intestinal ailment left untreated while under house arrest for 19
months. He now plans to study in the United States, where he has been offered fellowships by New York
University and the University of Washington, under a deal between Beijing and Washington.

   Chen said relatives back in Shandong appeared to be bearing the brunt of officials' anger over his audacious
escape and the international uproar it sparked.

   The reprisals were, he said, weighing heavily on his mind though for now he was unlikely to delay his plans
to go to the United States. "It shouldn't. We'll see," he said.



News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792318 Date: 10/30/2015
