      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768272 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL




From:                               Shah, Rajiv (AID/A) <rshah@usaid.gov>
Sent:                               Tuesday, April 13, 2010 7:47 AM
To:                                 McHale, Judith A
Cc:                                 Slaughter, Anne-Marie; H; Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:                            Re: Recognition of US assistance efforts



Thanks Judith!

This is one of the big take aways from my trip... And that we can quickly do a lot more to raise our profile as it relates to
our assistance portfolio.

I would ask that Sean Carroll and Maura O'Neill also join this conversation.

We could use Pakistan as a case study to help brainstorm and to be able to move quickly on this issue as its a real issue
here (but there also are some opportunities to move quickly on this here).

Finally, Melanne and I discussed this and the idea of pulling together a very creative group of external thinkers/corporate
marketing experts to help brainstorm ideas over dinner. Not an immediate priority but we could do that following on the
meeting you propose. (And she might like to join us in this first discussion as well.)

Raj


From: McHale, Judith A
To: Shah, Rajiv (AID/A)
Cc: Slaughter, Anne-Marie; H ; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Tue Apr 13 05:48:26 2010
Subject: Recognition of US assistance efforts
Raj:

Hope you are well and that you are having a good trip. I'm very much looking forward to catching up when you get back
hearing how it all went, particularly in Pakistan.

As you and I have discussed briefly on several occasions, most of us feel there is a need to dramatically increase global
awareness of USG assistance efforts. I have raised this issue with the Secretary and others at State and I would like to
propose that Anne Marie , you and I co-host a small gathering of individuals from State, USAID and representatives from
the private sector and NGO community to help us evaluate where we are and to develop some new approaches. If you
agree, we can figure out a time which works for everyone and put together a list of people to invite. I'm happy to take
the lead in organizing it. Let me know what you think.

Safe travels.

Judith




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768272 Date: 10/30/2015
