UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786184 Date: 10/30/2015



                                                                           RELEASE IN FULL



         NEW YORK TIMES
         Tuesday, 20 December 2011

         NORTH KOREA as we know it is over. Whether it comes apart in the next few weeks
         or over several months, the regime will not be able to hold together after the untimely
         death of its leader, Kim Jong-il. How America responds — and, perhaps even more
         important, how America responds to how China responds — will determine whether
         the region moves toward greater stability or falls into conflict.
         Mr. Kim's death could not have come at a worse time for North Korea. Economically
         broken, starving and politically isolated, this dark kingdom was in the midst of
         preparations to hand power over to his not-yet-30-year-old son, the untested Kim Jong-
         un. The "great successor," as he has been dubbed by the state media, is surrounded by
         elders who are no less sick than his father and a military that chafed at his promotion to
         four-star general last year without having served a day in the army. Such a system
         simply cannot hold.

         The transition comes at a time when the United States has been trying to get nuclear
         negotiations back on track. Those efforts have now been replaced by a scramble for
         plans to control loose nuclear weapons, should the regime collapse.

         And yet Washington remains powerless. Any outreach to the young Mr. Kim or to
         other possible competitors could create more problems during the transition, and would
         certainly be viewed as threatening by China. Since Kim Jong-il's stroke in 2008, the
         United States and South Korea have been working on contingency plans to deal with
         just such a situation, but they all thought they would have years, if not a decade.

         The allies' best move, then, is to wait and see what China does. Among China's core
         foreign-policy principles is the maintenance of a divided Korean Peninsula, and so
         Beijing's statements about preserving continuity of North Korea's leadership should
         come as no surprise. Since 2008 it has drawn closer to the regime, publicly defending
         its leaders and investing heavily in the mineral mines on the Chinese-North Korean
         border.

         But even as Beijing sticks close to its little Communist brother, there are intense
         debates within its leadership about whether the North is a strategic liability. It was one
         thing to back a hermetic but stable regime under Kim Jong-il; it will be harder to
         underwrite an untested leadership. For Xi Jinping, expected to become China's over the
         next year, the first major foreign policy decision will be whether to shed North Korea
         or effectively adopt it as a third northeastern province.

         All indications are that Beijing will pursue the latter course, in no small part because of
         a bias among its leadership to support the status quo, rather than to confront dramatic
         change. And yet "adopting" North Korea could be dramatic in itself. China may go all
         in, doling out early invitations and new assistance packages to the young Mr. Kim,
         conditioning them on promises of economic reform.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786184 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786184 Date: 10/30/2015




         While some observers hope that Kim Jong-il's death will unleash democratic regime
         change, China will work strongly against that possibility, especially if such efforts
         receive support from South Korea or the United States. Given that Beijing has the only
         eyes inside the North, Washington and Seoul could do little in response.

         Yet even China's best-laid plans may come apart. The assistance may be too little, too
         late, especially given the problems the new leadership will face. A clear channel of
         dialogue involving the United States, China and South Korea is needed now more than
         ever.

         And yet such a dialogue is completely absent since Kim Jong-il's stroke. Beijing has
         deflected every official and unofficial overture from Washington to have quiet
         discussions on potential North Korean instability. Before, China let its fears of Western
         interests get the better of it; wiser Chinese judgment should lead authorities to open
         such a channel now. The three sides should open with a conversation on all our fears
         about what could happen in a collapsing North — loose nukes, refugee flows, artillery
         attacks — and how each would respond.

          With so little known about the inner workings of this dark kingdom, miscalculation by
          any side in response to developments inside the North is a very real possibility given
          the hair-trigger alerts of the militaries on the peninsula.

          None of this will be easy. For China, the uncertainty surrounding North Korea comes
          against the backdrop of Mr. Obama's "pivot" to Asia and assertion that the region is
          America's new strategic priority. This has already created insecurities in Beijing that
          will make genuine dialogue with the United States even more challenging — and thus
          all the more necessary.

          Victor Cha, a professor at Georgetown and author of the forthcoming book "The
          Impossible State: North Korea, Past, and Future," was director of Asian affairs at the
          White House from 2004 to 2007.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05786184 Date: 10/30/2015
