      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788873 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Monday, September 26, 2011 8:13 AM
To:                                'JilotyLC@state.gov'
Subject:                           Fw: a few items of interest



Pls print.


From: Verveer, Melanne S [mailto:VerveerMS@state.gov]
Sent: Monday, September 26, 2011 12:49 AM
To: H
Subject: a few items of interest

When I got back from NY on Friday afternoon, I went to the World Bank advisory board meeting on their
Women's Development Report. Many of the development ministers, private sector reps and WB officials commented on
the significance of your APEC speech. The Swedish minister told me that you're having such an impact on these issues
that her Foreign Minister made his General Assembly speech solely on women's issues.
Zoellick is really committed to investing in women and girls. He opened the annual meeting standing with his Managing
Directors and reading excerpts from lives of girls and women around the globe. Their WDR website is excellent and the
WB bldg is dressed in banners proclaiming "gender equality is smart economics", etc We had considerable discussion
about getting these issues on the Pusan aid effectiveness agenda. In fact, Ngozi made a very strong pitch for putting
gender significantly in the Pusan discussions.

I participated on your behalf in the launch of the Women, War and Peace documentary series that's going to be aired on
PBS. They did a short excerpt from the series. It is exceptionally powerful. You look and sound terrific. I think it will be
helpful in pushing our women, peace and security action plan forward, as well.

Also, I wanted to tell you that I met with Pinchuk who was asked by Yanokovych to convey his strong continuing interest
in integrating with Europe (despite the mess they find themselves in --- having antagonized all sides in the last few
weeks with the Tymoshenko trial), that they are under huge pressure from the Russians, and he's looking for a way to
get beyond Tymoshenko trial, but regardless the outcome, they most likely wouldn't allow her to run for future office
(not that she'd be the strongest candidate anyway).

Several of the women foreign ministers involved in the climate change issue cornered me and said they want to use
Durban meeting to advance women in sustainability and would like US to join with Mexico and S. Africa in playing a
leadership role. We'll see what's possible.

You and CVC were fabulous at CGI! May you survive another day of bilats.




SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05788873 Date: 10/30/2015
