     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762321 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                                             RELEASE IN
                                                                                                             FULL


From:                              Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                              Sunday, June 14, 2009 6:04 PM
To:
Subject:                           Biden transcript



Here is what Biden said today on mtp:

MR. GREGORY: It's good to have you here. There's a lot going on, let's get right to it. The developing story is Iran. This
has been the scene over the weekend in Tehran, street protests turning violent at times, those protesting the fact that
Ahmadinejad is still in power, has claimed victory in this presidential race. He spoke to the press this morning, indicating
that this was a free and fair election and also was rather belligerent, saying anybody who would attack Iran would come
to deeply regret it. Is Mahmoud Ahmadinejad the winner of this election, as you see it?

VICE PRES. BIDEN: Well, you know, we don't have all the details. It sure looks like the way they're suppressing speech,
the way they're suppressing crowds, the way in which people are being treated that there's some real doubt about that.
I don't think we're in a position to say. It was surprising that the assertion was he won by what, 60-some percent of the
vote? And so I think we have to wait and see. But it, it, it didn't seem on its face to be as clear cut as so
many...(unintelligible).

MR. GREGORY: Well, what specifically is the administration doing to find out what you need to find out?

VICE PRES. BIDEN: Well, we're, we're doing what every other country is doing. We're doing everything we can in our
power with folks that are on the ground, with the press that's left. I know it's being kicked out. Actually going back and
taking a look--for example, 70 percent of the vote comes out of the city. That's not Ahmadinejad's strong place. The
idea he could get, you know, 68 or whatever percent of the vote...

MR. GREGORY: Right.

VICE PRES. BIDEN: ...and, and in a circumstance like that seems unlikely.

MR. GREGORY: He says it's free and fair. You sound like you have doubts.

VICE PRES. BIDEN: Well, you know, I, I have doubts, but I--we're going to withhold comment until we have a, you know,
a thorough review of the whole process and how they react in the aftermath.

MR. GREGORY: A couple of years ago you said the following about Ahmadinejad when you were on the campaign trail:
"Ahmadinejad, the madman, is in competition with mullahs and ayatollahs who think he's overstepped his bounds.' ...
Biden called [him] 'that wacko guy, the crazy president,' and said he would only be in office for a little more than a year
before being 'taken out' because he threatened Shia interests." He's proved to be more durable than that, hasn't he?

VICE PRES. BIDEN: Yes.

MR. GREGORY: Why?

VICE PRES. BIDEN: Well, I think because it, it appears as though the supreme leader has decided the alternatives aren't
as, aren't as useful. But again, this is--I'm getting a little head of myself here. We have to see what the results were, we
have to have an analysis of it. And that'll be being done by not just us...

MR. GREGORY: Right.

                                                             90
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762321 Date: 10/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762321 Date: 10/30/2015




 VICE PRES. BIDEN: ...by every country in the world. And, and we can make a better judgment then.

 MR. GREGORY: You don't want to recognize him as the president of Iran at this stage.

 VICE PRES. BIDEN: Well, I, I'm not--look, that's, that's what they're announcing.

 MR. GREGORY: Right.

 VICE PRES. BIDEN: We have to accept that for the time being. And--but there's an awful lot of question about how this
 election was run. And we'll see. I mean, we're just waiting to see. We don't have, we don't have enough facts to note--
 to make a firm judgment.

  MR. GREGORY: Even without those facts, the question is whether the belligerence we're seeing from Ahmadinejad is a
  sign that he is emboldened, that this regime is emboldened, or is it in some way it weakened? How do you see it?

• VICE PRES. BIDEN: Well, the question is, is it for domestic consumption or is it for foreign consumption? It's obvious he
  has some problems right now. Let's assume he won the election fair and square, he still has some problems at home.
  And so it seems as though he--it--you know, it's hard to say where it's directed. It could just as easily be directed at his
  domestic critics. And they are, they are real. They're--and they exist.

  MR. GREGORY: But this administration went out of its way--the president sent a message directly to the Iranian people;
  the president made this speech in, in Cairo reframing the relationship with the Muslim world, and yet this is the
  response from the Iranian people. Or is it?

  VICE PRES. BIDEN: Well, well...

  MR. GREGORY: Do you think Iran is a democracy?

  VICE PRES. BIDEN: No. That's the question, is this the response, is this the accurate response we're getting? Is this the
  result of the Iranian people's wishes? The hope is that the Iranian people, all their votes have been counted, they've
  been counted fairly. But look, we just don't know enough, David. It's been less than 24 hours since the polls have
  closed.




                                                       91
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762321 Date: 10/30/2015
