      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783893 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL


From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Friday, October 21, 2011 1:13 PM
To:
Subject:                         Fw: Steve Jobs Biography Reveals He Told Obama, 'You're Headed For A One-Term
                                 Presidency'




From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Friday, October 21, 2011 12:14 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Steve Jobs Biography Reveals He Told Obama, 'You're Headed For A One-Term Presidency'



"Steve Jobs Biography Reveals He Told Obama, 'You're Headed For A One-Term Presidency" -
HuffPost Books; no byline: "In one of the most hotly-anticipated biographies of the year, 'Steve Jobs,' author
Walter Isaacson reveals that the Apple CEO offered to design political ads for President Obama's 2012
campaign despite being highly critical of the administration's policies ... Jobs, who was known for his prickly,
stubborn personality, almost missed meeting President Obama in the fall of 2010 because he insisted that the
president personally ask him for a meeting. Though his wife told him that Obama 'was really psyched to meet
with you,' Jobs insisted on the personal invitation, and the standoff lasted for five days. When he finally relented
and they met at the Westin San Francisco Airport, Jobs was characteristically blunt. He seemed to have
transformed from a liberal into a conservative. 'You're headed for a one-term presidency,' he told Obama at the
start of their meeting, insisting that the administration needed to be more business-friendly.

"As an example, Jobs described the ease with which companies can build factories in China compared to
the United States, where 'regulations and unnecessary costs' make it difficult for them. Jobs also criticized
America's education system, saying it was 'crippled by union work rules,' noted Isaacson. 'Until the teachers'
unions were broken, there was almost no hope for education reform.' Jobs proposed allowing principals to hire
and fire teachers based on merit, that schools stay open until 6 p.m. and that they be open 11 months a year.
Jobs suggested that Obama meet six or seven other CEOs who could express the needs of innovative businesses
-- but when White House aides added more names to the list, Jobs insisted that it was growing too big and that
'he had no intention of coming.'

"In preparation    for the dinner, Jobs exhibited his notorious attention to detail, telling venture capitalist
John Doerr that the menu of shrimp, cod and lentil salad was 'far too fancy' and objecting to a chocolate
truffle dessert . But he was overruled by the White House, which cited the president's fondness for cream pie.
Though Jobs was not that impressed by Obama, later telling Isaacson that his focus on the reasons that things
can't get done 'infuriates' him, they kept in touch and talked by phone a few more times. Jobs even offered to
help create Obama's political ads for the 2012 campaign. 'He had made the same offer in 2008, but he'd become
annoyed when Obama's strategist David Axelrod wasn't totally deferential,' writes Isaacson. Jobs later told the
author that he wanted to do for Obama what the legendary 'morning in America' ads did for Ronald Reagan."
http://huff.to/pg6yjP




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05783893 Date: 10/30/2015
