UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764315 Date: 10/30/2015

                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL




                                                      U.S. Department of Justice

                                                      Federal Bureau of Investigation


Office of the Director                                Washington, D.C. 20535-0001



                                                       August 21, 2009



  The Honorable Kenny MacAskill, MSP
  Cabinet Secretary for Justice
  Scottish Government
  St. Andrew's House
  Regent Road
  Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom
  EH1 3DG

   Dear Mr. Secretary:

                   Over the years I have been a prosecutor, and recently as the Director of the FBI, I
   have made it a practice not to comment on the actions of other prosecutors, since only the prose-
   cutor handling the case has all the facts and the law before him in reaching the appropriate deci-
   sion. Your decision to release Megrahi causes me to abandon that practice in this case. I do so
   because I am familiar with the facts, and the law, having been the Assistant Attorney General in
   charge of the investigation and indictment of Megrahi in 1991. And I do so because I am out-
   raged at your decision, blithely defended on the grounds of "compassion."

                   Your action in releasing Megrahi is as inexplicable as it is detrimental to the cause
   of justice. Indeed your action makes a mockery of the rule of law. Your action gives comfort to
   terrorists around the world who now believe that regardless of the quality of the investigation, the
   conviction by jury after the defendant is given all due process, and sentence appropriate to the
   crime, the terrorist will be freed by one man's exercise of "Compassion." Your action rewards a
   terrorist even though he never admitted to his role in this act of mass murder and even though
   neither he nor the government of Libya ever disclosed the names and roles of others who were
   responsible.

                   Your action makes a mockery of the emotions, passions and pathos of all those
   affected by the Lockerbie tragedy: the medical personnel who first faced the horror of 270
   bodies strewn in the fields around Lockerbie, and in the town of Lockerbie itself; the hundreds of
   volunteers who walked the fields of Lockerbie to retrieve any piece of debris related to the break-
   up of the plane; the hundreds of FBI agents and Scottish police who undertook an unprecedented
   global investigation to identify those responsible; the prosecutors who worked for years--in some
   cases a full career--to see justice done.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764315 Date: 10/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764315 Date: 10/30/2015




  The Honorable Kenny MacAskill, MSP


                   But most importantly, your action makes a mockery of the grief of the families
  who lost their own on December 21, 1988. You could not have spent much time with the fami-
  lies, certainly not as much time as others involved in the investigation and prosecution. You
  could not have visited the small wooden warehouse where the personal items of those who per-
  ished were gathered for identification--the single sneaker belonging to a teenager; the Syracuse
  sweatshirt never again to be worn by a college student returning home for the holidays; the toys
  in a suitcase of a businessman looking forward to spending Christmas with his wife and children.

                  You apparently made this decision without regard to the views of your partners in
  the investigation and prosecution of those responsible for the Lockerbie tragedy. Although the
  FBI and Scottish police, and prosecutors in both countries, worked exceptionally closely to hold
  those responsible accountable, you never once sought our opinion, preferring to keep your own
  counsel and hiding behind opaque references to "the need for compassion."

                 You have given the family members of those who died continued grief and frus-
  tration. You have given those who sought to assure that the persons responsible would be held
  accountable the back of your hand. You have given Megrahi a "jubilant welcome" in Tripoli,
  according to the reporting. Where, I ask, is the justice?

                                                    Sincerely yours,



                                                    Robert S. Mueller, III
                                                          Director




                                               2



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764315 Date: 10/30/2015
