       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784048 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                         Abedin, Hume <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Sunday, November 20, 2011 5:19 PM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: EU calls on Egyptian authorities to halt violence (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker
Sent: Sunday, November 20, 2011 05:05 PM
To: NEWS-EUR; NEWS-Mahogany
Subject: EU calls on Egyptian authorities to halt violence (Reuters)

BRUSSELS (Reuters) - The European Union's foreign policy chief urged interim authorities in Egypt on
Sunday to halt violence against protesters and ensure a democratic transition following the overthrow of Hosni
Mubarak in February.

   Catherine Ashton said in a statement she was "extremely concerned" about violent clashes over the weekend,
particularly in Cairo's Tahrir Square, where police backed by the army used batons and teargas on Sunday.

   Egypt's state news agency reported three dead in a second day of violence on Sunday and 192 wounded as
demonstrators demand the ruling generals hand power to civilians. Medical sources say as many as 11 people
died on Sunday.

  "I urge calm and restraint and condemn the use of violence in the strongest terms," she said. "There is no
doubt that the transitional process is a difficult and challenging one."

   "I reiterate that the interim authorities and all parties concerned have the crucial task of listening to the
people and protecting their democratic aspirations."

   Egypt is due to hold a parliamentary election starting on Nov. 28 but protesters accuse the army of seeking to
keep power from behind the scenes until a presidential election which may happen late next year or in early
2013.

   Ashton also said she was concerned about military trials and an ongoing emergency law in Egypt which was
revived by the interim military rulers after the toppling of Mubarak.

   "Law and order must be ensured in a manner respectful of human rights," she said. "Citizens and political
parties' demands that the transition moves forward and safeguards the principles of democracy must be listened
to."

  British Foreign Office minister Alistair Burt also condemned the clashes, saying in a statement the deaths
were "deeply regrettable".

    "It is important Egypt enters the coming elections in an atmosphere of calm and mutual respect," he said.

News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784048 Date: 10/30/2015
