       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761234 Date: 10/30/2015


                                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                           B6



From:                                Jake Sullivan <jake.sullivan
Sent:                                Wednesday, May 6, 2009 7:00 PM
To:
Cc:                                  H2
Subject:                             Re: Followup



I am working through your partial list of follow-ups. Below is a progress report.

What can we do to help protect the Christians in Iraq as requested by Ken Joseph whom we saw in Baghdad?


I have tasked NEA and other relevant bureaus and offices to provide some background and options on this. I will ride
herd on it to make sure you get something focused.

JoDee Winterhof raised questions about how the PRTs and the language DOD uses about them are problematic for NGOs like
CARE.


I connected with JoDee today and she sent me more information on CARE'S concerns. I told her we would look into it
and get back to her. Piper Campbell and others in Jack Lew's shop now have the materials JoDee sent, are reviewing
them, and will come back with a response. I will keep you posted on this.

Pls ask one of Holbrooke's people if they ever talked to Wolfgang Danspeckgruber at Princeton about building a railroad in
Aghanistan.


Paul Jones says he is not aware of any conversations with Danspeckgruber. He or someone else on the team will
reach out soon.

Also Dr. Arthur Keys at International Relief + Development wanted to talk w someone from Holbrooke's team about development
in Af.


Paul Jones says that he met with Dr. Keys and a team from 1RD and they have a number of good ideas. He is going to
follow up with Dr. Keys later this week or early next.

I asked the Spec IG for Af Recon, Arnold Fields, to alert us to problems as soon as they can. I'm not sure how to formalize this
or even if it's appropriate. Let's discuss.


Cheryl and I are meeting with the Special IGs for both Afghanistan and Iraq to find out what our options are in this
regard, and also more generally to get a handle on what they are doing and how we can be responsive.

We are hoping these meetings will be on Friday- if not, they will be early next week - and we will keep you apprised.

What are the "Iran Watchers"?

The Iran Watchers are a group of about 20-odd Farsi-speaking FSOs stationed in Ash gabat, Baghdad, Baku,
Berlin, Istanbul, London, and the Iran Regional Presence Office in Dubai. They do political reporting on
Iranian expat communities and on political and economic developments within Iran (The Regional Presence
Office also does Iranian immigrant visa processing).

The Iran Watchers Conference — organized by the Office of Iranian Affairs — brought them all back to DC this
week to share insights and assessments with their DC-based colleagues and counterparts at Treasury, NSC,



       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761234 Date: 10/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761234 Date: 10/30/2015




and the Intel Community. (The last conference was in Dubai in 2007.) I have asked for a one-page
backg rounder to come up to you tomorrow.



On Wed, May 6, 2009 at 6:59 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemai1.com> wrote:
 Here's a partial list of followup from our last trip and the last week:

What can we do to help protect the Christians in Iraq as requested by Ken Joseph whom we saw in Baghdad?

JoDee Winterhof raised questions about how the PRTs and the language DOD uses about them are problematic
for NGOs like care.

Pis ask one of Holbrooke's people if they ever talked to Wolfgang Danspeckgruber at Princeton about building
a railroad in Aghanistan.

Also Dr. Arthur Keys at International Relief + Development wanted to talk w someone from Holbrooke's team
about development in Af.

I asked the Spec IG for Af Recon, Arnold Fields, to alert us to problems as soon as they can. I'm not sure how
to formalize this or even if it's appropriate. Let's discuss.

What are the "Iran Watchers"?




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761234 Date: 10/30/2015
