     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789191 Date: 10/30/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                              Tuesday, March 6, 2012 6:38 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: IRELAND'S FRIEND DON PAYNE DIES



Fyi - I didn't know he was such a friend to ireland.
Stella coming thursday.


From: Stella O'Leary [mailto:irldems@erols.corn]
Sent: Tuesday, March 06, 2012 03:22 PM
To: undisclosed-recipients <undisclosed-recipients:;>
Subject: IRELAND'S FRIEND DON PAYNE DIES

DONALD M. PAYNE

Irish American Democrats mourn the passing of Ireland's great friend, Congressman Donald M.
Payne, the first African American Member of Congress from New Jersey. Congressman Payne was
a great friend of Ireland. He was recognized as having the most pro-Irish voting record in the entire
U.S. Congress. He introduced a measure to ban the use of plastic bullets by the British Army and a
bill to support an inquiry into the deaths of Pat 'Finucane and Rosemary Nelson. Congressman
Payne championed the cause of Irish deportees, urging that they be permitted to remain in the U.S.

A frequent visitor to Ireland, he accompanied former President Bill Clinton on his historic trip to Northern
Ireland to lay the groundwork for a peace settlement. He also traveled to South Africa with his Irish friend
Niall Mellon, to support the work of Irish volunteers building homes to replace shacks in the townships of
South Africa.

He joined Irish nationalists in monitoring the Orange Order parades to document violations against the Catholic
residents of Garavaghy Road. A strong supporter of the peace process, he personally met with leaders of all
parties and with the U.S. Envoy to Northern Ireland, to encourage successful implementation of the Good
Friday Agreement. Congressman Payne delivered the Frank Cahill Memorial Lecture in Belfast and was named
the winner of the Pat Finucane Award by the Irish American Unity Conference, in recognition of his support for
human rights.

Congressman Payne was an advocate in Congress for the International Fund for Ireland, believing it to be the
best instrument to build the peace and prevent a return to violence in Northern Ireland.

 Stella O'Leary
 President
 Irish American Democrats
 (202) 362-9064
 irldems(&,erols.com www.irishamericandemocrats.org




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05789191 Date: 10/30/2015
