      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764653 Date: 07/31/2015


                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.goV>
Sent:                              Tuesday, September 08, 2009 8:59 AM
To:
Subject:                           School event


Don't think oscar was able to get this to you before you left. Its a few ny notes from chris falvo before the school event:

TO: Secretary Clinton
FROM: Chris Falvo
DATE: September 8, 2009
RE: NY Local Issues

Schools - NYC public schools open on Wednesday, September 9th. As a result, you will be visiting a charter school that
opened a couple of weeks ago instead of a public school. Mike Mulgrew, who took over as President of the UFT when
Randi left for AFT, will be present at the event and should be acknowledged in your remarks. His aides who you have
met numerous times, Dick Riley and Bridget Rein, will also be present. Mike appointed Dick as his press secretary last
month.

H1N1 - Mayor Bloomberg did a rollout earlier this week on NYC's plans to handle this health concern, and a significant
portion discusses schools. Unlike what was done in the Spring, this time closing schools will be a last resort. Reason is
that they found kids still contaminate each other by going to movies and playgrounds when the schools are closed, so
instead they are asking sick kids to stay home.
And if four percent of a student body experiences the flu on a single day, a doctor will visit to monitor the situation.
Every student in a NYC school will be offered free H1N1 flu shots or mist once a vaccine is available.

Primary day - September 15th is primary day. In addition to Bill Thompson for Mayor, the primary races that have been
closely followed are Public Advocate and City Comptroller. Running for Public Advocate are Councilmember Eric Gioia,
Councilmember Bill DeBlasio, former Public Advocate Mark Green, and civil rights lawyer Norman Siegel. Running for
Comptroller are four Councilmembers: John Lui, Melinda Katz, David Yassky, and David Weprin.

Rangel - As of last week House Speaker Pelosi plans to allow Rep. Rangel to keep his chairmanship of the Ways and
Means Committee despite his ethics problems. According to amended forms recently filed with the House, Rangel failed
to disclose at least $800,000 in assets and income since 2002. This comes amid a House ethics investigation into his
failure to report income from and pay taxes on a villa in the Dominican Republic and his ties to a real-estate developer
who leased him four rent-stabilized apartments in New York. The panel is also looking into Rangel's fundraising and
whether he improperly used his office to raise money for a public policy center in his name at the City University of New
York. Rangel has denied any wrongdoing and says its accounting mistakes and simple oversights. The NY Post and
Buffalo News have called for his resignation. Speaking at a health-care forum in Washington Heights last Tuesday, Rangel
said that bias and prejudice toward Obama are fueling opposition to health-care reform. "Some Americans have not
gotten over the fact that Obama is president of the United States. They go to sleep wondering, 'How did this happen?' "
Rangel said. Rangel then likened the battle over health-care expansion for the uninsured to the fight for civil rights.
"Why do we have to wait for the right to vote? Why can't we get what God has given us? That is the right to live as
human beings and not negotiate with white southerners and not count the votes. Just do the right thing," he said. After
the forum, Rangel insisted he was not smearing opponents as racists. "What I'm saying is, if you watch the town-hall
meetings, people were angry and did not care what the answer was to some of their questions. They were angry with
their member of Congress, period," he said. Rangel's comments came less than two weeks after Governor Paterson
claimed he has been the victim of a racist white media -- and also suggested that opposition to Obama's plan is racially
driven. The White House disagreed with Paterson's comments.


                                                             120
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764653 Date: 07/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764653 Date: 07/31/2015




Little League World Series - Staten Island's little league team, the South Shore Nationals, made it to the Little League
World Series, but they lost the title two weeks ago with a 4-1 loss to the Southwest Regional Champs, McAllister Park
American, from San Antonio.

9/11 - Jay Winuk, founder of the My Good Deed organization, and brother of 9/11 victim, Glenn Winuk, notified us that
DOJ has finally award his brother the 9/11 Heroes Medal of Valor. You were very supportive of Jay's efforts and wrote
letters to DOJ. Glenn worked at a law firm near the WTC, but was also a volunteer FF. After helping to evacuate his
building he went to the WTC area to help and unfortunately died when the South Tower fell. Senator Schumer and Rep
Pete King held a press conference on Tuesday making the announcement at a park named in Glenn's honor in their
hometown of Jericho, Long Island. Fyi, Jay will be at Friday's 9/11 Servicenation event.




                                                    121
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764653 Date: 07/31/2015
