       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766810 Date: 07/31/2015



                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL




From:                           Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                           Sunday, October 25, 2009 9:08 AM
To:
Subject                         FW: FYI - Raj Shah Background and Now Lael




Lael Brainard
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Lad Brainard was a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution from 2001 to 2009, and served as the vice
president and director of the Global Economy and Development program from June 2006 to March 16, 2009.
Brainard has been nominated by President Barack Obama to be Under Secretary of the Treasury for
International Affairs.al

Brainard served as Deputy National Economic Adviser and Chair of the Deputy Secretaries Committee on
International Economics during the Clinton Administration. As Deputy Director of the National Economic
Council, she helped build a new White House organization to address global economic challenges such as the
Asian financial crisis and China's WTO entry. As the US Sherpa to the G8, she helped shape the 2000 G8
Development Summit that for the first time included leaders of the poorest nations and laid the foundations for
the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB, and Malaria. She has been mentioned as a likely U.S. Trade Representative
in the Obama administration. 121

Previously, Brainard served as Associate Professor of Applied Economics at the MIT Sloan School of
Management, where her publications made important contributions on the relationship between offshore
production, trade, and jobs; the measurement of structural and cyclical unemployment in the US economy; and
strategic trade policy. Brainard has also worked at McKinsey & Co. advising corporate clients on strategic
challenges and on microenterprise in West Africa.

Brainard is an alumna of the George School class of 1979, a boarding school in Newtown, PA. Brainard
received masters and doctoral degrees in Economics from Harvard University, where she was a National
Science Foundation Fellow. She graduated with highest honors from Wesleyan University with a degree from
the College of Social Studies. She is the recipient of a White House Fellowship and a Council on Foreign
Relations International Affairs Fellowship, a Marshall Scholar elect, and a member of the Wesleyan University
Board of Trustees, Council on Foreign Relations, and Aspen Strategy Group.

Publications
Brainard is co-editor of Too Poor For Peace? (2007); co-editor of Offshoring White Collar Work (2006); editor
of Transforming the Development Landscape: the Role of the Private Sector (2006) and Security by Other
Means: Foreign Assistance, Global Poverty and American Leadership (2006); and coauthor of The Other War:
Global Poverty and the Millennium Challenge Corporation (2004). On March 23, 2009 she was nominated as
Under-Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs by President Barack Obama.

Select recent publications include "Services Offshoring, American Jobs, and the Global Economy," with Robert
E. Litan, Perspectives on Work (Winter 2005); "Reassessing National Security," with Michael O'Hanlon, in
Alice Rivlin and Isabel Sawhill, eds., Restoring Fiscal Sanity (2004); "Building Common Ground on Trade
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766810 Date: 07/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766810 Date: 07/31/2015




Demands More Than a Name Change," with Hal Shapiro, The George Washington International Law Review,
2003; "Compassionate Conservatism Confronts Global Poverty," The Washington Quarterly, Spring 2003;
"The Implications for the Global Economy of America's Campaign against Terrorism," Cambridge Review of
International Affairs, July 2002; and "Are U.S. Multinationals Exporting U.S. Jobs?" with David Riker, in
David Greenaway and Douglas Nelson, eds., Globalization and Labour Markets (Elgar, 2001).

Brainard is married to Kurt Campbell, who was nominated in April as assistant secretary of state for East Asian
and Pacific affairs.121



From: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Sunday, October 25, 2009 9:06 AM
To: 'H'
Subject: FYI - Raj Shah Background



Rajiv Shah
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Current Under Secretary Rajiv Shah

Rajiv "Raj" Shah (born March 9, 1973) is presently Under Secretary of Agriculture for Research, Education,
and Economics (REE) and Chief Scientist at the United States Department of Agriculture.

Prior to his appointment at USDA, Shah worked in a range of leadership roles at the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation including Director of Agricultural Development, Director of Financial Services, leader of the
Strategic Opportunities initiative and manager of the Foundation's $1.5 billion commitment to the Vaccine
Fund. He also came up with the idea for the International Finance Facility for Immunization to transform the
global system of vaccine financing, and worked to secure donor commitments of more than $5 billion for this
facility. Before joining the Gates Foundation, Shah was a health care policy advisor on the Al Gore presidential
campaign, 2000 and a member of Governor Ed Rendell's (D-PA) transition committee on health.

Shah earned his M.D. from the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine and M.Sc. in Health Economics
at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. He is a graduate of the University of Michigan and
also attended the London School of Economics.

President Obama announced Shah's selection as Under Secretary of Research, Education, and Economics and
Chief Scientist on April 17, 2009. Shah's nomination was confirmed by the United States Senate by unanimous
consent on May 12, 2009.

Early life and family
Born to Indian immigrant parents who settled in Ann Arbor, Michigan in the late 60's, Raj Shah grew up in the
Detroit area and attended Wylie Groves High School.

He lives with his wife, Shivam, and their two young children, Sajan and Amna. He has one sister, Ami Shah,
who is a medical doctor.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766810 Date: 07/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766810 Date: 07/31/2015




Career
Raj Shah is currently the Under Secretary of Research, Education and Economics (REE) and Chief Scientist at
the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The REE mission area provides the science that federal agencies, policy
makers, researchers, and others draw on to meet challenges facing America's food and agriculture system. The
four REE agencies are the Agricultural Research Service (including the National Agricultural Library), the
Economic Research Service, the National Agricultural Statistics Service, and the Cooperative State Research,
Education and Extension Service.

Prior to his appointment at USDA Raj worked in a range of leadership roles at the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation to help the poorest people on earth lead healthy and productive lives.

As the Director of the Agricultural Development program, Shah oversaw the foundation's multi-billion dollar
portfolio of grant and program-related investments to help transform rural economies throughout the developing
world and help small farmers and their families overcome hunger and poverty. He led efforts to create the
Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa, helped recruit its leadership including UN Secretary General Kofi
Annan, and serves on its Board of Directors. He oversaw grant portfolios in science and technology; farmer
productivity; market access; and policy, statistics and advocacy; and managed a team of more than 60
professionals. He also developed innovative partnerships with private industry, the United Nations, the World
Bank, and country governments around the world, where he was an active voice on issues related to food and
hunger.

As the Foundation's first Director for the Financial Services to the Poor portfolio, Shah worked with a broad
range of financial institutions and other donors to determine how Foundation resources could best amplify the
field's collective impact. Previously, he led the Strategic Opportunities initiative which worked with Foundation
co-chairs to identify, assess and recommend new areas of giving. This process led to the creation of the
Foundation's Global Development Program.

Shah's early work with the Foundation focused on global health. As Deputy Director for Policy and Finance,
Raj managed the Foundation's $1.5 billion commitment to the Vaccine Fund — an effort referred to by Bill and
Melinda Gates as their best investment. He also came up with the idea for the International Finance Facility for
Immunization to transform the global system of vaccine financing and worked to secure donor commitments of
more than $5 billion for this facility. The World Health Organization estimates this initiative will save more
than five million children's lives through the next decade, and a New York Times article described the effort as
"a clever way to reduce the burden of costly diseases now and save money in the future."

Shah previously worked as a health care policy advisor on the Gore 2000 presidential campaign, was an active
supporter of the Barack Obama presidential campaign, 2008, and served as a member of Pennsylvania Governor
Ed Rendell's health transition committee. He also co-founded Health Systems Analytics (a health care
consulting firm), served as an advisor to the City of Philadelphia's Public Health Commissioner, and worked at
the World Health Organization. In addition, he co-founded multiple nonprofit organizations focused on
increasing the political awareness and civic engagement of minority communities, including Project Impact for
South Asian Americans.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766810 Date: 07/31/2015
