      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765644 Date: 07/31/2015




                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART B4,B6



From:                              sbwhoeop
Sent:                              Tuesday, November 10, 2009 11:47 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fwd: From Joe Wilson


FYI. How did it go in Berlin? Looked terrific. What does Merkel think of the Blair option? Sid


    Original Message
From: Joseph Wilson
To: sbwhoeop
Sent: Tue, Nov 10, 2009 11:44 am
Subject: From Joe Wilson

Sid,
Could you please pass the following to HRC. Thanks. Joe

Dear Madame Secretary,

When we last spoke at the Corporate Council on Africa you were kind enough to invite me to pay a call on you when in
DC. As it turns out, I will be in Washington for most of next week, arriving the afternoon of the 16th and returning to Santa
Fe the evening of the 201h ( the return is flexible if you were available to see me over the weekend.) I realize that you are
traveling this week and possibly into next, but I wanted to reach out to you. As I wrote to you earlier, I am a director for
Symbion Power and may soon assume more direct responsibility for all of Africa as Symbion expands there from its
current operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. Symbion's competitive advantage is its reliance on local partnering and
human capacity development in the execution of its projects. Its success in the most difficult and dangerous
environments has been very impressive, as the four minute video that Sid gave to you on my behalf demonstrates. We
now want to bring that business model and philosophy to Africa where the social entrepreneurship and the development
of skilled labor is imperative for Africa's long term economic prospects, as you have so forcefully articulated in past
comments.
                                                                           am very enthusiastic about Symbion. It is one or
the very few American companies outside the petroleum sector willing to establish itself and to undertake projects in
Africa. With our record of success elsewhere, we are certain that our approach to project development and execution will
mesh nicely with African needs and U.S. policy priorities.

Valerie, Trevor and Samantha join me in extending our best wishes to you, Bill, and Chelsea as we enter the holiday
season.

Joe
Ambassador Joseph Wilson
Director, Symbion Power
Email: joseph.wilsonsymbion-power.com
Tel. No. +1 505 629-9142
website: www.symbion-power.com ;


This transmission is intended only for the use of the addressee and may contain information that is privileged, confidential
and exempt from disclosure under applicable law. If you are not the intended recipient, any use of this communication is
strictly prohibited. If you have received this communication in error, please notify immediately.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765644 Date: 07/31/2015
