     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765160 Date: 07/31/2015


                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                           B6



From:                             sbwhoeop
Sent:                             Thursday, November 5, 2009 10:18 AM
To:                               H
Subject:                          FYI: has some valuable info on af/pak. Sid



tittp://www.qpi.corn/Ton NewsiAnalvsis/2009111104/Corranentary-Wariords-R-UsitiP1-16551?57351379/




   ornment-                      Nanot                   T i s
                                                              u

  ARNAUD DE BORCHGRAVE
UPI Editor at Large

WASHINGTON, Nov. 4 (UPI) -- If we are successful beyond President Obama's wildest dreams -- e.g., the
Taliban is wiped out and a tough new Afghan government does not allow al-Qaida or other terrorists to conspire
against us on their territory -- would that make us safer from radical Islam? The answer, of course, is no,
because this is riot about geography. Two veteran intelligence operatives with much Middle Eastern and Afghan
experience, speaking not for attribution, agreed a stable, secure Afghanistan doesn't change the equation, at least
not significantly.

The popular perception of al-Qaida in Afghanistan is the same propaganda news clip, shown a gazillion times
over the last eight years, replete with terrorist "trainees" in shalwar-kameez (knee-length shirts over baggy
pantaloons) running through obstacle courses and emerging from tunnels, presumably to kill us all in our beds.
Al-Qaida doesn't need commando-steeled volunteers to attack the United States and its allies. For the next Sept.
11, the chances are they have already selected highly motivated, brainwashed wackjobs among the graduates of
Pakistan's madrassas, who look forward to a one button push to the land of plenty in the sky where 72 impatient
maidens await their arrival. Al-Qaida's "martyrs" don't need Afghan training camps for WMD terrorism. In fact,
to be inconspicuous, they should not have the physique of an avoid-at-all-cost likely to arouse suspicion.

Al-Qaida does not need Afghanistan for its next terrorist objective. In fact, those who follow events in
Afghanistan closely were taken aback when Obama said Afghanistan was a war of necessity because that's
where al-Qaida. is. They haven't been there since Afghanistan was liberated in October 2001. They moved to
Pakistan's tribal areas where they attracted volunteers from the Middle East and Europe. When a reconstituted
Taliban insurgent force re-entered Afghanistan in large numbers in 2004, al-Qaida was not interested in its now
insecure old training camps. Even if Pakistan's current offensive.against the Taliban and al-Qaida in the tribal
areas is successful, al-Qaida is not an entity that can be captured or destroyed. Its clandestine operatives are
widely scattered in the Middle East, Africa, Europe, North and South America.

As alternatives to Afghanistan and Pakistan, Yemen, in the vernacular of the intelligence community, will do/is
doing it. Somalia will do/is doing it. West African states whose writ doesn't extend much beyond their capitals
will do/are doing it. Grimy North African suburbs of major French cities will do/are doing it. British provincial
towns with Pakistani enclaves will do/are doing it. And the Internet's thousands of pro-al-Qaida Web sites will
do/are doing it.

Osama bin Laden and his deputy Ayman al-Zawahiri are believed to be comfortably installed in a tribal chiefs
compound somewhere near Quetta, the capital of Pakistan's constantly rebellious Baluchistan province, which

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765160 Date: 07/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765160 Date: 07/31/2015



has 48 percent of the country's land with. only 10 million of its 175 million people. There is no al-Qaida central
issuing orders to thousands of adherents the world over.

If the:re is no connection between Afghanistan and the core problem of "no more Sept. lls," what are the United
States and 41 friendly nations doing there? Even in the event of a Taliban victory in the years to come, the
Taliban would not be stupid enough to invite al-Qaida back. Three months prior to Sept. 11, 2001, there was
palpable tension between Taliban leader Mullah Omar and bin Laden. Omar complained that bin Laden was
issuing "too many fatwas (religious edicts) which he has no business doing as he didn't complete his religious
education." Omar also prevented journalists from seeing bin Laden. The Taliban leader knows he lost power
and his country because of what bin Laden and his terrorists did to the United States.

In today's Afghanistan almost everything turns out to be corruption and mismanagement. The average citizen
has seen little benefit from expenditures in the $250 billion range -- on top of $1 trillion in Iraq. The .U.S. effort
has been plagued by fraud, laced with mismanagement and bereft of strategic focus. One example among many
others came in 2007 when the United States awarded a massive contract worth some $300 million to A:EY, a
Florida-based company, to supply the Afghan army with 52 types of ammo, chiefly bullets for AK-47s. All
requirements for safety inspections, mandatory for all ammo delivered to U.S. forces, were removed. Thus AEY
was able to shop around in Eastern Europe for the cheapest ammo available. Millions of rounds of old Chinese
ammo made in the 1960s turned out to be substandard. and dangerous.

The State Department was aware of what was going on but did not object as speed was the only criterion. AEY
and its officers were eventually indicted in Florida. But U.S. officials involved got off with a slap on the wrist.
Wherever U.S. inspectors look, they find fraud and abuse. There are even cases -- reported by GlobalPost
reporter Jean Mackenzie -- of American contractors paying bribes to the Taliban to ensure aid projects are not
disrupted. This is a recipe for a war without end. She also reports a disguised Taliban office in Kabul that
reviews all aid projects and determines the amount to be paid to the Taliban.

If true, the United States is paying the Afghan government to fight the Taliban while also paying the Taliban to
fight the Afghan government.

The key lies in Pakistan. Almost all terrorist trails in Europe lead back to Pakistan -- and its madrassas. These
are the free Koranic schools that have stepped into the vacuum of no education system for the poor as the
military takes up 50 percent of government revenue. A fraction of what the United States has spent in Iraq and
Afghanistan would go a long way to turning Pakistan around. Instead, Congress, in its infinite wisdom, after
authorizing $1.2 trillion in both wars allocated $7.5 billion to Pakistan over five years -- with umpteen caveats.
In a country of 175 million, a drop in the proverbial bucket.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765160 Date: 07/31/2015
