    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766457 Date: 07/31/2015



                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                           sbwhoeop
Sent:                           Friday, October 23, 2009 10:25 AM
To:
Subject:                         Memo on Tony Blair, politics behind Eu presidency & Berlin trip. Sid
Attachments:                     hrc memo blair berlin 102309.docx




                                       CONFIDENTIAL




                                       October 23, 2009



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Tony Blair, EU presidency, Tory Party, & Berlin trip


One of your agenda items behind the scenes on your Berlin trip can be to discuss the future of the EU, the
European presidency and the prospects of Tony Blair. If Blair does not become EU president the position will
likely be filled by a third rank nonentity in the Brussels bureaucratic mode incapable of realizing the
possibilities in the creation of the office, continuing the feebleness of Europe as a political idea and reality. Of
course, it is in the US interest to have a strong Europe—and the naming of the first European president might be
the most important opportunity for the US to strengthen Europe, to give it actual sinew, for a long time and a
long time to come.

The Conservative Party is split over Europe and Blair. Hague represents the Tory right, which is the center of
the party. He is supported prominently by Boris Johnson, mayor of London, also known as the Tory "clown
prince." The responsible wing, such as Chris Patten, the former European Commissioner, and Douglas Hurd,
former Foreign Secretary, are pro-European and not necessarily hostile to having Blair there as a counter-weight
to the anti-Europeans of their own government, helping to tilt things more their way. All present themselves as
"pro-American," sine qua non of Conservative rhetoric, though there is a nasty anti-American undercurrent on
the Tory right. Hague tried to paper this over in his conference with you and was disingenuous about the nature
of the far right parties the Tories are aligned with in Europe. Nobody in the UK or Europe is fooled.

Cameron is trying to balance the wings of the Conservative Party. On domestic policy, he is more radical than
his Etonian image suggests (profound connotations of the Conservative paternalistic, aristocratic one-nation
tradition), more influenced by the Thatcher legacy, more like George W. Bush influenced by Reagan and
Reaganism than by his father and vestigial moderate Republicanism. On foreign policy, Cameron is unsure,
inexperienced, oblique, and largely uncommitted. So far his foreign policy is little more than projection of his
domestic politics, especially his need to keep his party behind him going into the election. His political

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766457 Date: 07/31/2015
