       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765762 Date: 07/31/2015



                                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MilIsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Saturday, November 14, 2009 3:50 PM
To:
Subject                            Fw: Last thoughts



Let me know when you are up

    Original Message ----
From: Shannon, Thomas A
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob
Sent: Sat Nov 14 08:43:30 2009
Subject: Last thoughts

I want to thank all three of you for the tremendous support you have given me and WHA since the beginning of the
Obama Administration. I am especially grateful to the Secretary for the confidence she has shown in me, and her
willingness to make me part of her team. I consider this an enormous honor and I hope that I have met her
expectations. I look forward to continuing to be part of her team from Brazil.

I am preparing a "Last Thoughts" paper for the Secretary, which will look back over the past ten months, identify
accomplishments, and point toward what I think needs to come next. I will share this paper with Arturo.

Regarding Honduras, Craig did heroic work there this week, and we are moving toward a potentially big step by
Micheletti that would open space for many of our allies to support the elections. As we move forward, it is important to
note that the solution to the crisis is becoming more and more Honduran with each step in the process. This is a good
thing, because it increases the chances that the resolution will be peaceful, enduring, and a platform for the political
reforms that must come next.

It is worth highlighting that the Secretary, through her outreach to both sides and her clear commitment to the future of
Honduran democracy, has positioned us as an honest broker in this dispute. The only honest broker. Everyone one else
in this drama -- from Insulza to the Brazilians to the Albinos -- has other agendas and motives in play. In this regard, we
are the only hope of the Honduran people. The internal dialogue taking place, within the de facto regime, among its
supporters, and between the Micheletti and Zelaya camps, is the product of our engagement. No one else could have
done this. I urge that you keep this in mind as we move forward and as we consider how we will support the November
29 elections.

Finally, I leave behind a great Bureau. I believe it is the best in the State Department. Craig and the other DASes are
superb, and I believe we have an extraordinary cadre of Ambassadors. This is a huge resource for the Secretary and the
President. Use it.

Again, my deepest thanks to you and the Secretary.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765762 Date: 07/31/2015
