UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765663 Date: 07/31/2015




       U.S. GLOBAL
       LEADERSHIP
       COALITION                                                                            RELEASE IN FULL



   FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE                                                                 Contact: Richard Parker
   November 10, 2009                                                                             202-730-4163

               USGLC Applauds Choice of Dr. Rajiv Shah as USAID Administrator
          In Choosing Dr. Shah, President Signals Important Role Development Plays in Foreign Policy

   Washington, DC — The U.S. Global Leadership Coalition released the following statement from Executive
   Director Liz Schrayer on President Obama's announcement of Dr. Rajiv Shah to be Administrator of the
   U.S. Agency for International Development:

   "The USGLC applauds the President's nomination of Dr. Rajiv Shah to be USAID Administrator as yet
   another example of the President's commitment to elevating our civilian-led, smart power tools. With a
   robust International Affairs Budget request for FY 2010, a pledge to double foreign assistance by 2015, a
   Presidential Study Directive on Global Development and the State Department's Quadrennial Diplomacy
   and Development Review, the Administration continues to demonstrate the essential role development and
   diplomacy play in our foreign policy.

   "Rajiv Shah is a fresh and dynamic addition to President Obama's foreign policy team. Dr. Shah will bring
   expertise and energy to a critical agency in need of strong, empowered leadership. His career in global
   development, global health and agricultural development give him real perspective to lead USAID. He is
   already an important player in the Administration's food security initiative, and his additional background in
   fighting global poverty and promoting global health make him an ideal candidate for this important post.

   "The USGLC's broad, bipartisan coalition welcomes Dr. Shah's nomination to be USAID Administrator, and
   we look forward to working with him to strengthen the role of development."

   The U.S. Global Leadership Coalition (www.usglc.org) is a broad-based influential network of 400
   businesses and NGOs; national security and foreign policy experts; and business, faith-based, academic
   and community leaders in all 50 states who support a smart power approach of elevating diplomacy and
   development alongside defense in order to build a better, safer world.

                                                         ###




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765663 Date: 07/31/2015
