        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765810 Date: 07/31/2015



                                                                                           RELEASE
                                                                                           IN FULL



From:                             Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                             Tuesday, December 1, 2009 4:51 PM
To:
Subject                           Fw: Washington Post Article on Pakistan



Will also print



From: Adams, David S
To: Abedin, Huma
Cc: Sullivan, Jacob 3; Verma, Richard R; Turk, David M
Sent: Tue Dec 01 16:50:54 2009
Subject: Washington Post Article on Pakistan

Huma — The Secretary asked to see a copy of this article from yesterday's Washington Post. Would you pass it
to her? Thanks.


U.S. offers new role for Pakistan
A BROADER PARTNERSHIP
Importance of country to Afghan effort recognized

By Karen DeYoung
Washington Post Staff Writer
Monday, November 30, 2009

President Obama has offered Pakistan an expanded strategic partnership, including additional military and
economic cooperation, while warning with unusual bluntness that its use of insurgent groups to pursue policy
goals "cannot continue."

The offer, including an effort to help reduce tensions between Pakistan and India, was contained in a two-page
letter delivered to President Asif Ali Zardari this month by Obama national security adviser James L. Jones. It
was accompanied by assurances from Jones that the United States will increase its military and civilian efforts
in Afghanistan and that it plans no early withdrawal.

Obama's speech Tuesday night at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, N.Y., will address primarily the
Afghanistan aspects of the strategy. But despite the public and political attention focused on the number of new
troops, Pakistan has been the hot core of the months-long strategy review. The long-term consequences of
failure there, the review concluded, far outweigh those in Afghanistan.

"We can't succeed without Pakistan," a senior administration official involved in the White House review said.
"You have to differentiate between public statements and reality. There is nobody who is under any illusions
about this."

This official and others, all of whom spoke about the closely held details of the new strategy on the condition of
anonymity, emphasized that without "changing the nature of U.S.-Pakistan relations in a new direction, you're
not going to win in Afghanistan," as one put it. "And if you don't win in Afghanistan, then Pakistan will
automatically be imperiled, and that will make Afghanistan look like child's play."


        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765810 Date: 07/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765810 Date: 07/31/2015




Proffered U.S. carrots, outlined during Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton's October visit to Islamabad,
center on a far more comprehensive and long-term bilateral relationship. It would feature enhanced
development and trade assistance; improved intelligence collaboration and a more secure and upgraded military
equipment pipeline; more public praise and less public criticism of Pakistan; and an initiative to build greater
regional cooperation among Pakistan, India and Afghanistan.

Obama called for closer collaboration against all extremist groups, and his letter named five: al-Qaeda, the
Afghan Taliban, the Haqqani network, Lashkar-e-Taiba, and the Pakistani Taliban organization known as
Tehrik-e-Taliban. Using vague diplomatic language, he said that ambiguity in Pakistan's relationship with any
of them could no longer be ignored.

Jones, a retired Marine Corps general, was more precise in conversations with top Pakistani government and
military leaders, U.S. and foreign officials said, stating that certain things have to happen in Pakistan to ensure
Afghanistan's security. If Pakistan cannot deliver, he warned, the United States may be impelled to use any
means at its disposal to rout insurgents based along Pakistan's western and southern borders with Afghanistan.

Current U.S. policy includes the use of missiles fired from unmanned drones on insurgent locations limited to
roughly 50 miles inside the western border; training in two military camps for the Pakistani Frontier Corps; and
intelligence exchanges. It prohibits kinetic, or active, operations by U.S. ground forces inside Pakistan.

While praising Pakistani military offensives against groups that pose a domestic threat -- primarily the alliance
of groups known as Tehrik-e-Taliban, in the Swat Valley and South Waziristan -- Jones made it clear that the
administration expects more.

The rollout of the new strategy is being coordinated with principal U.S. allies, including Britain, whose prime
minister, Gordon Brown, said Sunday, "People are going to ask why, eight years after 2001, Osama bin Laden
has never been near to being caught."

"Al-Qaeda has a base in Pakistan," Brown said in an interview with Sky News. "That base is still there -- they
are able to recruit from abroad. The Pakistan authorities must convince us that they are taking all the action that
is necessary to deal with that threat."

Expansion of the U.S.-Pakistan relationship will require overcoming significant public and political mistrust in
both countries. Officials said that they recognize the difficulty in delivering on either U.S. promises or threats,
and that "our leverage over Pakistan is very limited," the senior administration official said.

At the same time, although the administration's goal is to demonstrate a new level and steadfastness of support,
short-term U.S. demands may threaten Pakistan's already fragile political stability.

"It's going to be a game of cat-and-mouse with them for a while," another official said, adding that "what we're
trying to do is to force them to recalculate" where their advantage lies.

The Pakistan strategy is complicated by a number of factors, including the fact that any indication of increased
U.S. involvement there generates broad mistrust. Zardari's political weakness is an additional hazard for a new
bilateral relationship. He is disliked by the military and is challenged by the political opposition and his own
prime minister; he also remains under a cloud of long-standing corruption charges. Less than a third of
Pakistan's population voices approval for him in polls. Obama is even less popular there, with approval ratings
in the low double digits.

Many of the broad powers that Zardari assumed from his predecessor, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, who seized
power in a 1999 military coup and was forced to resign last year, are being whittled away. On Friday, Zardari

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765810 Date: 07/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765810 Date: 07/31/2015




turned over control of Pakistan's nuclear arsenal to Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani, who is held in much
higher favor by the military.

Zardari's Musharraf-era powers to fire the elected government and appoint top military officials are also under
challenge, and a law protecting government officials from corruption prosecution expired Saturday. On Sunday,
the leading political opposition group called for him to give up the additional powers, and Zardari, who had
pledged to do so, said he will act "soon." The administration expects Zardari's position to continue to weaken,
leaving him as a largely ceremonial president even if he manages to survive in office.

Senior U.S. officers, including the Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman, Adm. Mike Mullen, have made repeated
relationship-building trips to Pakistan, and training programs in this country for Pakistani officers are expanding
after being moribund for years.

U.S. officials have long referred to Pakistani military and intelligence officers who are sympathetic to or
actively support insurgent groups fighting in Afghanistan as "rogue elements." More recently, they have
described those relationships as more direct and institutional within a divided military. "For the things that we
care about," a U.S. official said, "the real decision-maker is the military." It has long been hedging its bets in
Afghanistan; the military has positioned itself to prevent inroads by India in the event of a U.S. withdrawal, and
against a 30-year history of being used and then rejected by shifting U.S. policy aims.

"Our game is to convince them that our commitment to Afghanistan and the region is long-term," the official
said of the military. "We're not going to pack up our bags and leave them as soon as we're done. We have to
create a situation in which they see a much more positive interest in closer relations with us than they do in
trying to play us. But it requires time."

India is skeptical of any U.S. involvement in its relationship with Pakistan. Bilateral attempts to resolve the
long-standing border dispute in Kashmir were put on hold after last year's terrorist attacks in Mumbai, which
were blamed on Lashkar-e-Taiba.

The group has long been active in the Kashmir conflict and is said to have close ties to Pakistan's Inter-Services
Intelligence agency.

Obama and Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh treaded carefully on the issue in public during Singh's state
visit to Washington last week. "It is not the place of the United States to try to, from the outside, resolve all
those conflicts," Obama said during their news conference here. "On the other hand, we want to be encouraging
of ways in which both India and Pakistan can feel secure."

Correspondent Pamela Constable in Islamabad contributed to this report.

David S. Adams

Deputy Assistant Secretary for House Affairs

Department of State

202 647 2623

202 647 2762 fax




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765810 Date: 07/31/2015
