      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765250 Date: 07/31/2015




                                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Saturday, November 7, 2009 7:24 AM
To:
Subject                            Fw: NYT: UN Blames US For Critically Short Food Supplies In Somalia.




From: Cousin, Ertharin
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Sat Nov 07 07:15:15 2009
Subject: Fw: NYT: UN Blames US For Critically Short Food Supplies In Somalia.

Any movement on this issue?



From: deValcourt-Ayala, Lillian G
To: Astibia, Miren E; Clark, Jeanne L; Cousin, Ertharin; Glover, Michael P; Heffern, Keith L; Hegadorn, Chris S; Heinen,
Suzanne E; Luedig, Erika A; Petrovski, Elizabeth A; Snow, Michelle S; Spanos, Harriet ; Tuminaro, John D; Wendell,
George C
Sent: Sat Nov 07 07:04:46 2009
Subject: NYT: UN Blames US For Critically Short Food Supplies In Somalia.

UN Blames US For Critically Short Food Supplies in Somalia. The New York Times (11/7, A4,
Gettleman, 1.09M) reports that the UN on Friday called "the food supply line to Somalia...broken," in part
because the US delayed some 40 million pounds of food contributions in Kenyan warehouses "out of fears that
they would be diverted" to the Shabab insurgents by Somali contractors. The US, however, "played down the
impact of the delays" and said food would again be shipped when it was "assured that the United Nations was
doing more to police the aid deliveries." The UN said Friday that food rations would need to be cut and "said
the American government was insisting on guarantees that were unrealistic in Somalia." The Times adds that
some Somalis whose "entire communities are on the brink of famine...said that many children who had been
surviving off the American donations were now dying from hunger."

Full text:


U.N. Says U.S. Delays Led to Aid Cuts in Somalia
By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN
Published: November 6, 2009


NAIROBI, Kenya — United Nations officials said Friday that the supply of critical food
aid to Somalia had been interrupted and that rations to starving people needed to be
cut, partly because the American government had delayed food contributions out of
fears that they would be diverted to terrorists.

Last month, American officials said they had suspended millions of dollars of food aid
because of concerns that Somali contractors working for the United Nations were

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765250 Date: 07/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765250 Date: 07/31/2015




funneling food and money to the Shabab, an Islamist insurgent group with growing ties
to Al Qaeda.

American officials played down the impact of the delays and said the food shipments
would resume soon, once the United States government was assured that the United
Nations was doing more to police the aid deliveries.

But on Friday, the World Food Program said, "The food supply line to. Somalia is
effectively broken."

United Nations officials said that around 40 million pounds of American-donated food
was being held up in warehouses in Mombasa, in neighboring Kenya, because
American officials were not allowing aid workers to distribute it until a new set of
tighter regulations was ironed out.

United Nations officials said the American government was insisting on guarantees
that were unrealistic in Somalia, like demanding that aid transporters not pay fees at
roadblocks, which are ubiquitous and virtually unavoidable in a nation widely
considered a case study in chaos.

American aid officials declined to comment on Friday.

In the drought-stricken regions of central Somalia, where entire communities are on
the brink of famine, elders said that many children who had been surviving off the
American donations were now dying from hunger.

"We are totally dependent on this food, and people are now suffering," said Ahmed
Mahamoud Hassan, the chairman of the drought committee in Galcaio, central
Somalia. "We have nothing else to eat."

Somalia is one of the neediest nations in the world — and one of the most complex
environments to deliver aid. Ever since the central government imploded in 1991, the
country has lurched from one crisis to the next, the latest being a vicious civil war
between a weak government and an extremist Islamist insurgency during one of the
worst droughts in years.

The United States has played a huge role in saving lives by supplying about 40 percent
of the $850 million annual aid budget for Somalia. But that aid is often only loosely
monitored at best once it enters the country because of the dangers of working in
Somalia and the fact that so much of it is a no-go zone for foreigners.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765250 Date: 07/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765250 Date: 07/31/2015




For months now, United Nations officials have been negotiating with their American
counterparts, trying to agree on language for new rules that would ensure, as much as
possible, that American donated food goes to needy people and not to the Shabab.

Last month, American officials said they were legally bound to do this, because the
American government has listed the Shabab as a terrorist organization, a designation
that means that aiding or abetting the Shabab is a serious crime.

There is increasing evidence, according to United Nations documents, that some of the
United Nations contractors in Somalia have been stealing food and channeling the
proceeds to the Shabab and other militant groups. United Nations officials are
investigating some of their biggest contractors.

United Nations officials say that other donor nations have been skittish about
contributing aid during these investigations, which is another reason for the aid
shortages in Somalia. The global recession has also taken a toll on aid operations
around the world.

That said, "the United States is traditionally W.F.P.'s largest single donor," said Peter
Smerdon, a spokesman for the World Food Program, "and other donors cannot make
up the difference."

He warned that the food supplies for Somalia were steadily dwindling each month and
that by December, "we will completely run out."

Partly because of the standoff over the new rules and the ensuing interruption in the
food pipeline, the World Food Program recently halved the emergency rations to the
more than one million displaced Somalis.

United Nations officials said they had been urging the American government to release
at least some of the food from the warehouses in Kenya while they worked out the new
rules.

The officials said that even if they wanted to bypass the American government and ship
in food from other countries, which would cost millions of dollars, it would be
impossible to get it to Somalia in time and that the American sacks of grain sitting in
Mombasa were the only solution to averting a widespread famine.

"The urgency of the situation has been communicated," said one United Nations official
in Nairobi, who spoke on condition of anonymity because negotiations were
continuing. "Basically, USAID," the United States Agency for International
Development, "has to come through, one way or the other."
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765250 Date: 07/31/2015
