        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766920 Date: 07/31/2015




                                                                                               RELEASE IN
                                                                                               PART B6

From:                           sbwhoeop
Sent:                           Sunday, November 29, 2009 10 58 AM
To:                             H
Subject:                        Another memo on backdrop to this week. Sid
Attachments:                    hrc memo backdrop 112909.docx




                                      CONFIDENTIAL



                                             November 29, 2009



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Backdrop to your coming week

Below is a piece published today in The Observer, the Sunday newspaper of The Guardian, on the Chilcot
inquiry, summarizing the testimony so far and what is expected this week while you are drumming up support
for the Afghanistan initiative. Britain and Europe are riveted by Chilcot, especially official circles. The
objective correlative, of course, is trust in any 11.S. administration and deep skepticism about the Afghanistan
project. Yet another undercurrent among the mandarins is disdainful resentment of indifference to Britain, a
sentiment beyond Labour or the Tories but what has emerged as the view of the permanent establishment at
Whitehall and elsewhere.

Mandelson Watch: After Miliband declined to reach for the EU foreign secretaryship (though Sarkozy wanted
him to take it and Brown was not averse, even favorable), Mandelson personally campaigned on his own for it
among the Europeans. Mandelson was eager to Miliband to take the EU post, allowing Mandelson to be
appointed foreign minister. When Miliband refused, Mandelson's ambition was thwarted, and tried to seize the
EU position for himself, but without any backing in Europe or from Gordon. The Europeans thought him mad.
Suddenly, they recalled his bad or strange behavior as UK commissioner to the EU. When Christine Ashton was
named, Mandelson briefed the press on her lack of credentials, etc. Ashton, as it happens, had worked the press
to try to help Mandelson when he had gotten into the mess that led to his first resignation. Those inside the
government who remember this see it as an illustration of the principle that no good deed goes unpunished.
Mandelson, in a snit, is now not speaking to Gordon as 'though his rejection were Gordon's fault.

One more item: Did you read Jim Hoagland in the Washington Post today? He nails McDonough for trashing
Biden, among other things. Enclosed below story on Chilcot:




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766920 Date: 07/31/2015
