       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766101 Date: 07/31/2015




                                                                                                RELEASE IN
                                                                                                FULL


From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Wednesday, November 25, 2009 5:32 PM
To:
Subject:                          RE: Abu Mazen



Will do. Below is the formal statement that was released in the PM's name:



Today, my cabinet authorized a policy of restraint regarding settlements which will include a suspension of new permits
and new construction in Judea and Samaria for a period of ten months.

My cabinet authorized this far reaching step because of our deep desire for peace.

We hope that this decision will help launch meaningful peace negotiations to reach a historic peace agreement that will
finally end the conflict between the Palestinians and Israel.

We are committed to working closely with the United States to advance peace and security in the region.

We have been told by many friends that once Israel takes the first step towards peace, the Palestinians and the Arab
world would respond positively with steps of their own to create a virtuous cycle of goodwill.

Well, the government of Israel is taking a very big and difficult step toward peace today.

I hope that the Palestinians and the Arab world will seize this opportunity to work with us to forge a new beginning and
a new future for our children and for their children.

Since the day our government was sworn in eight months ago, we have been calling for direct negotiations with the
Palestinians.

During that time, we have taken many concrete actions to improve daily life for the Palestinians and to create a climate
in which political negotiations would have the best chance to succeed.

We have dismantled hundreds of roadblocks and checkpoints, extended the hours of operation on the Allenby Bridge
and removed bureaucratic obstacles to Palestinian economic development.

These actions have helped spur a surge, a boom, in the Palestinian economy. At the same time, the security
environment has improved thanks both to the efforts of the IDF and to the efforts of better trained PA security forces.

Now we wish to add to this improved economic and security climate meaningful political negotiations.

I have already said that we will not build new settlements and that we would not expropriate additional land for existing
settlements.

I said we would also restrain settlement activity, and that's exactly what we decided to do today.

I promised to enable normal life to continue for the three hundred thousand Israeli citizens, our brothers and sisters,
who live in Judea and Samaria.

That is why this suspension will not affect construction currently underway.
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766101 Date: 07/31/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766101 Date: 07/31/2015




It will not include the schools, kindergartens, synagogues and public buildings necessary for the continuation of normal
life over the time period of the suspension.


Obviously, any infrastructure that may be needed to protect our national security or to safeguard the lives of our citizens
will also be provided during this time.

Regarding Jerusalem, our sovereign capital, our position is well known. We do not put any restrictions on building in our
sovereign capital.

As always, we are committed to protect freedom of worship for all faiths and to ensure equal and fair treatment for all
the city's residents, Jews and Arabs alike.

When the suspension ends, my government will revert to the policies of previous governments in relation to
construction.

I want to say clearly to the Palestinians: Now is the time to begin negotiations. Now is the time to move the peace
process forward. There is no more time to waste.

Israel has taken a far reaching step for peace. It's time for the Palestinians to do the same.



    Original Message--
From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Wednesday, November 25, 2009 5:25 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Re: Abu Mazen

Make sure Daniel R gets transcripts of what Mitchell and I said to the PA so Abbas can see it and if there is a transcript of
Bibi too.

    Original Message
From: Sullivan, Jacob I <Sullivan.11@state.gov>
To: H
Sent: Wed Nov 25 17:21:36 2009
Subject: RE: Abu Mazen

Netanyahu gave a press conference a few hours ago. I've seen plenty of his quotes in stories. Let me see if I can find
transcript.

    Original Message
From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Wednesday, November 25, 2009 5:18 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 1
Subject: Abu Mazen

He's asking if Israel made its statement since he hasn't seen it and I told him I hadn't either. Is there one?




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766101 Date: 07/31/2015
