      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766888 Date: 07/31/2015



                                                                                           RELEASE
                                                                                           IN PART
                                                                                           B6

From:                          cheryl.mills
Sent:                          Saturday, November 28, 2009 5:47 PM
To:
Subject:                       Fw: The LGBT worldwide community must push back against any leader, including
                               Goosby if the Newsweek report is accurate, who looks the other way as Uganda enacts a
                               draconian law to imprison or even execute its LGBT citizens.



Fyi

Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T


From: Richard Socarides •
Date: Sat, 28 Nov 2009 07:51:07 -0500
To: Cheryl Mills
Subject: The LGBT worldwide community must push back against any leader, including Goosby if the
Newsweek report is accurate, who looks the other way as Uganda enacts a draconian law to imprison or even
execute its LGBT citizens.

This guy Trammell is a DC lobbyist -- not exactly a firebrand..

         Forwarded message
From: The Network of eQualityGiving.org <members@network.equalitygiving.org>
Date: Fri, Nov 27, 2009 at 11:08 PM
Subject: [eQualityGiving] Persecution of LGBT Ugandans
To: "The Network of eQualityGiving.org" <members@network.equalitygiving.org>


I would encourage you to take note of this Newsweek interview posted today in which US Global AIDS
Coordinator Eric Goosby makes what could well be a significant diplomatic and human rights blunder..
Ambassador Goosby, according to Newsweek, says that he does not have a dog in the fight as to whether
Uganda criminalizes or even adopts the death penalty for homosexuality. ..Goosby.s interview appears to
undercut the pressure the Congress, the Secretary of State and human rights supporters around the world have
put on the Ugandan government in recent days to save the LGBT population in that country from violent
persecution.. The LGBT worldwide community must push back against any leader, including Goosby if the
Newsweek report is accurate, who looks the other way as Uganda enacts a draconian law to imprison or even
execute its LGBT citizens.

Jeff Trammell

•

A
A
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766888 Date: 07/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766888 Date: 07/31/2015




Newsweek... Posted Friday, November 27, 2009 10:41 AM

Eric Goosby: No Hold on PEPFAR Funds for Uganda

Katie Paul

Stigma is anathema to effective public-health work, but that's never stopped homophobic crusaders from
mucking up the fight against HIV/AIDS before. Now, just as the South African government is finally changing
its tune on the matter, Uganda is emerging as the world's new problem country. The recipient of $287 million in
PEPFAR funds last year, Uganda is also the site of a vicious campaign against homosexuality, which took a
turn for the worse last month when the "Anti-Homosexuality Bill" was introduced to Parliament. The bill
threatens harsher punishments for actual or even perceived homosexual activity, which is already illegal under
Ugandan law; convicted offenders could face the death penalty. "Promoting homosexuality" would also be
illegal, as would a failure to report any of the above to police within 24 hours.

Even by regional standards, such penalties would be exceptionally harsh, especially since they would
effectively criminalize the work of HIV/AIDS prevention efforts under the "promotion of homosexuality
clause." The thinking behind them is just as disturbing, since this latest round of antigay fervor was kicked off
at a conference held by by American missionary groups that went to proselytize about the twin evils of Nazism
and homosexual behavior in Kampala earlier this year. Just to hammer home how far-out that is, this means the
Ugandan government got its advice from the author of a book called The Pink Swastika: Homosexuality in the
Nazi Party, which claims the Nazi movement was "entirely controlled by militaristic male homosexuals
throughout its short history." The result has been a vigilante campaign against the country's LGBT community,
whereby gay detainees are tortured and tabloids publish the names, places of employment, addresses, and
physical descriptions of gay-rights advocates under headlines that scream "TOP HOMOS IN UGANDA
NAMED." It would seem the stuff of Orwellian parody, but it's real.

As the witchhunt in Kampala has heated up, so too have calls for U.S. policymakers to take a stand. In an article
for the Los Angeles Times, TNR editor James Kirchick called for PEPFAR to withhold its funding for
HIV/AIDS programming in Uganda unless its legislators abandon the legislation, which has been tabled for
now. But in an interview with NEWSWEEK this week, PEPFAR chief Eric Goosby said he didn't have a dog in
that fight:

I'm very concerned about any decision that any country#ncluding our own.would make to target a group
that's in the population, and that's always been in the population, by excluding them from a service or passes
legislation that criminalizes their behavior. Every time you do that, you push the behavior underground. It
never works. Rather than minimizing the spread of the virus, it actually amplifies it.

The U.S. policy is trying to work with governments to say exactly that. I think I would do more harm than good
by connecting our resources to respond to the epidemic to making them dependent on a behavior that they're
not willing to engage in on their own. My role is to be supportive and helpful to the patients who need these
services. It is not to tell a country how to put forward their legislation. But I will engage them in conversation
around my concern and knowledge of what this is going to do to that population, and our ability to stop the
movement of the virus into the general population.

So, for all those who hoped that PEPFAR funding might be used as a hammer to pressure the Ugandan powers-
that-be to abandon their crusade: no dice. The Obama era is the dialogue era; don't pick fights, but persuade
through elegant theses. That said, since the moral argument clearly hasn't convinced the Ugandan authorities of
the errors of their ways, one can only hope that Goosby's public-health argument will.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766888 Date: 07/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766888 Date: 07/31/2015




PRIVATE NETWORK - BY INVITATION ONLY - CONFIDENTIAL - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
* To review the Discussion Guidelines: www.eQualityGiving.org/Discussion
* To email all members reply to this email or send a new email to: Members@Network.eQualityGiving.org
* To manage volume of emails: www.eQualityGiving.org/Tips
* To invite other people, email the hosts: Founders@eQualityGiving.org
* To send a private email to the hosts: Founders@eQualityGiving.org
* To change your email address: www.eQualityGiving.org/Change
* To unsubscribe: Members-leave@Network.eQualityGiving.org




Richard Socarides, Esq.
Brady Klein Weissman LLP
501 Fifth Avenue, 19th Floor, New York, NY 10017
w: 212.949.5800 4em:                                                                                    B6




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766888 Date: 07/31/2015
