   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765355 Date: 07/31/2015




                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL
http://www.politico.com/news/stories/1109/29716 Page3.html

Why the Greg Craig debacle matters
By: Elizabeth Drew
November 19, 2009 11:58 AM EST
President Barack Obama is returning from his trek to Asia Thursday to a capital that is a
considerably more dangerous place for him than when he departed.

While he was abroad, there was a palpable sense at home of something gone wrong. A
critical mass of influential people who once held big hopes for his presidency began to
wonder whether they had misjudged the man. Most significant, these doubters now find
themselves with a new reluctance to defend Obama at a phase of his presidency when he
needs defenders more urgently than ever.

This is the price Obama has paid with his complicity and most likely his active
participation, in the shabbiest episode of his presidency: The firing by leaks of White
House counsel Gregory Craig, a well-respected Washington veteran and influential early
supporter of Obama.

The people who are most aghast by the handling of the Craig departure can't be
dismissed by the White House as Republican partisans, or still-embittered Hillary Clinton
supporters. They are not naïve activists who don't understand that the exercise of power
can be a rough business and that trade-offs and personal disappointments are inevitable.
Instead, they are people, either in politics or close observers, who once held an
unromantically high opinion of Obama. They were important to his rise, and are likely
more important to the success or failure of his presidency than Obama or his distressingly
insular and small-minded West Wing team appreciate.

The Craig embarrassment gives these people a new reason — not the first or only reason
— to conclude that he wasn't the person of integrity and even classiness they had thought,
and, more fundamentally, that his ability to move people and actually lead a fractured and
troubled country (the reason many preferred him over Hillary Clinton) is not what had been
promised in the campaign.

This may seem like a lot to hang on a Washington personnel move. After all, intramural
back-stabbing or making people fall guys when things go wrong (think Bill Clinton's
Defense Secretary Les Aspin after the disaster in Somalia) are not new to
Washingtonians.

But Craig's ouster did not occur in a vacuum. It served as a focal point to concerns that
have been building for months that Obama wasn't pressing for all that might be possible
within the existing political constraints (all that one could ask of a president); that his
presidential voice hadn't fulfilled the hopes raised by his campaign voice (which had also
taken him a while to find); that he hadn't created a movement, as he had raised
expectations that he would; that would be there to back him up and help him fulfill his
promises.

That is why it is worth pondering how the Craig story, unfolded in detail — its
consequences likely will echo far longer than anything Obama said or did in Asia.


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765355 Date: 07/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765355 Date: 07/31/2015




Briefly, here's what happened, some of it told for the first time: Craig, who had known the
Clintons since they were all at Yale Law School together, had served as a senior adviser
to Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, but in 1998 gave up that job to help defend Bill
Clinton against impeachment. Yet in 2008, he supported Obama for the nomination — not
so much a turning against Hillary Clinton as being impressed early, as were some other
prominent Washingtonians, by the then-state senator but would-be U.S. Senate candidate
at a fundraiser held by Vernon Jordan, seeing Obama as the first potentially inspiring
Democratic figure since Robert Kennedy. In the course of the campaign, Craig wrote a
highly publicized memo questioning some of Hillary Clinton's claims of foreign policy
experience, such as coming under enemy fire in Tuzla, Bosnia. During the campaign,
Craig coached Obama for the debates (playing McCain), and praised him highly. Craig's
imprimatur helped the neophyte Obama in certain influential circles.

He hoped to get a high foreign policy position in an Obama administration, but when
Clinton was named secretary of state, this of course became untenable. The Clintons are
an unforgiving lot. So, Obama and Craig agreed that Craig would take the job of White
House counsel for a year, and then they'd discuss what he'd do next. Thus, Craig was
handed a very tricky portfolio.
During the transition, about mid-December, Craig presented to a group of the president's
newly named national security advisers meeting in Washington — including Clinton,
Defense Secretary Robert Gates, national security adviser General James Jones, and
others — three proposed executive orders: One ordered the shutting down of Guantanamo
in a year. (The others banned torture and closed down the C.I.A.'s "black sites"; and
addressed future detainee policy.) The one-year target for closing Guantanamo resulted
from consultations with human rights and detainee rights groups, who argued that
Guantanamo could be shut down in three months, and with Pentagon officials, who had
no united position but argued that it would take from a year to 18 months.

At the meeting, only the newly named Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano,
beamed in from Arizona, questioned whether a year was realistic. When Gates, as he
later confirmed publicly, said that though it was an "ambitious" deadline, he supported it
because setting it was the only way to get things, especially the bureaucracy, moving
toward that end, and that it could be extended if it couldn't be met, that was it.

Obama's new national security team signed off on the executive order to close
Guantanamo in a year. This was passed along to the president as well as his top aides;
Craig was never in a meeting with the political side of the White House on the
Guantanamo matter — and the president-elect and then president raised no objection
before, when, or after he signed off on it.

Unsurprisingly, the deadline became hard to meet, for various legal and political reasons -
including the congressional outburst of NIMBYISM (similar to its earlier outbursts on Dubai
Ports and even Terri Schiavo — short-term, irrational, and politically motivated fits that
erupt from the Congress from time to time). If Craig failed to foresee this (as some later
charged), he had a lot of company.

The closing of Guantanamo is undoubtedly far further along than it would have been
without the executive order. But along the way, Craig fell out of favor with the president's
political aides and, apparently, the president himself. Whether he was simply being made
the fall guy, or the tight circle of Chicagoans in the White House didn't care for this
outsider, or he committed some unknown errors, suddenly, in August, leaks began to

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765355 Date: 07/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765355 Date: 07/31/2015




surface that his job was in danger. Non-denial denials were issued from the White House.
The leaks became a pattern, a systematic, anonymous, tipping off of reporters that Craig
would soon be gone.

Craig was accused, anonymously of course, of a welter of charges: of being "too close to
the human rights groups" (if so, what was wrong with that?), of not playing well with
others, of being a bad manager, of being fixated on Guantanamo to the detriment of other
issues. In the summer, Obama offered Craig another job, which Craig declined, and the
two agreed that they would discuss the matter further later in the year. But the leaks
continued, and Craig decided that his situation was untenable, and he had to leave.

 To make sure he did, he was leaked his way out, up to the day before he planned to
.resign. What caused so many Obama supporters' stomachs to turn was that Obama could
 have stopped the leaking at any time; he or White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel
 could have arranged a dignified departure. (They're within their rights to get rid of
 someone if they're dissatisfied, for good reasons or not — but a preferred route would be to
 call that person in and ask what day would suit him or her to resign, and then just let that
 person do it. This happens a lot in administrations; even if people don't believe the
 resignation was voluntary, there's a soupcon of dignity left to that person.) Even some
 Hillary Clinton supporters, who still hold no brief for Craig, think he was treated shabbily.

And this opinion is not confined to "political junkies." Thomas Wilner, a distinguished
Washington attorney who challenged Bush administration detainee policies, particularly on
Guantanamo, and had worked with Craig on these issues, told me, "There's a lot of
concern among a lot of lawyers in this town, especially those who were supporting
Obama, that somebody this bright, this respected, this good, and with this integrity, was
treated in such a way."
Yes, we knew, or should have, during the campaign that the supposed idealist Obama
had a bit of the Chicago cut-throat in him, but there was little sign that he could be as
brutal and heedless of loyalty as he was in the Craig affair. An unexpected climate of fear
emanates from the Obama White House.
The incident underscored worries that several had held about the Obama White House for
some time: that it was too tightly controlled and narrowly focused by the Chicago crowd;
that it seemed from the outset to need an older, wiser head, someone with a bit more
detachment.
The current crowd displays a certain impulsiveness and vindictiveness that do it no good -
as in the silly war-let on Fox News that it is now trying to back out of. Even if Craig was
making a hash of his job — and there's no independent evidence of this — it just wasn't
smart to treat someone widely held in such high respect in this manner; once again, the
impulsiveness backfired.

 The replacing of Craig with Washington attorney Robert Bauer, Obama's own attorney for
 years as well as counsel for the Democratic National Committee and the Obama
 campaign, further narrowed the White House circle just when it needed broadening,
 lowered the stature of the office, and choosing the president's personal attorney for a
 position that calls for dispassionate judgment is hazardous. (Does anyone remember
 Alberto Gonzalez?)

 The Obama's themselves hang tight with a small Chicago crowd. Yes, he talks to others,
 and yes, a president's time is very limited, but the Obama's themselves seem as closed-
 off and unto themselves as does his inner White House circle. (Is this a coincidence?

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765355 Date: 07/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765355 Date: 07/31/2015




What is all this wariness about?) When the Obama's go to someone's house for dinner,
almost invariably it's to that of Valerie Jarrett, the old friend from Chicago who serves as a
counselor and whom they see all day. Old Chicago friends fly in for weekends frequently.
Old friends, who had helped launch him, helped them personally, have been left behind.

At the same time as the Craig imbroglio happened, many people who had defended
Obama against charges that he wasn't what he'd been cracked up to be were now
becoming concerned themselves: though it was a relief to have a president who thought
through crucial decisions about sending the country's young to war, it was taking him
awfully long to make up his mind about what to do about Afghanistan and Pakistan, and
the decision-making was bafflingly leak-ridden (was this a deliberate airing of ideas or a
loss of control over the process?); that the health care debate had in fact careened out of
his control and it seemed less and less likely that, having used up almost a year of his
presidency on it (his "deadlines" had become irrelevant, and so, in a way, had he), he
would end up with a bill, if at all, that did enough net good.

Certain things are not his fault: the unprecedented truculence of the Republican Party,
scared silly by right-wing ranters on cable television; the unholy economic and foreign-
policy mess that he inherited; the fact that he never had, as so many liberal commentators
asserted, the 60 (or 58 or 59) Senate votes that would enable him to get what he wanted
from the Congress. It's not his fault that unemployment rates remain stubbornly high
following a traumatic recession.

And it's always risky to project the long-term from the moment. Perhaps this will prove to
have been a passing moment. Perhaps Obama will still salvage a health care bill that is a
real step forward (though there will be a humongous fight over its definition); maybe he'll
come up with a smart strategy — or the best of bad options — on Afghanistan and Pakistan;
it's not impossible that he'll add real progress on climate change and regulatory reform to
his list of achievements, and that he'll start to get the deficit under control.

Maybe there'll be enough examples of grace that will make people forget this period of
pettiness. He's been lucky before; maybe he'll get lucky again. Meanwhile, serious people
who had a lot of hope about him and who defended him are more worried than ever, and
in this if anything over-communicative society the White House can't write them off as "a
bunch of Washington insiders." So meanwhile, there's a palpable mood change in
Washington that could signify that Barack Obama is in deeper trouble than he was even a
week ago.

Elizabeth Drew is a journalist and author in Washington. She is the author of 14 books,
most recently "Richard M. Nixon" (Times Books, 2007)
© 2009 Capitol News Company, LLC




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765355 Date: 07/31/2015
