      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764296 Date: 07/31/2015



                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Tuesday, October 6, 2009 11:59 PM
TO:
Subject:                           FW: Draft email to the Secretary on Guinea



FYI


From: Carson, Johnnie
Sent: Tuesday, October 06, 2009 11:44 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J; Smith, Daniel B
Cc: Posner, Michael H; Mills, Cheryl D; Yamamoto, Donald Y; Bando, Jun; Leonard, Mary Beth; Fitzgerald, William E; Lew,
Jacob J
Subject: FW: Draft email to the Secretary on Guinea

Jake or Dan: Could one of you pass the following note from me to the Secretary on the Guinea-Conakry situation. We
will be sending forward an info memo later this afternoon. But in view of the Secretary's interest, I thought this note my
be useful to pass on to her at some point during the day. We are also doing some press guidance.
 Regards, Johnnie

Madam Secretary,

I know you are deeply concerned about reports of ongoing violence and attacks against women that have occurred in
Guinea-Conakry. I want to let you know what actions the Africa Bureau is taking to address this crisis.

I met with Guinean Foreign Minister Alexandre Cece Loua this morning at 9:00. I expressed our deep outrage at the
brutal actions of Guinean security forces against protesters on September 28, which resulted in 157 deaths, hundreds
more injured, and the widespread rape of women. I will separately provide you with a formal readout of the meeting. I
have also sent one of my Deputies, Bill Fitzgerald, to Conakry, where he met yesterday with President Dadis Camara and
expressed the same outrage.

We are pressing the government to take immediate actions to stop the violence and to restore constitutional order. We
have asked Dadis Camara to step aside and to seek exile in Morocco or another French-speaking country. We have also
asked Guinea to invite in observers from the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to monitor the
actions of the military and developments toward a democratic transition. In addition, we have indicated that we will
seek an international investigation in order to arrest and punish the perpetrators of the violence.

We have indicated that if the Government of Guinea does not act rapidly, we will pursue sanctions against government
officials. In all of these actions, we are consulting with the French, whose views and actions closely mirror ours, as well
as with several west African states, including Liberia and Senegal.

Regards, Johnnie




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764296 Date: 07/31/2015
