      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765794 Date: 07/31/2015



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                     B6


From:                               sbwhoeop
Sent:                               Tuesday, November 17, 2009 8:57 AM
To:                                 H
Subject:                            FYI: Lead FT editorial today, must if you haven't read. Sid




Financial Times FT.com
    OMMENT


editorial
US fumbling for a new China tone
Published: November 16 2009 20:39 I Last updated: November 16 2009 20:39
Gone are the days when the US president could visit Beijing as the unassailable top dog, able to lecture the Chinese on
everything from human rights to an overvalued currency. As has become fashionable to note, events have instead obliged
Barack Obama to play the role of washed-up debtor visiting his stern bank manager for yet another loan.
That analogy is useful. But it can be overdone. Certainly, the financial crisis has brought into sharp relief just how
dependent the US has become on foreign creditors, chief among them China.
It has also sharpened the perception of what had been happening anyway, the relative decline of a US-centric west and
the relative rise of a China-centric Asia. But the word relative is important. China, poor and riddled with internal
contradictions, is not there yet, by a very long way.
The changing relationship with China does demand a new tone. But early indications are that Mr Obama is still fumbling
for the right one. Take global imbalances.
In the only set-piece speech of his Asian tour — delivered in Japan, perhaps to assure his hosts that Washington is not
abandoning Tokyo just yet — Mr Obama correctly pointed out that the global economy cannot go back to business as
usual. "One of the important lessons this recession has taught us is the limits of depending primarily on American
consumers and Asian exports to drive growth," he said.
That is quite right. But his entreaties on global rebalancing fall flat in China. That is partly because Beijing remains publicly
sceptical about the US's long-term finances.
From China's perspective, Mr Obama's emergency measures to stimulate the US economy and persuade Americans to
spend their way out of recession smack of re-creating the spendthrift ways that triggered the crisis in the first place.
That explains why Chinese officials have quizzed their US counterparts so robustly about how they intend to pay for
healthcare reform. It is also why Beijing has started questioning US monetary, as well as fiscal, policy.
On the eve of the US president's visit, Liu Mingkang, China's chief banking regulator, took a swipe at the US Federal
Reserve, saying the combination of a weak dollar and low interest rates risked generating a global asset bubble. That is a
bit rich coming from someone who oversees a banking system that has pumped the equivalent of nearly 30 per cent of
gross domestic product into the economy so far this year. But it reflects the new tone with which China presumes it can
address a humbled superpower.
Mr Obama's efforts to occupy the moral high ground are also undermined by his flirtation with protectionism, particularly
his decision to slap tariffs on Chinese tyres.
His administration has failed to spell out a convincing trade policy — and that is seen as a stark omission for-a business-
oriented Asian audience. Such perceived deficiencies have hobbled his ability to cajole China with any real conviction.
When it comes to human rights, too, the US seems to have drawn the conclusion it is not good policy to badmouth its
 chief creditor.
Hillary Clinton, secretary of state, set the tone early when she said that human rights should not "interfere" with matters of
 implicitly greater urgency. Mr Obama obligingly omitted all references to Tibet, Xinjiang and even Taiwan from his Tokyo
 speech. There was also not a single mention of India, a potential regional counterweight to China, yet another indication
 that Washington is behaving as though it is treading on eggshells. It was therefore all the more refreshing to hear Mr
 Obama criticise Chinese censorship during his town hall meeting in Shanghai on Monday — though even that could not
 undo his own self-censorship in refusing to meet the Dalai Lama before this week's trip.
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765794 Date: 07/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765794 Date: 07/31/2015



It is right and proper that the US acknowledge the rising significance of China. Mr Obama's assurances that China's rise
need not be a threat were spot on. But by the same token, US accommodation can be taken too far. Contrary to common
perception, China's huge holdings of US treasuries are not a sign of great strength. They are evidence of how dependent
Chinese growth has been on the US consumer.
Equally, any idea that China, with an economy less than a third the size of the US and a GDP per capita roughly the same
as Angola's, can somehow save the world is ludicrous. Mr Obama is right to show respect to China. He need not — and
must not — kowtow.
Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2009. Print a single copy of this article for personal use. Contact us if you wish to
print more to distribute to others.

                "FT" and "Financial Times" are trademarks of the Financial Times. Privacy policy I Terms
                                       © Copyright The Financial Times Ltd 2009.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765794 Date: 07/31/2015
