      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764415 Date: 07/31/2015
                                                                                                              RELEASE IN
                                                                                                              FULL




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Monday, August 24, 2009 7:40 AM
To:
Subject:                           FW: For u and to pass on to HRC



See below for discussion.

I think we are going to need to be very specific about limiting more of her activities in the building than she suggests b/c
as is, she is in many matters here too that are very consuming.

cdm

    Original Message
From: Slaughter, Anne-Marie
Sent: Monday, August 24, 2009 7:36 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: For u and to pass on to HRC

I was delighted to see the Rothkopf piece yesterday, and not only b/c he mentioned me! It identified State as the source
of big ideas under your leadership, ideas that adapt our foreign policy to a 21st c world and allow us to get things done.
As I think about what I want to sink my teeth into over the next 18 months and how I can best serve you, I have
concluded that I want to devote myself full time to the QDDR. -- driving the process and the outcomes as efficiently and
effectvely as possible. I have run something like this before; I know almost all the players; my staff is well plugged into
the building; and I am committed to all the ideas that we want to see emerge. Instead of hiring a senior director, I
propose that the AID designate and I start driving the process by working w/ Karen and the staff and reporting
to/engaging the senior leadiership team on a weekly basis.

As Cheryl and I discussed, I am well aware that taking on this role means cutting many other things that I do. The
demands for policy planning talks have been proliferating because they serve the interests of the bureaus. I am less
convinced that they are the best use of my time or that they allow me to best serve you. There are 2 sets -- one with 5
middle eastern countries that we have agreed to hold in Jordan this fall -- this is their second meeting -- and the second
round of the russia-eu-us talks that I think it would be very detrimental to cancel. But I shd b able to make those each 3
day trips total. Other than that I wd cancel all my planned travel for the fall. I would also limit outside speaking
engagements except to the extent such engagement served QDDR outreach purposes. QDDR meetings will also take
priority on my calendar, alongside meetings w/ my staff on other projects we are pursuing.

As it is shaping up, the QDDR combines thinking and doing in a way that fits what I think I can bring to the table perfectly
and make this what you want it to be. I very much want to take on the role I describe, and hope you agree.
AMS




                                                             159
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764415 Date: 07/31/2015
