       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764294 Date: 07/31/2015




                                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                                Tuesday, October 6, 2009 11:22 PM
To:
Subject                              FW: Video Success and Another Idea



More


From: Klevorick, Caitlin B
Sent: Tuesday, October 06, 2009 8:33 PM
To: Dowd, Katie W; Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Re: Video Success and Another Idea

I can attest to the fact that this has thus far been the shining star of the initiative (from a non-policy perspective) and I think
speaks to how hrc will do diplomacy and development differently.

In addition to what katie mentioned-- Institute for International Education (goodman) included it in their weekly email to
more than 8000 institutions, Pepsi showed it an internal meeting last week and will show it at a global conference this
week, and CGI has gotten feedback about the video and has gotten increased interest in commitments in this area. It has
also been pushed out to posts through internal sites.

We are also trying to see if we can get it in a rotation or on mtvU or their website and bet as part of the world food day
push.



From: Dowd, Katie W
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Klevorick, Caitlin B
Sent: Tue Oct 06 19:57:36 2009
Subject: Video Success and Another Idea

Cheryl

Hope this finds you well. I wanted to update you on the success of the video and also share a new idea with you. Give
the statistical results below, I honestly believe this is the State Departments first ever successful instance of policy
advocacy via viral video and the impact we have raised is worth noting. I have heard comments from all over the
building and outside that this is a new level of creating content/video that is engaging, interesting, educating and that
can have long term value for State and partners to use. Bottom-line, we have done something new in raising
awareness/attention on a major foreign policy initiative through compelling, and viral video -- the Department of State
has raised the bar.

It is hard to read the traffic exactly to their sites and ours but here are some initial stats:

Top line: Using State.gov, America.gov, Facebook, Twitter, Youtube and more, we have use new media and connection
technology tools to reach over an estimated 100K audiences domestically and internationally through the video on Food
Security and ultimately have brought press and attention to a new focus. This video is engaging in that it raises
awareness and education on a critical foreign policy issue.

    1. It is one of the top 20 videos viewed on our Youtube channel, with over 5K views and rising. Considering how
         much video we generate through the daily press briefings and videos through S remarks daily, I think this carries
         tremendous weight that in a short amount of time and little push to reach out to communities we have raised
         the bar for engaging content through video.


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764294 Date: 07/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764294 Date: 07/31/2015




   2. Many organizations and users on Youtube have picked up the video and reposted on their channels, for
        examples it is has been picked up heavily in China from one user who generated 3K views on his own already
        and I have been told that it has been posted on major Ethiopian blogs through their video channels as well.
   3. Over 12,000 (estimated) have visited our main video page through State.gov where the video was featured.
   4. Almost 9K people have visited the Global Food Security page through State.gov to get more information.
   5. Through pushing out on social networking presences at State, we have reached over 65,000 people who
        subscribe and follow the Department of State and we pushed this video and the broader FS page to those
        communities through Facebook, Twitter, and more.
Next Steps:
   1. We are making DVD's to give to posts
   2. Working on distributing to bloggers for continued use
   3. Will feature and push video to a larger audience when op-ed runs through a second push
   4. Will work to feature prominently on World Food Day
   5. Working to translate and subtitle video for usage in countries around the world.

New Idea:
Cheryl, wanted to talk to you about a new idea that I have presented before but thought about using for FS in a modified
form. I discussed with Caitlin and wanted to see if you thought this was a good idea.

This proposal is to ask that Secretary Clinton begin an online conversation on Food Security where she can engage with
people at home and abroad.
    1. Through a video announcement she announces the opening of a global and engaging talk worldwide talk on
        global hunger and invites people to submit questions on the topic. People can submit questions via video, text,
        email, comment.
    2. The community votes and comments on the best questions submitted by one another and votes on the best
        ones.
    3. After two weeks, Secretary Clinton answers then the top five questions in her own response video. *** We
        could even bring person with best question to DC to be a citizen journalist for a day and ask the top questions in
        person.
    4. We then use this video as a way to talk about the most frequently asked questions on global hunger, HRC's
        responses to them and we have engaged a global community on the topic.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764294 Date: 07/31/2015
