      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764100 Date: 07/31/2015


                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                                Wednesday, September 16, 2009 9:46 PM
To:
Subject:                             RE: Revised Op-Ed



No - it was collaborative effort -- he put in the edits but he didn't draft it.

    Original Message
From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonenrail.com]
Sent: Wednesday, September 16, 2009 9:45 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Re: Revised Op-Ed

Ok. Did !.ai
        Cr rati.aft?

    Original Message
From: Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>

Sent: Wed Sep 16 21:39:53 2009
Sul*ct: i2W: Revised Op-Ed

See below ao 0)u fine with this revised draft?

    Utignai Message
From: Schwerin, Dan B (PACE) [mailto:SchwerinDB2@state.gov]
Sent: Wednesday, September 16, 2009 9:15 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J; Muscatine, Lissa; Crowley, Philip J; Reines, Philippe I; Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Nose, Frank A
Subject: Revised Op-Ed

PJ ask me to pass along this revised draft of the missile defense op-ed. Its attached and pasted below for your review.
Thanks
Dan

A New Apprca,cn for ;Missile Defense

By Hillary Ciinton

Iran's development of :lion- and medium-range ballistic missiles poses a clear and growing threat to the security of our
European allies and our own forces stationed in the region. That is why President Obama announced yesterday that the
United States is ready to deploy missile defenses in Europe specifically geared toward stopping these missiles. This is a
threat we cannot ignore.

Previous missile defense efforts have focused on protecting against intercontinental ballistic missiles capable of reaching
the .Jriited        but our intelligence now shows that the threat from these long-range weapons has not progressed as
quickly as had been feared. In contrast, evidence indicates that Iran is developing short- and medium- range missiles
that will everanallv enable it to target most of Europe, the Caucuses and the Middle East, including U.S. and NATO
forces.


                                                                57
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764100 Date: 07/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764100 Date: 07/31/2015




We deeply appreciate the willingness of the Czech and Polish Governments to host the original missile defense
architecture on their soil, and the decision to deploy other systems to better meet this growing threat came as a result
of a long and careful review of our policies, capabilities, and requirements. This decision does not alter the unshakeable
commitment of the United States to the security of these vital NATO allies. Rather, it reflects our determination to
jointly meet the threats that endanger us all.

The old focus on long-range missile defense systems left significant gaps in our ability to defend against shorter-range
threats, exposing our allies and our forces stationed in Europe. Many experts have also expressed concerns about the
testing re-cc,rd and effectiveness of the long-range interceptors that were to be deployed in Poland.

Our view approach is different in a number of ways.

First, we ;gill use weil-tested missile defense systems, such as the Standard Missile-3, against the current threats. And
unlike the old fixed, silo-based interceptors, they will be mobile and able to shift as threats evolve.

Second, while previous efforts sought to by-pass NATO in favor of bilateral agreements, the Obama Administration plans
to make coordination with NATO a central element of our approach. By working with our allies to build a workable and
cost-effective missile defense system in Europe, we can better contribute to the protection of our NATO allies and
increase reEional stability.

For 61; years, the NATO alliance has been a force for peace, prosperity and security in Europe and around the world
because of its commitment to collective security: an attack on one ally is an attack on all. An attack on London or
Warsaw is an attack on New York or Washington. NATO demonstrated this commitment after the September 11
terrorist attacks, mien for the first time, the alliance invoked Article V and NATO sent assets to the United States to help
protect us horn additional terrorist attacks.

Unfortunately, The old long-range defense plan created the impression of "two-tiers" of security within the alliance by
focusing only on theoretical threats that could one day affect the mainland United States, while leaving our European
allies vulnerable to very real short- and medium-range missiles.

Ow new plan corrects this imbalance. We will continue to monitor and counter longer-term threats, but we will work
with our allies to protect all NA70 territory. We will focus on the most imminent threat, while also developing the
capacity to adjust quickly If the threat evolves.

Finally, we will engage with Russia as part of our new approach. Russia is also vulnerable to Iran's short- and medium-
range missiles end we will seek to cooperate to address this common threat. I am pleased that the Russians agreed at
the Moscow              to a joint threat assessment of the ballistic missile challenges of the 21st century, including from
Iran. This is a positive first step and I look forward to future progress.

In shor t.. this mkt,/ rnissile defense plan is more realistic about the threats we face, more reliable in the tools we will use,
and more irsiiuls i/E: tYj ti e?. allies we are pledged to protect.

While we piasue thls new path, we will also redouble our diplomatic efforts to engage Iran and focus its leaders on a
clee! criOiC.E.• Whe'her try „oil-, the international community as a responsible member or to continue down a path to
further isoraton.

But the security of our allies and our forces cannot wait. That is why we are moving ahead with a new approach for



728 words




                                                    53
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764100 Date: 07/31/2015
