      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763950 Date: 07/31/2015


                                                                                                            RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                            B6



From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Sunday, July 26, 2009 4:18 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: CODEL Mack


Fyi


From: Beale, Courtney A Kramer
To: Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Macmanus, Joseph E; Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: S_SpecialAssistants
Sent: Sun Jul 26 14:53:47 2009
Subject: Fw: CODEL Mack

Fyi on Amb. Llorens readout from CODEL Mack.

Courtney


From: Roskamp, Philip W
To: SES_DutyDeputies; S_SpecialAssistants; P_Officers; Campbell, Piper A
Cc: SES-O_SWO-Only
Sent: Sun Jul 26 14:33:17 2009
Subject: FW: CODEL Mack

Colleagues,

Ambassador Llorens provided a readout of CODEL Mack's trip to Honduras. During the weekend trip, U.S.
Representatives Mack and Bilbray met with several Honduran officials, including Micheletti, the Supreme Court
president, and six presidential candidates. It is Ambassador Llorens' opinion the CODEL was not helpful to the Obama
Administration's goals in Honduras. The CODEL already has departed and is en route back to the United States.

Thank you,


Philip Roskamp
Senior Watch Officer
State Department Operations Center
202-647-1512




From: Llorens, Hugo
Sent: Sunday, July 26, 2009 2:21 PM
To: Aguilera, Patricia; Amselem, W Lewis; Brands, William R; Cue, Lourdes C; Dan Restrepo; Doug Fraser; Eugene Gray;
Gonzalez, Juan S; Jacobson, Roberta S; Kelly, Craig A; Llorens, Hugo; Morales Jr, Hector E; Paul Trivelli; SES-0; Shannon,
Thomas A; Webster, Christopher W; Williams, Bisa
Cc: Task Force Honduras; Wolfe, David C; Brands, William R; Morrison, Gregory R
Subject: CODEL Mack




                                                   311
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763950 Date: 07/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763950 Date: 07/31/2015




ALL: We've spent the better part of the weekend with CODEL Mack (Rep. Mack and Rep. Bilbray). Prior to their arrival
announcement on Friday, Mack staffers had already made a number of appointments on their own. However, the
Embassy provided full logistical support and security, and set up a number of other appointinents where it was
appropriate for Embassy officials to participate consistent with our non-contact policy. The CODEL arrived at mid-day
yesterday. I hosted a country team briefing over lunch at the Residence. They made clear that they were in strong
disagreement with many aspect of our (Administration) policy on Honduras, but they did hear us out on our perspective
on the situation since the coup. Following the country team briefing, the CODEL went to the Presidential Palace to meet
with de facto regime President Micheletti. No Embassy staff was present or involved in that meeting, although we
provided the CODEL with security and transportation. Following the 90-minute session with M, the CODEL returned to
the Residence and met with Supreme Court President Rivera and several of the court magistrates. The Rivera discussed
his views on the legal aspects of the coup. He made the case that the process involving the Attorney General and the
Supreme Court was legal, although he acknowledged that by extraditing President Zelaya the military had disregarded
Court instructions and its issuance of an arrest warrant. The Honduran court members found a very receptive CODEL to
their arguments. The CODEL then stayed at the Residence for a meeting with a group of legislators. We had five
members of the Honduran National Congress representing three political parties. Three of the members were
supportive of Micheletti and two were strongly opposed to the coup. In a very interesting debate, former Minister of
Defense Orellana (a Liberal Congressmen who resigned following the coup) won the debate making a very powerful
presentation arguing that the events of June 28 were unquestionably a coup. Orellana's arguments for very muck track
with ours, and I believe this meeting had an impact on both Rep. Mack and Rep. Bilbray views about the coup. I am
convinced they came out of this meeting much more aware of the serious legal flaws in the regime's case that the coup
was constitutional.

The CODEL returned to their hotel where they met with a group of U.S. and Honduran business leaders to discuss the
current situation. We were not asked to participate in this event. The CODEL returned this morning to the Residence
for a breakfast I hosted with six of the country's presidential candidates. This was a an interesting session and allowed
for a review of the political situation and a look at possible ways forward. In the meeting Bilbray laid out the CODEL's
perspectives and the message they planned to take back to the Hill and to the Administration. Both stated that they
supported the idea of a negotiated solution under the Arias mediation. However, they said they would advocate an
agreement that would call for Micheletti's resignation, but not the restitution of Z. The CODEL's proposal was for some
type of constitutional succession involving the President of the Supreme Court as Micheletti's successor. Following this
meeting, the CODEL met with Pastor Anderson, a U.S. religious and social worker here. He was accompanied by several
Honduran human rights workers who made a cogent case that the human rights situation in Honduras had deteriorated
significantly since the June 28 coup.

The CODEL left for the airport about an hour ago. This CODEL was friendly and professional, but they certainly were not
helpful to Administration policy goals in Honduras. The CODEL sent a strong message of support for the Micheletti
regime. The meeting of the CODEL with Micheletti received prominent press coverage by the establishment media,
which are mostly in the anti-Zelaya camp.

As usual, our staff did a splendid job handling all aspects of this short fused visit. We will report the details of the CODEL
via front channel message.

Hugo Llorens
Ambassador
US. Embassy Tegucigalpa, Honduras
504 236-9320




                                                   312
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763950 Date: 07/31/2015
