     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764289 Date: 07/31/2015



                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                           B6



From:                           sbwhoeop
Sent:                           Tuesday, October 6, 2009 2:11 PM
To:                             H
Subject:                        Note from Joe Wilson... Sid



Hillary: I'm passing on a note below from Joe Wilson. Sid


Dear Madame Secretary,
It was great to see you, albeit briefly, at the US —Africa business summit. Your speech spoke to the entire
audience as I'm sure you felt from the response. I also appreciate your offer to meet with me the next time we
are both in Washington and would like to take you up on it.

I am now working with a serious American engineering and construction company, Symbion Power, that has
been hugely successful in Iraq and Afghanistan (on fixed cost contracts). It specializes in power plants,
substations and transmission towers and lines. It made its name in Iraq constructing transmission towers and
pulling lines across al Anbar province at the height of the war there. Its business model is to partner with local
companies and to train local employees to do the construction, maintenance and repair, and to provide the
security. In Iraq and Afghanistan they established training centers and graduated over 3000 certified
linemen. They partner with an American Lineman College in Idaho to provide the ed ucation and
certification. We think the model is well adapted to Africa and have already begun work on a training center in
Tanzania, where we will be bidding on all of the upcoming MCC financed power generation and distribution
projects. I have asked Sid to pass a memory stick with a four minute video that explains what Symbion does
and how it does it.

I tell you all this, not to tout Symbion (about which I am very enthusiastic) but let you know that we are doing
much of what you have been advocating in your public comments about human capacity development. The fact
that we have been successful on fixed cost contracts also speaks to your criticism of American companies that
have been milking the government with their cost plus contracts for the last nine years. Our goal is to
demonstrate that an emphasis on developing local talent is not just the right thing to do but is also good
business.

I look forward to seeing you the next time I am in Washington. I know how precious your time is, and very
much appreciate your generosity.

With warm regards and best wishes.
Joe




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764289 Date: 07/31/2015
