           UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767638 Date: 07/31/2015
                                                                                    RELEASE IN
                                                                                    PART B6



IMILMACTedirtlinebIZIN


From:                                   sbwhoeop
Sent:                                   Thursday, October 29, 2009 7:08 PM
To:                                     H; Doug Band
Subject:                                fyi: Blair's chances seem to be cratering in EU. Sid


Guardian


Tony lair's bid for EU residency sinks
Ex-PM's chances of winning role slide as Sarkozy and Merkel fail to back him

       •      Nicholas s‘tv'at.i. and )an,..Trajf.pf in Brussels
       •                     u!,-„ Thursday 29 October 2009 21.26 GMT



T20.,.:31::.3.1:7's hopes of becoming Europe's first sitting president were receding fast tonight as Britain admitted his chances
of success were "fading" after the continent's centre-right leaders made it clear one of their own must have the post.
Hours after G.nr.4,efl Srov.,,h delivered his strongest statement of support for Blair — disclosing that he had spoken to him
earl;er this week — British sources indicated that the former prime minister was unlikely to assume the high-profile. job.
"it would be right to describe Tony's c,hances as fading," one British source said."..slcgles. t...aa'r.sa; and                  are
not terribly enthusiastic. Silvio Berlust.-,oni remains his strongest backer."
Bialr's expected failure to secure the post of president of the European Council meant that ca,•,-,'et.,.."it;ity.n-te was emerging
as a serious contender to assume the new post of high representative for foreign policy. The foreign secretary insisted,
however, that.he was "not available".
Miliband spoke out as British sources said it had become clear in recent days that Blair would struggle to become
president. The post is likely to be filled in the next month amid signs that the Czech Republic will become the last EU
country to ratify the Lisbon treaty.
Sarkozy, the French president, and Merkel, the German chancellor, are understood to have agreed at a dinner at the
Elysee Palace last night that the new president should be appointed from the main centre-right EPP grouping, which
brings together the parties currently ruling most EU countries.
Brown gave a hint at a press conference that Blair's candidacy was fading when he qualified his strong backing for his
predecessor by stating that there were also other candidates for the job. "Of course it may not happen and there are other
candidates as well," he said.
The prime minister's remarks came after he attended an acrimonious meeting of the European centre-left leaders this
afternoon, shortly before the EU summit in Brussels began.
Brown was understood to have had a tense exchange with Martin Schulz, the German leader of the Socialists in the
European parliament, who wants the left to assume the new foreign policy post, leaving the presidency to the centre right.
Brown told the meeting: "You need to get real. This is a unique opportunity to get a progressive politician to be the
president of the council."
But it soon became clear that Blair has no support on the left, let alone on the centre right. Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero,
Spain's centre-left prime minister, for the first time publicly queried the Blair candidacy by announcing that the centre left
across the EU was more concerned with securing the other post of European foreign minister. Zapatero, who will have to
work with the new European figureheads when Spain assumes the Eti's six-month rotating presidency on 1 January, said
the European socialists were clear that they want the post of the high representative. "There is a preference for the high
representative," he said. "That is rather reasonable."
A senior Spanish official said this was the first time that Zapatero had "dropped Blair" and that the centre-left in the EU
was seeking a deal with the centre-right, led by Merkel. The centre-right would get the job coveted by Blair, while the
centre left would take the foreign minister post. The lack of support for Blair became clear when Jean Asselborn,
Luxembourg's foreign minister, launched a strong attack on him as be emerged from the meeting of Socialist leaders. "lt is
not about the person of Tony Blair. Now in the United States, Obama is the president, it is no more Mr Bush. We have a
new treaty, we have to reset Europe and we need to start with some new ideas. There is and will remain a link for the next
 generation between Iraq, Bush and Tony Blair."


           UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767638 Date: 07/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767638 Date: 07/31/2015



Downing Street wiil resist criticism that it was wrong to mount such a strong campaign in favour of Blair when it had
become clear earlier this week that his chances were fading.
Brown believes it was right — and in the national interest — to argue strongly for Blair when there was a chance to secure
such a senior post for Britain. Blair, who had a tense relationship with Brown during his decade as prime minister, will be
pleased by the strength of his successor's support.
Brown said today: "Let me say very clear that we, the British government, believe that Tony Blair would be an excellent
candidate and an excellent person to hold the job of president of the council.
"His international experience is well known, his expertise on environmental, economic and security issues is well known to
everybody throughout Europe as well as known throughout the world          If you have the chance for that to happen it is in
Britain's national interest."


        guardian.co.uk Guardian News and Media Limited 2009




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767638 Date: 07/31/2015
