        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN
                                                                                                     PART B6


From:                              sbwhoeop
Sent:                              Thursday, November 26, 2009 10:58 AM
To:                                H
Subject:                           Re: New memo. Decline and fall, etc. Cheers, Sid



Have a good holiday. Very best to Bill. Talk soon.


    Original Message
From: H <HD 22OrlintonPmail nom>
To: 'sbwhoeop
Sent: Thu, Nov 26, 2009 10:51 am
Subject: Re: New memo. Decline and fall, etc. Cheers, Sid

Thanks and Happy Thanksgiving. I will call again over the next few days.



         Original Message

From: sbwhceo0

To: H

Sent: Thu Nov 26 10:23:47 2009

Subject: New memo. Decline and fall, etc. Cheers, Sid




                                                                                  CONFIDENTIAL




                                                                                                 November

26, 2009




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015



For: Hillary

From: Sid

Re: Afghan/Western Alliance/UK




1.      Happy Thanksgiving!

2.      On the eve of the president's announcement on Afghanistan the Western

alliance is near-broken. The obvious: Your trip to NATO will be the final call

on Afghanistan. Whatever you scrap together there will be the remains of the

day. There will be no more. The spare change in troops you pick up will be the

close-out deal. The Europeans will be less amenable to contributions in the

future than the House Democratic Caucus.

3.      Consensus across the board in Britain—center, right, left—is that the

Atlantic alliance--the special relationship—the historic bond since World War

II—is shattered. There is no dissenting voice, not one, and there are no

illusions. Opinion is unanimous. The bottom line is that the Obama

administration's denigration of the UK is seen as the summation of the Bush era.

Undoubtedly, you saw this week Minister of Defense Bob Ainsworth's public

criticism of Obama's indecision and his accusation that the president is

indifferent and damaging to British interest. While Downing Street sought to

ameliorate his remarks with an oleaginous statement his view is simply what

evervone—evervone—thinks. His clumsy outburst was a classic gaffe—an

embarrassing mistake because it reveals something true. The Chilcot inquiry of

Parliament, publicly conducting hearings on the origins of UK involvement in the

Iraq invasion, has put Bush's war on terror—and British involvement—on trial—and

the calmly conducted but eviscerating hearings will go on for another year.

Blair is seen as either complicit on the basis of knowing there was no casus

belli or as an enthusiastically deceived tool. Nick Clegg, leader of the Liberal

Democrats, has stated that the reason support for the Afghanistan mission has

cratered is because of the lies told in the run-up to the Iraq war—another view

universally held. Meanwhile, former UK ambassador to the US Christopher Meyer



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015



has published his new book on the history of UK diplomacy with concluding

sections on the demise of the special relationship. He is not only being

interviewed on all British media but also has appeared as a voluble witness

before the Chilcot commission. (I've included a report below.) All British

newspapers and journals have prominently published many pieces within the last

week on the decline and fall of the US-UK relationship. (I've included below the

lead editorial today from the London Times and the cover story from the

Spectator—two of the most resolutely pro-American sources.) The tone is not

resentful, but reserved, disdainful and superior. The US administration is

considered blinkered, parochial and counter-productive. Conservatives are more

contemptuous than Labour, which feels abandoned and somewhat baffled. Rather

than eager to be Obama's poodle, Cameron would be superficially friendly and

privately scornful. Class has a lot to do with the contempt. A Cameron

government would be more aristocratic and even narrowly Etonian than any

Conservative government in recent history, sharply contrasting especially with

the striving and classless perspective of the grocer's daughter, Margaret

Thatcher. And yet, and yet, the most recent poll this week showed Labour within

striking distance of the Tories, about five points down, the result of a slight

economic uptick. A hung parliament seems very possible. Given the distribution

of voting patterns, Labour need not win a plurality to have more seats than the

Tories. The slight buoyancy for Labour in this unique situation has only

heightened anxiety about Obama's Afghanistan process, which has excluded the

British government from significant consultation and consideration of its

interests. (See the lead to Con Coughlin's Spectator piece.) Therefore, you

might contemplate a brief trip to London and public appearance with Brown on

your way back from Brussels.

4.       On the Western alliance, beyond its military part, NATO, there is much

more to say and develop, but later. Read three pieces below:




From The Times



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015



November 26, 2009

Atlantic drift

Washington's delay in announcing its Afghanistan strategy has left Brown

drifting. Obama needs to invest more time and attention in the transatlantic

alliance

President Obama declared on Tuesday that "the whole world" had a responsibility

to help the US-led mission in Afghanistan. He would, he said, soon lay out the

"obligations of our international partners". Those partners have been waiting a

long time for the details. On Monday the President had his tenth meeting with

his advisers to work out his strategy for Afghanistan. He has now spent almost

three months considering his options, and has promised an announcement on

deployments after the Thanksgiving holiday.

For Gordon Brown, this cannot come too soon. After the United States, Britain is

the largest contributor of troops to the Nato operation in Afghanistan. There

has never been any suggestion that Britain has enough soldiers to pursue a

separate strategy or that it can operate independently of the US forces, which

already number some 68,000 troops. Until the White House decides whether to send

an extra 40,000 or some figure significantly lower than the number requested by

General Stanley McChrystal, Mr Brown cannot properly plan the best support

strategy.

It is becoming sadly apparent that Britain has been left drifting by the delays

in Washington, and that the Obama Administration is largely unaware of the

embarrassment this is causing the Government. More worryingly, this does not

seem to be a source of concern within the Administration. Downing Street,

diplomatically, turns aside any suggestion that it is frustrated by the

nonchalance with which it is being treated. But the insistent questions on

Afghanistan, the anger caused by the steady stream of returning war dead and the

rapid crumbling of public support for the war cannot be answered effectively

until Mr Brown is taken into American confidence and seen as a full partner in

the Nato campaign.

On the surface, the continuing high regard in Britain for the dynamic and



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015



articulate new President has masked these growling complaints. Mr Brown is not

suffering, as his predecessor did, from the taint of close association with a

deeply unpopular US president. On the contrary: like several European leaders,

he is still eager to position himself as close as possible to Mr Obama to clothe

himself in some of the President's European popularity. But within Government,

there is already worry that Britain's voice counts far less than it did in the

past. This is not simply another instance of the persistent but pointless

British anxiety over the so-called special relationship; it is a justified

concern that two of the main pillars of the Nato alliance should have policies

and strategies that are closely co-ordinated and sympathetically understood on

both sides when fighting a war.

The fault, glaringly, is on the American side. The White House no longer seems

to be monitoring the reactions and political options of its transatlantic

allies. It is not sufficient to suggest that the Administration sees little

point in investing time and diplomacy in a British government likely to be

defeated in the coming general election; wartime allies have interests that go

far beyond the political make-up of the government of the day. Mr Obama promised

during his election campaign to revive trust in American leadership and to

re-engage in multinational diplomacy. In office, he has certainly voiced the

same ideals; but he has invested little in giving new substance and dynamism to

the transatlantic relationship.

On Afghanistan, Mr Brown has sometimes been left speechless by Washington. He

talks of sending 500 extra troops. But until he knows the likely US strategy, he

cannot outline his own. Atlanticism is always fragile on the Left and was

stretched to breaking point by Tony Blair. It is now being undermined by

indifference in Washington. Today America is enjoying Thanksgiving. Tomorrow it

must look out again to its all



THE SPECTATOR

          A special form of disrespect

         Con Coughlin
<htt.D: /www.spectator.co.uk/searchor/?searchStrina-Con%20Cougb in>


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015



          Wednesday, 18th November 2009

          Barack Obama's increasing disregard for Britain's views is no way to

treat an ally whose troops have fought side by side with America since September

11, says Con Coughlin

          Washington

          It says much about Britain's rapidly disappearing 'special

relationship' with America that when I happened to mention to some of our senior

military officers that I was visiting Washington, they begged me to find out

what the Obama administration was thinking about Afghanistan. it is not just

that the transatlantic lines of communication, so strong just a few years ago,

have fallen into disuse. There is now a feeling that, even if we reached the

Oval Office, there would be no one willing to take Britain's call.

          For weeks now, President Obama has been deliberating over what the

Afghan strategy should be — and how many troops to send. If there is confusion

in Washington, then Britain's strategy is not much clearer. Gordon Brown has

staged a recent flurry of activity on the subject, from writing misspelt letters

to grieving mothers to demanding that an exit strategy be established for the

withdrawal cf British forces. Yet among our top brass, the general perception is

that the Prime Minister has little interest in the war.

          It is often as if Brown regards the Afghan campaign as a dead. fish

that Tony Blair has left in the top drawer of his Downing Street desk. It has

infected his premiership with a foul odour, and he wants to be rid of it as soon

as possible. This explains his promise, on Monday, to set a timetable for the

withdrawal of British troops at the earliest available opportunity. The signal

is sent that an exit is not just in sight, but being approached.

          Brown's approach hardly squares with his Foreign Secretary's

assertion, made the next day in his address to Nato's Parliamentary Assembly,

that British forces should remain until the Afghans are strong enough to take

care of their own affairs. Miliband might have his faults, such as his obsessive

enthusiasm for Europe. But he is sound on Afghanistan where — unlike the prime

minister — he has been an articulate and well-informed advocate of the Nato



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015



cause. One has the feeling that, if Mr Obama were able to talk about

Afghanistan, Mr Miliband could have a decent conversation with him.

          But the very fact that these policy divisions are now starting to

appear in London is symptomatic of a far deeper malaise that lies at the heart

of Afghan policy-making; it is a malaise that now threatens to jeopardise the

success of the entire mission. And this malaise is the absence of meaningful

dialogue between the White House and its hitherto most stalwart and reliable

ally, particularly when it comes to the messy business of confronting Islamist

militants through force of arms.

          We all had a good giggle when Brown was reduced to chasing the Leader

of the Free World through the subterranean kitchen complex at the UN's New York

headquarters in September. One can understand why Obama can think of a million

better ways to spend his time than talking to our obsessive, nail-chewing and

electorally doomed prime minister. But given that Britain and America are

currently fighting a war together, one would hope that the true statesman would

overcome any personal reservations -- and deal with Mr Brown because of the

country he represents.

          What really troubles British policymakers is that the collapse in the

relationship is institutional, not personal, and that the president has little

interest in listening to what Britain has to say on many world issues, even at a

time when British servicemen and women are sacrificing their lives in what is

supposed to be a common cause.

          The astonishing disregard with which Mr Obama treats Britain has been

made clear by his deliberations over the Afghan issue. As he decides how many

more troops to send to Afghanistan — a decision which will fundamentally affect

the scope of the mission — Britain is reduced to guesswork. The White House does

not even pretend to portray this as a joint decision. It is a diplomatic

cold-shouldering that stands in contrast not just to the Blair-Bush era, but to

the togetherness of the soldiers on the ground.

          One of the enduring cornerstones of the transatlantic alliance is the

deep bond that exists between the British and American armed forces. The



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015



strength of the American military might be many times that available to Britain

but, as any senior officer will tell you, on either side of the Atlantic, they

are so close as to be joined at the hip. From the moment they sign up, young

American and British officers train together, socialise together and — since

9/11 — have fought and died together.

          The relaxed familiarity between the two martial traditions was

reflected in the warmth with which General Stanley McChrystal, the American

commander• of Nato forces in Afghanistan, referred during his recent visit to

London to British contemporaries such as 'Jacko', General Sir Michael Jackson,

former head of the British army, and 'Lamby', Lt-Gen Sir Graeme Lamb, who is

currently spending his well-earned retirement in Kabul helping to devise a new

counter-insurgency strategy to defeat the Taleban. So far as Afghanistan is

concerned, it would be fair to say that American and British military commanders

are singing from the same Afghan prayer mat.

          Indeed, there was no shortage of enthusiasm on the part of the British

military, or any of the other Whitehall departments involved in the Afghan

campaign, to support Obama when he announced last March a new counter-insurgency

strategy based on an Iraq-like military `surge'. McChrystal was personally

appointed by Obama to make the policy a success, and General Sir David Richards,

himself a former commander of Nato forces in Afghanistan, was one of a number of

senior army officers who Quickly got behind the new initiative. So, too, did the

redoubtable Sir Sherard Cowper-Coles, our former ambassador to Kabul, who

drafted numerous briefing documents making the case for greater co-operation and

cohesion within Whitehall, and the development of a comprehensive

counter-terrorism strategy that encompassed all the participants, and not just

the military.

          So where are they now, all these bright initiatives? Why is it that

the Foreign Office and our senior military commanders are as much in the dark as

anyone else as to. what the strategy for Afghanistan is to be? We don't know,

because Mr Obama is too busy cosying up to his new chums in Moscow and Beijing

to tell us. And as we stumble around in the policy darkness, there is the



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015



inevitable tendency to make it up as we go along. Hence the conflicting policy

edicts issued this week b✓ Messrs Brown and Miliband.

          The trouble started in the summer, when Obama appears to have had a

change of heart and, rather than proceeding with the Afghan strategy he

announced in March, decided to undertake a review of it instead. And in the

process of so doing he has provided us with a telling insight into how we can

expect the Obama presidency to function in future.

          Much of the criticism, at home and abroad, concerning the Afghan

policy review has tended to focus on accusations of White House dithering which,

after nearly three and a half months, is not entirely without foundation. But

what should be far more worrying for all those countries, such as Britain, that

had looked forward to co-operating with Obama's apparent desire to reach out and

engage with America's allies is the exclusivity of his style of decision-making

— if you can call it that.

          As General McChrystal has found to his cost, Obama and his inner

circle of Chicago pots do not take kindly to being second-guessed by those whose

advice they seek, but have every right to reject. There is no reason to doubt

McChrystal's gloomy prediction -- which is generally endorsed by Whitehall — that

without an extra 40,000 Nato troops the Afghan mission is doomed to failure. But

talk to any Obama aide these days and they will tell you that, fine soldier

though he undoubtedly is, McChrystal is politically naive, spoke cut of turn and

now thoroughly regrets the day he ever set foot in a London think tank, where he

stated his case too explicitly for the White House's liking. One recent two-hour

Afghan strategy meeting spent 24 minutes discussing whether McChrystal was the

right man for the job after all. In other words, to use the phrase- ology

popular in Chicago, he's dead meat.

          Obama, meanwhile, has made his own deliberations so secretive that

only about three people in the whole of Washington — and, ergo, the rest of the

world — know precisely what he has in mind, and none of them is talking. Even

President George W. Bush, who was frequently criticised for his arrogance and

unilateralism, was better than this. From 9/11 until the Iraq war, he kept Tony




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015



Blair and other trusted allies (there weren't that many, let's face it) fully

briefed on what he was planning — so much so that Blair is now accused of

colluding with him to invade Iraq from the spring of 2002.

          But with Obama there are no regular video-conferences bringing Downing

Street up to date on the latest White House thinking. No special envoys making

secret visits to London to keep the key players informed. Instead we will have

to wait, like everyone else, for the puffs of smoke from the White House — which

are now expected around the Thanksgiving holiday — to find out what Obama really

intends to do about Afghanistan. He is, in all too many ways; an AWOL ally.

          Nor is it just on Afghanistan that we can discern a high-handed

approach from the American president. Did Obama bother to consult Britain before

cancelling the missile shield system for Eastern Europe (the early•-warning

detection system is, after all, based at RAP Fylingdales on the North Yorkshire

Moors)? No he did not. The Poles, who are rightly sensitive about their security

being used as a bargaining chip in negotiations with their super-power

neighbours, had to make do with a late-night call from Hillary Clinton on the

eve of the announcement — the Poles understandably turned down the call, a

breach of both manners and protocol. In his keenness to befriend Russian

President Dmitry Medvedev, had Obama taken any account of the widespread

European unease concerning the mood of resurgent nationalism sweeping Moscow?

Not a chance.

          And to judge from his recent peregrinations around the Far East, it

seems Obama is far more interested in making new friends than taking the trouble

to keep up with old acquaintances. The enthusiasm he displayed when he bumped

into Dmitry Medvedev, Russia's Prime Minister, during this week's Apec summit in

Singapore was considerably greater than he has shown for many of his European

allies. Not for Medvedev the indignity of conducting important bilateral

discussions in kitchens surrounded by vats of boiling noodles. And in Beijing

Obama spent a convivial evening with President Hu Jintao, discussing the

evolution and histories of China and America. Being an American ally has never

seemed so unrewarding.



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015



          There will, though, inevitably come a time when Obama discovers who

America's true friends really are. Sooner or later he will have to deal with the

considerably more taxing issues of Islamist militancy, rogue nuclear states and

other tangible threats to the West's security. At that point, Obama will

discover a simple but essential truth. The world divides between those who

support American values of freedom and democracy, and those who seek to destroy

them.

          Few nations have been more committed to- supporting those values with

both blood and treasure than Britain. This country, and especially those British

troops fighting alongside their American counterparts, deserve far better than

this president's disregard.

          Con Coughlin is the Daily Telegraph's executive foreign editor and

author of Khomeini's Ghost: Iran since 1979 (Macmillan).



          The Spectator, 22 Old Queen Street, London, SWIH 9HP. All Articles and

Content Copyright ©2009 by The Spectator (1828) Ltd. All Rights Reserved




Iraq war build-up 'left us scrabbling for smoking gun' says ex-UK ambassador



Sir Christopher Meyer says plans to invade Iraq did not give time for weapons

inspectors

             James Meikle <ht:tp://www,guardian,co.ukiprofile/jamesmelki> and

Andrew Sparrow <http://www.quardian.co .1k/profileiandrewsparrow>

             guardian.co.uk <htt,p://www.uuardian.co.uk/> , Thursday 26 November

2009 12.57 GMT

The military timetable for an invasion of Iraq <ntt //www.guardianco.                world/iraq>

in 2003 did not give time for UN weapons-inspectors in the country to do their

job, the former British ambassador to Washington told the Iraq inquiry in London



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015



today.

Sir Christopher Meyer said the "unforgiving nature" of the build-up after

American forces had been told to prepare for war meant that "we found ourselves

scrabbling for the smoking gun".

He added: "It was another way of saying 'it's not that Saddam has to prove that

he's innocent, we've now bloody well got to try and prove he's guilty.' And we -

the Americans, the British - have never really recovered from that because of

course there was no smoking gun."

The US had first prepared for invasion in January but the date was later moved

to March. "All that said, when you looked at the timetable for the inspections,

it was impossible to see how [Hans] Blix [chief weapons inspector] could bring

the process to a conclusion, for better or for worse, by March."

Meyer said he had been in favour of removing Saddam. He thought you did not need •

9/11 or weapons of mass destruction     to justify confronting Iraq. Saddam had not
lived up to the commitments given after the first Gulf war. He had "the means

and the will" to build weapons even if he hid not have them at the time.

Meyer said he did not know what made the UK fix "on a very large land force by

our standards". He believed it would not have damaged Britain's standing in the

US to have sent fewer troops to Iraq, but actively opposing the war would have

done.

Earlier Meyer said George Bush's administration was seen by many as "running out

of steam" on the eve of the "great atrocity" of the 9/11 attacks on the US.

It looked like an administration that had run into trouble very quickly, the

former ambassador to Washington said. People were saying the effort of getting

big tax cuts and medical prescription benefits for older people through Congress

had "killed" Bush, Meyer said. He added that secretary of state Colin Powell's

efforts to.narrow and deepen sanctions against Iraq had failed and there was a

"huge bear market" against Donald Rumsfeld, the defence secretary.

Meyer said attitudes towards Iraq were influenced to an extent not appreciated

by him at the time by the anthrax scare in the US soon after 9/11

<htt'c://en..- ikipedia.org/wiki/2 _ a      rax attacks> . US senators and others



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015



were sent anthrax spores in the post, a crime that led to the death of five

people, prompting policvmakers to claim links to Saddam Hussein.

Meyer told the third day of Sir John Chilcot's hearings that from the onset of

the Bush presidency in 2001, there was enthusiasm on the Republican right for

arming and supporting Iraqi dissidents, "mostly in London", particularly the

Iraqi National Congress led by Ahmad Chalabi.

Powell was sceptical of such "belligerent" moves, concentrating on sanctions

with Robin Cook, the then-British foreign secretary, with whom, Meyer said,

"somewhat to my surprise", he got on well.

On 9/11 Condoleezza Rice, then the US national security adviser, told Meyer she

was in "no doubt: it was an al-Qaida operation". The following weekend Bush and

his key advisers met at Camp David and contacts later told Meyer there had been

a "big ding-dong" about Iraq and Saddam.

It seemed that Paul Wolfowitz, Rumsfeld's deputy, argued for retaliation to

include Iraq, Meyer said. It was not clear where Rumsfeld stood. But later that

month Bush and Tony Blair, on a visit to Washington, were agreed on a

"laser-like focus" on al-Qaida and Pakistan.

Blair's reputation had soared "above all others" because of his support for the

US, the former ambassador told the inquiry.

But the anthrax scare had "steamed up" policy makers in Bush's administration

and helped swing attitudes against Saddam, who the administration believed. had

been the last person to use anthrax.

Rice fell more and more "in the camp of Powell's enemies". There was a "sea

chanae" in attitudes to containment but the UK still had "a legal problem" with

regime change. Meyer told British officials to argue that the alliance would be

in better shape if there was international support for military action. There

was no need to argue that with the state department. But there was with Dick

Cheney,. the vice-president, and Rumsfeld.

Asked about Blair's meeting with Bush at Crawford, Texas, in April 2002, where,

some observers believe, the decision to go to war was made, Meyer said: "To this

day I'm not entirely clear what degree of convergence was signed in blood at the



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015



Texas range."

But a speech by Blair the following day was, he believed, the first time the

prime minister had publicaly said "regime change". "What he was trying to do was

to draw the lessons of 9/11 and apply them to the situation in Iraq, which led -

I think not inadvertently but deliberately - to a conflation of the threat posed

by Osama bin Laden and Saddam Hussein.

"When I heard that speech, I thought that this represents a tightening of the

UK/US alliance and a degree of convergence on the danger Saddam Hussein

presented."




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766156 Date: 07/31/2015
