      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760158 Date: 07/31/2015


                                                                                                        RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                        B6,B5




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Wednesday, October 7, 2009 8:01 AM
To:                                'millscd@state.gov.
Subject:                           Re: My Op-Ed in The Hill




    Original Message
From: Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
To: H
Sent: Wed Oct 07 07:57:05 2009
Subject: FW: My Op-Ed in The Hill

FYI




From: Nelson W. Cunningham
Sent: Tuesday, October 06, 2009 b.11 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: My Op-Ed in The Hill




Cheryl —




I thought you'd be interested in my op-ed in The Hill. It's on the web today and will be in the print edition tomorrow.




Doing my small part. Ruth Marcus is writing in tomorrow's Post.




Nelson




<http://thehill.com/>




Holds, delays on Cabinet picks hurting American businesses

By Nelson W. Cunningham - 10/06/09 03:45 PM ET

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760158 Date: 07/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760158 Date: 07/31/2015




You may never have heard of the Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade, or the Under Secretary of
Treasury for International Affairs. You may have vaguely assumed there was a Deputy United States Trade
Representative, and an Assistant Secretary of State for Western Hemisphere Affairs, and an ambassador to Brazil, but
never thought much of them or what they do.

But ask American CEOs and business leaders who they turn to in Washington for help getting a fair shake in foreign
markets or untying global trade knots, and you will learn that these are the very officials they rely on. Yet today, when
every export dollar and trade-supported job is essential to America's economic recovery, these key positions sit empty.
And, surprisingly, these five seats are empty because of stalls and behind-the-scenes maneuvers by Senate Republicans
— usually key allies of U.S. business.

In each case, the names went up months ago. The nominees have strong credentials and many have demonstrated
strong bipartisan support. The reasons for the holds and delays vary. But even if the blocking actions are unrelated,
collectively they deny American businesses their most effective overseas advocates.

•Miriam Sapiro, who was unanimously approved by the Finance Committee in July to be Deputy United States Trade
Representative with responsibility for trade agreements and enforcement with Europe and the Americas (including
NAFTA), has a one-man hold by Sen. Jim Bunning (R-Ky.) over a Canadian tobacco bill.

•Arturo Valenzuela, nominee for Assistant Secretary of State for Western Hemisphere, was overwhelmingly approved by
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in July, but Sen. Jim DeMint (R-S.C.) has a one-man hold on Valenzuela as a
protest against the administration's Honduras policy.

•Thomas Shannon, nominee for ambassador to Brazil, is also being blocked by Sen. DeMint over Honduras. Shannon is
hardly political, but is a career foreign service officer who was President Bush's top official for Latin America at the NSC
and then the State Department.

• Francisco Sanchez, nominated in April to be Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade, responsible for
advancing U.S. export and trade opportunities around the world. Republican staff under Sen. Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa) on
the Finance Committee have repeatedly delayed a hearing.

• Lael Brainard, nominated in March to be Under Secretary of Treasury for International Affairs, is also being held up by
the Republican staff on the Finance Committee. With an empty chair in this powerful position — it was previously held
by future Treasury Secretaries Timothy Geithner and Lawrence Summers — our ability to coordinate a response to the
financial crisis is hampered at a time when we can't afford it.

Who is hurt by these holds and staff delays? Certainly the president, who is facing the worst economic crisis in 50 years,
a stalled trade agenda, and economic and political turmoil in many parts of Latin America, including the hot-button crisis
in Honduras.

But U.S. businesses are also hurt. When American companies find themselves in commercial or trade disputes abroad, or
face unfair competition from foreign companies or discriminatory practices from regulators, they turn directly to the
roster above. With all these chairs empty, U.S. businesses with problems abroad find themselves facing a classic
Goldilocks problem — the Cabinet secretaries above are too big (and too busy), and the officials below are too small to
have an impact at the right levels.

Moreover, the international economic issues of greatest interest to U.S. businesses are precisely the ones that are being
hampered by these vacancies: balanced and coordinated growth out of the Great Recession, promotion of job-
generating U.S. exports, delayed trade agreements with Colombia and Panama, barriers into Brazil's huge market, trade
tensions with Canada (our largest trading partner) and security and border issues with Mexico (our second-largest),
among many others.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760158 Date: 07/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760158 Date: 07/31/2015




And while all U.S. business interests overseas are affected by these vacancies, it is our business and political interests in
the Americas that are being hit most directly, because of the responsibilities and expertise of the five nominees.
Predictably, this lamentable situation is renewing cries from our neighbors that even under a promising new president,
they continue to be neglected. And as importantly, our ability to help shape political and economic events in our
hemisphere to advance U.S. interests is suffering greatly. Who wins when we can't act? Our foreign competitors; not
just foreign companies, but Hugo Chavez and his anti-democratic allies.

All this is not to cast blame on the United States Senate, which has a constitutional duty to provide "advice and consent"
on presidential nominations (though it may cause one to question the tradition that permits a single senator to put an
indefinite hold on a nominee). Nor is it to cast blame solely on Republican members or staff. Democratic senators and
their staffs used these same parliamentary maneuvers under Republican presidents.

But it is to say that those who engage in those tactics now — at a time of global economic crisis and with growing
financial, trade and political frictions in our own hemisphere — should be reminded of the harm done to important U.S.
interests. In the days after 9/11, the Democratically-controlled Senate moved swiftly to confirm the U.N. ambassador
and other stalled security-related posts. Today's circumstances are not the same by any means, but as we confront the
worst economic crisis in over 50 years, these are surely no ordinary times.

The time has come for the Senate to carry out its constitutional duty and to end the delays on these five key commerce
and trade nominations. American business deserves an A Team by its side.

Cunningham is managing partner of McLarty Associates, which advises U.S. and multinational businesses on their
international strategies. He was a Democratic White House and Senate aide.

Source:
http://thehill.com/opinion/op-ed/61849-holds-delays-on-cabinet-picks-hurting-american-businesses




Nelson W. Cunningham I Managing Partner I McLarty Associates I




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05760158 Date: 07/31/2015
