     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765161 Date: 07/31/2015


                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                              B6



From:                              sbwhoeop
Sent:                              Thursday, November 5, 2009 10:51 AM
To:                                H
Subject:                           In case no one shows you this from Foreign Policy today. Sid


http://thecable.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2009/11/04/experts_call_for_further_national_security_reform


Report: Obama's national security team
'incredibly weak'
Wed, 11/04/2009 - 1:45pm
Despite an expansion of the National Security Council staff, coordination of national security policy is still dysfunctional
and there is a lack of strategic guidance from President Obama, according to a group of leading outside experts and
former officials.
"Reform must take place," said dames Lalher, President & CEO of the r!-olect on n; alone! Security Reform (PNSR), If
you did not like what happened in the last 7 or 8 years... you're not going to like what's coming in the future."
"Momentum for reform is building, but it is largely rhetoric and good intentions," reads PNSR's .new report . The
congressionally funded group was begun as the result of a cooperative agreement between the Defense Department and
the Office of the Director of National Intelligence. "Strategic management of the national security system remains absent
and is desperately needed to make it integrated, cohesive, and agile," the report continues.
Calling reform of the national security infrastructure "the number one national security issue," Locher said that America's
ability to operate in international arenas the world over is "crippled" by the dysfunction within the system.
He called the White House's national security staff "incredibly weak," preventing integration and coordination
that the National Security Council should be doing.
"There's almost no strategic guidance from the president or the executive office of the president," Locher said,
adding, "We have almost no knowledge management in the national security system."
There's also no effective means for delegating the president's authority, he added.
Locher spoke a an event rolling out the latest PNSR report at the New American Foundation; hosted by its foreign policy
chief and editor of       V/gst1inc.Vgz? N.DtL:9 Steve Clemons.
Clemons noted that according to the Goldwater-Nichols act, President Obama was required to submit a national security
strategy by June 18, 150 days into his presidency, but he failed to do so.
The "Guiding Coalition" that oversaw the PNSR report included heavyweights such as former Lockheed Martin CEO
Norman Augustine, former Amb. Robert Blackwill, retired Gen. Wesley Clark, retired Adm. Ed Giambastiani, former
House Speaker Newt Gingrich, former Director of National Intelligence Mike McConnell, plus Washington players Brent
Scowcroft, Thomas Pickering, and Joseph Nye.
Last November's version of the PNSR report included input from now Obama officials Jim Jones, James Steinberg,
Michele Flournoy, and Dennis Blair. It declared that "the national security of the United States of America is
fundamentally at risk."




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765161 Date: 07/31/2015
