     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764568 Date: 07/31/2015


                                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL




From:                           Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                           Thursday, August 27, 2009 2:01 PM
To:
Cc:                              Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:                         Col DCA letter
Attachments:                     Demarche-letter Prior to Aug 28 UNASUR Summit 8-21-09.doc


Attached and enclosed below is the demarche and letter that went out, reflecting your comments.

SUBJECT: DEMARCHE/LETTER PRIOR TO AUGUST 28 UNASUR SUMMIT

REF: A. STATE 86734
     B. STATE 82581

1. (SBU) This is an action request, see paras 4 - 6.

2. (SBU) On August 14, the USG and Colombian government
provisionally agreed ad referendum to the text of a
bilateral Defense Cooperation Agreement (DCA) (septel).
We expect the final agreement may be signed in Bogota in
about a month, following a final review by both sides. As
noted in reftels, the DCA would permit the United States
access to several Colombian military bases and facilitate
effective bilateral cooperation on security matters in
Colombia. It would not/not authorize establishment of any
U.S. bases or ports, nor would it result in an overall
increase in the number of U.S. military personnel or
U.S.-citizen civilian contractors in Colombia.

3. (SBU) On August 18, the Secretary and Colombian FM
Jaime Bermudez met in Washington to discuss the DCA,
including the importance of coordinating our public
affairs and diplomatic strategies (septel to follow).
There is some concern that the upcoming Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR) summit would become a regional
referendum on the DCA. Colombian President Alvaro Uribe
will attend the summit provided that a full range of
regional security matters can be discussed, not just the
DCA. In this context, we are reaching out to selected
UNASUR members to ask that they raise other regional
security issues beyond the DCA.

4. (SBU) Action requested for Santiago, Asuncion, and
Lima: that you find an opportunity prior to the August 28
summit to raise the importance of discussing the full
range of regional security topics during the summit, and
not merely the DCA, with appropriate high levels of host
government.

                                                         265
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764568 Date: 07/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764568 Date: 07/31/2015




5. (SBU) Action requested for all: that Ambassadors to
UNASUR member states deliver the attached letter from the
Secretary to host governments in advance of the August 28
summit.

6. (U) Begin text:

Dear Madam/Mr. Minister:

I wanted to take a moment to write to you and your
colleagues about the upcoming summit of the Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR), scheduled for August 28 in
Bariloche. UNASUR provides an important forum to address
the issues and challenges that affect the region. The
United States supports the formation and effective
functioning of regional groups such as UNASUR. They
promote stability, cohesion, and leadership on key issues,
and ensure the best possible communication between
nations.

As you know, our common neighbor,
Colombia, has faced an ongoing threat from an unholy
alliance of terrorist groups funded by the insidious
illegal narcotics trade. These terrorists have threatened
the security of average Colombians and sought to overthrow
by violence and corruption successive,
democratically-elected Colombian governments. The actions
of these groups also threaten the security of other
countries in the hemisphere, sometimes directly, in many
ways indirectly. Over the last decade, Colombians have
beat back this threat, to the benefit of us all. My
country is proud of the role we have been able to play in
this effort.

This battle is far from won. Our governments and people
are collectively forced to find ways to protect ourselves
and our institutions from such threats. I am certain
these very issues will be addressed at the upcoming
summit, including the recently concluded Defense
Cooperation Agreement (DCA). We understand the
sensitivities associated with U.S. military activities in
the hemisphere and the questions your government may have
regarding the scope and extent of this agreement. I hope
the efforts made in the last few weeks by both my
government and the Colombian government have helped
address those questions.

I would like to take this opportunity to make several key
points about the DCA. First, this agreement is a
bilateral agreement with Colombia to deepen our
cooperation on security challenges within Colombia,
permitting U.S. access to specified agreed Colombian
                                                  26fi
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764568 Date: 07/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764568 Date: 07/31/2015




facilities to undertake mutually agreed activities on
Colombian territory. It is a bilateral agreement that
does not pose any threat or risk for the citizens of other
nations. On the contrary, our mutual efforts to combat
drug trafficking benefit the security of the region as a
whole. The agreement does not permit the establishment of
U.S. bases in Colombia. It will not result in an increase
in the U.S. military presence in Colombia, and we do not
seek any such increase. Activities undertaken at or from
Colombian bases by U.S. persons will be coordinated in
advance by Colombian authorities. All activities will be
based on full respect for the principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity of states, and
non-interventionism.

We are committed to being as forthcoming as possible in
addressing concerns about this bilateral agreement with
nations in the region, and we have endeavored to do so in
recent weeks through a variety of mechanisms. As concerns
or questions arise, I hope that you will feel free to
reach out to us to seek clarification.

The UNASUR summit provides a unique opportunity for the
organization to address a range of security issues that
affect the hemisphere, and I salute your leadership for
deciding to discuss these matters. The security
challenges affecting our hemisphere, and your nations in
particular, are pressing and grave. Our firm belief is
that a collective and collaborative approach to these
matters is essential. It is our commitment to work with
UNASUR nations to help address these concerns.

Sincerely yours,

Hillary Rodham Clinton

End text.




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No.T2014-20439 Doc No. C05764568 Date: 07/31/2015
