       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767501 Date: 07/31/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE
                                                                                              IN FULL


From:                                     Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                                     Sunday, November 29, 2009 9:58 PM
To:
Subject                                   FYI
Attachments:                              ole0.bmp


POLITICS d,.d        by   MARC AMBINDER




                                          « The Sunday Shows In Five Bullet Points   I Main

Nov 29 2009, 9:13 pm by Marc Ambinder

A Last-Minute Meeting On Afghanistan
President Obama convened a last-minute meeting of his national security team tonight to discuss the language that his
administration will use to describe its new strategy for Afghanistan. Two administration sources confirmed that the
meeting, which began at 5:oo pm, included cabinet officials like Defense Secretary Robert Gates. The officials would not
describe the meeting and said that no other news organizations were being given any background briefing. That suggests
that the meeting was akin to a pre-game rally session by the commander-in-chief: he wants to gert everyone from Gates to
Gen. Stanley McChrystal to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on the same page before the president's Tuesday speech.

Before young officers at West Point, Obama will announce his decision about Afghanistan to an increasingly skeptical
nation and a Democratic Congress that is threatening to condition its budgeting on identifiable off-ramps and
timeframes. Obama is expected to announce that he'll order several Army combat brigades to Afghanistan -- about
30,00o troops in all, most of them to be tasked with more rapidly standing up Afghanistan's indigenous army. His speech,
as described in broad terms by advisers last week, will be short and serious. His challenge is to persuade Americans that
the war in Afghanistan is winnable, as Americans tend to give their presidents significant leeway so long as they believe
that the president is confident in his strategy. Officials said last week that while would outline a clear exit strategy, he
would not tie troop withdrawals to any specific political developments in Afghanistan, which might run into opposition
from Democrats in Congress, who are demanding benchmarks. Nor is the President likely to impose direct conditions on
Afghanistan President Hamid Karzai. An official said that Obama plans to try explain the interconnection between the the
stability of Pakistan and the nexus of terror in Afghanistan. An explanation that the American people would accept has
proven elusive.

Permalink :: Comments (0) TrackBacks (0) :: Share




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767501 Date: 07/31/2015
