       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767657 Date: 07/31/2015
                                                                                               RELEASE IN
                                                                                               FULL




From:                                 Reines, Philippe I <reinesp@state.gov>
Sent:                                 Friday, October 30, 2009 3:09 AM
To:
Cc:                                   Mills, Cheryl D; Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob.)
Subject                               Wow



Editorial: Mrs. Clinton in Pakistan
NEW YORK TIMES
October 30, 2009

Hillary Rodham Clinton's first trip to Pakistan as secretary of state was never going to be easy. The day she arrived,
extremists detonated a car bomb at a crowded market in Peshawar that killed at least 100 people. The Nation
newspaper dismissed the visit as a mere "PR exercise, but who will buy what the US is selling is difficult to imagine,
beyond the already compliant government."

Polls show that an overwhelming majority of Pakistanis dislike and mistrust the United States. They blame Washington
for using and then abandoning them after the Soviets were driven from Afghanistan. And they resent Washington for
pressing their government now to fight against extremists — and suspect that they will be abandoned again. The fact
that many of the extremists are on Pakistan's territory and threatening Pakistan's government has not shifted that
thinking or mitigated that resentment.

A good part of this, of course, is the failure of Pakistan's government, which has still not adequately explained that this is
not just America's fight. But the United States is also to blame. For eight years the Bush administration coddled the
Pakistani Army at the expense of the rest of society.

Mrs. Clinton challenged Pakistan's government to do more to shut down Al Qaeda, but she was, rightly, determined to
use this visit to also broaden the relationship.

Instead of just courting President Asif All Zardari and the army chief, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, Mrs. Clinton also held
talks with the top opposition leader, Nawaz Sharif; parried questions from an audience of deeply suspicious college
students; met with civil society leaders, including women and Pashtun elders; gave interviews to Pakistani journalists;
and visited religious and cultural sights.

She promised to refocus American aid on the "needs of the people" and announced targeted commitments, including
$85 million for microloans for poor women to start businesses and $125 million for the first phase of an electricity
project aimed at reducing blackouts and improving energy conservation.

Those grants are welcome but still small change when compared with a five-year, $7.5 billion — nonmilitary — aid
package approved by Congress and signed into law this year. That package was supposed to demonstrate to Pakistanis
that, this time, the United States is in it for the long haul. Instead, it has become another focus of popular resentment.
The Army and some Pakistani news media whipped that up with disingenuous complaints that the legislation (Islamabad
was consulted beforehand) compromised Pakistan's sovereignty by conditioning disbursement on adequate civilian
control of the military.

If Washington is ever to enlist Pakistan as a reliable ally, it is going to have to do a much better job of explaining itself.
And it is going to have to insist that Pakistan's leaders start explaining the real stakes to their citizens and the real
benefits of an alliance with the United States. Mrs. Clinton's trip was an important start — but only a start.



       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767657 Date: 07/31/2015
