         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765705 Date: 07/31/2015




                                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Wednesday, November 11, 2009 2:34 PM
To:                               H
Subject                           FW: U.S. national held over Afghan boy's shooting



FYI


From: Slattery, Phillip T
Sent: Wednesday, November 11, 2009 2:28 PM
To: S; D(L); D(S); P; SSRAP_StaffAssistants; M_SpecialAssistants; CA-Staffers Mailbox; SCA-Staff-Assistants-DL; C
Cc: SES-O_Shift-II; SES-O_Shift-III; SWO; Bitter, Rena; Sullivan, Stephanie S
Subject: U.S. national held over Afghan boy's shooting

Colleagues —

I have attached a Reuters report below about a U.S. national who has been arrested in Northern Afghanistan over a
shooting incident.

Ops spoke with Kabul ACS Chief Katie Nutt who said that this incident occurred on November 8. Kabul has kept CA/OCS
in the loop about the case. The man, who works for a NGO, has not yet been charged and is being held at a NDS
(National Directorate of Security) site in a private cell. He is being treated well and has hired an attorney from the
Consular Section's list. The Consular Section has kept in touch with him, and the Swedish-led PRT in Mazar-i-Sharif has
also been in contact.

-PhiII



Phillip T. Slattery
Senior Watch Officer




U.S. aid worker held over Afghan boy's shooting

KABUL, Nov 11 (Reuters) - An American aid worker in northern Afghanistan is being held by Afghan authorities over the
fatal shooting of an Afghan teenager at his home, a provincial police chief said on Wednesday.
Mohammad Bilal Niram, chief of police in the northern Sar-i-pul province, said the aid worker had killed his landlord's
16-year-old son with three gunshots, possibly suspecting a burglary when the boy tried to enter his home.
"He is in Afghan government custody for investigation. He has not been charged," Niram said.
The man worked for GP he said, referring to Global Partners, a UK-based aid group which says it has run programmes in
Afghanistan since 1993. Staff at the organisation's London headquarters declined to comment on the incident.
John Groch, a spokesman for the U.S. embassy, confirmed that an American had been arrested in Sar-i-pul but said he
could give no further details pending the Afghan police investigation.
(Reporting by Hamid Shalizi and Peter Graff, writing by Peter Graff, editing by Mark Trevelyan)




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765705 Date: 07/31/2015
