     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765761 Date: 07/31/2015




                                                                                                           RELEASE IN
                                                                                                           PART B6


From:                              sbwhoeop
Sent:                              Monday, November 23, 2009 12:00 PM
To:
Cc:                                 MilIsCD@state.gov
Subject:                            FYI: Les Gelb: "Amateur Hour at the White House"


http://www.thedailybeast.com/blogs-and-stories/2009-11-22/think-before-you-travel/?cid=hp:mainpromo2

The White House might try to blame the State Department (such an easy and delicious target) for the missteps. But
State's role in the conceptual planning of the trip was not central, and the department's senior Asia hand, Kurt Campbell,
surely knew better. It's also hard to tar the National Security Council's own senior Asia expert, Jeff Bader, another pro like
Campbell. Perhaps even higher officials at the NSC dropped the ball. Perhaps Mr. Obama might take responsibility
himself, as President Kennedy did after the Bay of Pigs fiasco in 1961. Now, that would truly clear the air—and open the
door to some obvious and necessary changes in the administration's decision-making machinery. Every decision, large
and small, is shaped and made by the president himself and enforced by Denis McDonough, a deputy NSC adviser and
the administration's Lord High Executioner. Does Obama get enough pushback? Is he hearing a range of views? Can he
see that his powerful intellect might profit from bowing to the voices of experience? If Mr. Obama reflects on the Asia
journey and other mishaps, he might loosen the reins and bring in additional policy and diplomatic pros as inside
counselors or outside advisers.



Amateur Hour at the White House
by Leslie H. Gelb
November 22, 2009 I 10:50pm
The Asia trip was not worth Obama's time. Leslie H. Gelb on why the president should shake up his
foreign policy team—and make sure the deals are done before he leaves home.
President Obama's nine-day trip to Asia is worth a look back to fix two potent problems, past and future. First, the trip's
limited value per day of presidential effort suggests a disturbing amateurishness in managing America's power. On top of
the inexcusably clumsy review of Afghan policy and the fumbling of Mideast negotiations, the message for Mr. Obama
should be clear: He should stare hard at the skills of his foreign-policy team and, more so, at his own dominant role in
decision-making. Something is awry somewhere, and he's got to fix it.

Secondly, the Asia trip presented an important opportunity to carve out a new American leadership role in the world's
most dynamic economic region, and Mr. Obama missed it. He only scratched the surface in his calls for multilateralism
and mutual understanding. He needs to paint pictures of how Washington will help solve regional security and trade
problems. Otherwise, most Asian nations will continue their unwanted drift toward China and away from the United States.
A meditation on his journey should start by forgetting half of the last week's commentary. Unbelievably, some criticized
Obama for not getting China to "throw its weight around." What Asian leaders want that? None that I know of. Others
lamented that Obama couldn't make "demands" on China anymore. The presumption here is that China is now king, and
that Washington can no longer have its way with Beijing. The facts are that Washington never did boss Beijing around,
and that China is not now ruling the roost (more accurately, it's sitting on its own eggs). Others contended that Obama
continued his pattern of trashing America's friends and coddling its authoritarian enemies like China. It's hard to stomach
this nonsense from the same conservative crowd that forever praised George W. Bush for accommodating China and
alienating America's allies.

Some analysts played fair and acknowledged that administration officials tried to tell reporters not to expect "deliverables"
on the trip, and to see the journey more as a recognition of Asia's new importance and America's desire for a new co-
operative spirit. That's a commendable thought, but hardly justification for almost two weeks of the president's time (when
you consider preparations)— especially when he's got a tanking economy, health-care reform woes, and decisions to
make on Afghanistan. Presidents take trips like this one only when they need breakthroughs and accomplishments on
certain issues that can't be agreed on without the pressure of an impending presidential visit. In fact, most presidents
wouldn't even commit to trips abroad without knowing that key deals would be finally agreed on and announced during the
visit itself. The prospective visit is the power jackhammer to nail down the deals. Just take a gander at trips planned for
Richard Nixon by Henry Kissinger or for George H. W. Bush by James Baker.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765761 Date: 07/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765761 Date: 07/31/2015




Obama's travels were a chance to settle or make concrete progress on thorny issues like greenhouse-gas emissions, and
the fate of U.S. bases on Okinawa, which the new Japanese government insists on moving. It was time to announce ways
to gain fixes on the U.S.-South Korean trade treaty, long stalled in Congress. It was a moment to show that Beijing would
actually make some mutually beneficial compromises on exchange rates or economic sanctions against Iranian and North
Korean nuclear programs. Absent guarantees of progress on issues such as these, Mr. Obama should have taken a well-
deserved vacation in Hawaii.
Matters were made worse on the scene. It was not good optics for Obama to bow to Japan's emperor. He seems to do
this stuff spontaneously and inexplicably, as with his bow to the Saudi King some months ago. And it was truly unfortunate
that Obama and his aides didn't flatly insist that he be allowed to address the Chinese people directly on television and
meet with non-stacked Chinese groups—as has been the case during previous presidential visits. Beijing's leaders
obviously didn't feel confident enough of their own standing at home to give the popular Mr. Obama such access. But he
and his team should have made it a precondition of the visit. Its absence left an unhappy taste.
 The Asia trip presented an important opportunity to carve out a new American leadership role in the world's most dynamic
                                           economic region, and Mr. Obama missed it.
The White House might try to blame the State Department (such an easy and delicious target) for the missteps. But
State's role in the conceptual planning of the trip was not central, and the department's senior Asia hand, Kurt Campbell,
surely knew better. It's also hard to tar the National Security Council's own senior Asia expert, Jeff Bader, another pro like
Campbell. Perhaps even higher officials at the NSC dropped the ball. Perhaps Mr. Obama might take responsibility
himself, as President Kennedy did after the Bay of Pigs fiasco in 1961. Now, that would truly clear the air—and open the
door to some obvious and necessary changes in the administration's decision-making machinery. Every decision, large
and small, is shaped and made by the president himself and enforced by Denis McDonough, a deputy NSC adviser and
the administration's Lord High Executioner. Does Obama get enough pushback? Is he hearing a range of views? Can he
see that his powerful intellect might profit from bowing to the voices of experience? If Mr. Obama reflects on the Asia
journey and other mishaps, he might loosen the reins and bring in additional policy and diplomatic pros as inside
counselors or outside advisers.
If most Asia hands inside and outside the government had designed the Obama trip, here's what they would have
advised: Go beyond the usual and trite message of building mutual understanding and cooperation, and stop invoking the
God of Multilateralism without spelling out America's leadership role. Asia is now overflowing with multilateral
organizations. Washington is a member of a few key ones, like Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation and the Asian
Development Bank. But that has little to do with other new and key groupings such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (Russia, China, Uzbekistan, etc.) and ASEAN, the association of Southeast Asian nations. Asian nations are
increasingly organizing themselves into these groups, and Washington hasn't really figured out its role. Most Asian
nations want that role to be a prominent one—in fact, the leadership position. They're afraid of China, afraid that China
won't be as attentive to their concerns in the future as America was in the past. At the same time, they don't want
Washington to come into these groupings and cause problems with Beijing. They want Washington to figure out a
leadership position constructed on the proven American ability to help solve common problems in the common interest.
They want an America they remember, one that can get things done and doesn't let problems fester.
That U.S. policy was the main missing ingredient on Obama's trip. Washington played architect and solidified its
leadership in Europe after World War II with NATO, the Marshall Plan, and various trade and economic organizations like
the World Bank. Asian nations are yearning for the same kind of creativity today from a brilliant American president in the
new Pacific Era.
Leslie H. Gelb, a former New York Times columnist and senior government official, is author of Power Rules: How
Common Sense Can Rescue American Foreign Policy (HarperCollins 2009), a book that shows how to think about and
use power in the 21st century. He is president emeritus of the Council on Foreign Relations.
                      For more of The Daily Beast, become a fan on Facebook and follow us on Twitter.
                         For inquiries, please contact The Daily Beast at editorialathedailvbeast.com.

      http://www.thedailybeast.com/blogs-and-stories/2009-11-22/think-before-you-travel/p/




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765761 Date: 07/31/2015
