      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764285 Date: 07/31/2015

                                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Saturday, August 22, 2009 4:41 AM
To:                                H
Subject:                           Fw: AMCIT suspected of abuse of minors in Liberia


Fyi - see b/I


From: Carson, Johnnie
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Bando, Jun
Sent: Fri Aug 21 20:38:51 2009
Subject: AMCIT suspected of abuse of minors in Liberia

Cheryl: My staff assistance received a call from the "Line" saying you might want a short informal note to send to the
Secretary on the situation with the American UNMIL employee suspected of abusing minors in Liberia. Below is a
shorter and updated version of what I sent you earlier. I will be on leave for a week beginning tomorrow and one my
deputies, Bill Fitzgerald, will be following this issue in my absence. Regards, Johnnie




An American citizen civilian employee of the UN operation in Liberia is suspected of engaging in illegal acts with at least
two underage Liberian girls. The Liberian National Police, who received a DVD of the acts, told Embassy officials earlier
today they had identified the American citizen and confirmed the identity of two girls—an 11-year-old and another
between 12-15 years of age. These are crimes in Liberia as well as in the United States.

We are working with Liberian authorities and the UN to ensure that the American citizen is made to answer for these
allegations. In the meantime, the Department is working with Department of Justice lawyers to determine if the
American citizen can be tried in the United States. Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield, currently in the Department
chairing a promotion panel, has spoken to President Johnson-Sirleaf about the importance of this case. It appears that
the UN will waive any immunity the American may have and that the Liberians will take the American citizen into
custody.

Coming on the heels of your trip to Africa, and the emphasis you placed on gender-based violence and sex crimes, we
are making every effort to ensure that this individual is brought to justice, including by offering whatever resources the
Liberians need to conduct the best possible investigation. The Legal Attache, based in Freetown, is currently en route to
Liberia to assist.




                                                    van
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764285 Date: 07/31/2015
