UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765171 Date: 07/31/2015




                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL




                                        CONFIDENTIAL



                                                November 5, 2009-11-05


 For Hillary:
 From: Sid
 CC: Lissa
 Re: Berlin speeches

 Below are my notes for speeches in Berlin. The themes I stress are these: the importance of
 Berlin and the Brandenburg Gate as symbols of freedom; the weight of history (always felt by
 Germans); the contribution of the US and the salience of the Western alliance; the meaning of
 1989 to today and especially the continuity of the Western alliance; and segue from past to
 future.

  What I have not done here but might be added are references to Angela Merkel (a courageous
  woman from the east who embodies the highest values of the West): and specific policies. Those
  can be fitted in.

  So, some ideas and language:


  Twenty years ago the wall fell. Here, in Berlin, the moment when tens of thousands of citizens
  tore it down with hammers and picks and bare hands is called "Die Wende," a phrase that means
  more than simply a change but a turning point in history. It was not only a turning point for
  Germany and Europe but also for the United States because the wall—the reason for its
  construction and the reason for its destruction—is central to our common history—and to our
  common future.

  Richard von Weizsaecker said, "As long as the Brandenburg Gate is closed, the German question
  will remain open." Today I can say with finality, the German question is closed, because the
  Brandenburg Gate is wide open! The gate is open, Europe is open, and our future together is
  open.

  In the forty years from the Berlin airlift to the fall of the Berlin Wall, the Atlantic partnership
  proved itself the most successful alliance for freedom in history. That alliance was, is and shall
  be the crowning achievement of American foreign policy. And the German – American
  relationship has always served as its foundation. Our alliance represents the reconciliation of




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765171 Date: 07/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765171 Date: 07/31/2015




 The revolution of 1989 did not mark the end of history. Having made history together, we are
 summoned to secure freedom for future generations. As vital at the beginning of the 21St century
 as it was in the last half of the 2e, the Western alliance is called to new tasks. The dreams of
 1989 reached far—and have farther to reach. Old hatreds and conflicts—in the Balkins, the
 Caucauses, in the Middle East, East Asia, and Africa—still simmer. We have much to
 demonstrate what we have learned from the last century. Without freedom, without the rule of
 law, without the opportunity for people to support themselves and their families — without basic
 human rights-- anger, aggression and violence will prevail.

 Today we are faced with difficult and often dangerous conflicts arising not from conflicts
 between nations but within them, conflicts exploited by zealots who make the false claim that
 violence will purify the world and open the gates of heaven. Once zealots tried to use this Gate to
 symbolize that message. But through the courage and determination of the people of Berlin and
 their stalwart allies, this Gate now stands for a true revolution of the spirit. The long twilight
 struggle to tear down this wall to make Europe whole and free inspires us, in this new century, to
 help other peoples gain the same measure of security, respect and progress.

 We need Berlin more than ever today. We need your courage, your fortitude, your commitment
 to the rights of men—and women—we need your example. We are hardly at the end of the
 history of the West. Standing here, where a wall once stood but is no more, in the light from the
 Gate, we have learned from history's deepest lessons. Our alliance, linked by shared struggle,
 dedicated to the ideals of freedom and democracy, strong from the world we have built, now
 faces a new world of challenges. And we are ready to meet and conquer them. We know it has
 been done before. We are free men—and women—and proud to say, We are all Berliners.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765171 Date: 07/31/2015
