UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766647 Date: 07/31/2015




  SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
                                                                          RELEASE
                                                                          IN FULL
                            The Secretary's Call Sheet for
                        Uruguayan Foreign Minister Pedro Vaz
                                        TBD

  Purpose of Call: To obtain the Government of Uruguay's recognition of the
  November 29 elections in Honduras.

  • Iran/IAEA: We appreciate your principled position on the IAEA Board of
    Governors vote. A strong, unified signal to Iran is vital as we try to move
    forward.

  • Honduras: I know that you recently discussed Honduras with Assistant
    Secretary Valenzuela and as you may know, he is planning to travel to Uruguay
    in mid-December. Uruguay has been a very constructive partner over the last
    few months on Honduras.

  • We strongly believe in the need to send a clear signal for the return of
    democratic and constitutional order in the wake of the June 28 coup d'etat. We
    all agree coups must remain a part of our past and have no place in our present
    or future.

  • We have remained firm on that principle and have acted upon our convictions
    by cutting off aid and revoking visas.

  • We also believe we must work to help Honduras move forward to restore
    democratic and constitutional order. That is why we helped broker the
    Tegucigalpa-San Jose Agreement. We are working hard to help the parties
    implement that agreement, including the December 2 Congressional
    deliberations on the matter of President Zelaya's restitution.

  • Elections are a vital part of the overall solution. The Honduran elections follow
    the normal calendar established by the Constitution. They were underway long
    before the coup and involve candidates from a wide array of parties and
    ideologies. The elections are being run not by the de facto regime but by the
    Supreme Electoral Tribunal, which was itself chosen before the coup.

  • We see the elections and the implementation of the Accord as part of a package.
    Elections are necessary, though in themselves insufficient for a return to


                           SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766647 Date: 07/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766647 Date: 07/31/2015




  SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
                                          -2-
     democratic and constitutional order. However, we must stress they are
     necessary.

  • I encourage you to view the elections as a vital part of the democratic way
    forward.

  • The Honduran people and their institutions are trying to resolve this issue
    according to the October 30 agreement. It is likely that the elections will
    change the dynamic surrounding congressional discussions.

  • If you have a chance, you might encourage President Zelaya to participate
    positively in this process, which he agreed to on October 30. This is his
    opportunity to return to office.

  • [If Raised: Zelaya must be returned to office for elections to be
    legitimate:] The Accord called for the Congress to vote on his restitution
    expeditiously, and we will urge them to do that. It is critical that Honduras
    forge a government of national unity before transferring power to the next
    president.

  • [If Raised: the November 26 Supreme Court opinion on President Zelaya's
    restitution:] The Supreme Court's opinion on President Zelaya's restitution is
    a separate matter and has no bearing on whether to hold elections or not.
    Elections are a vital part of the solution and completely separate from President
    Zelaya's restitution, as laid out in the Tegucigalpa-San Jose Accords, which
    President Zelaya signed.

  Background: Iran/IAEA -- Though Uruguay has abstained from similar votes in
  the past Uruguay recently voted with the United States on a resolution demanding
  that Tehran immediately freeze construction of its newly-revealed nuclear facility
  and heed Security Council resolutions to stop uranium enrichment. Significantly,
  Uruguay broke with Brazil, which abstained on the vote.

  Honduras -- The current Uruguayan government's position on the Honduras
  elections is that Uruguay will not recognize the results of the November 29
  elections if they are carried out under the de facto regime. However, earlier in the
  crisis, the Government of Uruguay was constructive about the importance of the
  Hondurans working out their own problems, and at one point offered to play a
  mediating role with Chile. Our hope is that Uruguay will understand that

                           SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766647 Date: 07/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766647 Date: 07/31/2015




  SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
                                              -3-
  international rejection of the Honduran elections will mean continuation of the
  situation for months, if not years, to come. Uruguay tends to ally with Chile on
  this and similar regional issues.

  The Honduran Supreme Court issued an opinion November 26 on President
  Zelaya's restoration to office, as requested by the Honduran Congress in
  accordance with the Tegucigalpa-San Jose Accord. The opinion recommends that
  the Congress vote against President Zelaya's restoration to office because he has
  criminal charges pending against him.

  Call Notes:




                           SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766647 Date: 07/31/2015
