      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763959 Date: 07/31/2015

                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                           B6



From:                         Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov >
Sent:                         Monday, July 27, 2009 9:07 PM
To:
Subject:                      FW: Cheryl, here is a quick backgrounder on child slavery in Haiti
Attachments:                  HAITI -- Paper on Restaveks 26JUL09.doc



Text of attachment below:

To: Cheryl Mills, COS
From: Lou de Baca, G/TIP
Re: Child Trafficking in Haiti: the Restavek Problem
Date: July 26, 2009

Just before I left for Africa, the Secretary asked that I send you and her a short memo on the
restavek problem that she could share with President Clinton in his role as Haiti envoy. The
Haiti country narrative from the annual trafficking report is also attached to this short memo as
an appendix.

I wanted to make sure that you had this before you travel to Haiti this week. I'm also sending
over a copy of A Crime So Monstrous, by investigative `reporter Ben Skinner, who did some
undercover work in Haiti on child slavery and in fact negotiated the purchase of a child in just a
few short hours. I understand that                  will be joining you for the trip — she has been          B6
increasingly active in the slavery/trafficking arena, and is enthusiastic about engaging with us
on the issue.

Background

Haitian parents unable to care for their children have traditionally sent them away from home,
to relatives or strangers who are expected to provide the children with food, shelter, and an
education in exchange for housework. Children given or sold into this system are known as
restaveks, a Creole term based on the French "restez avec" ("stay with"). While some restaveks
are cared for by their host families and sent to school, most of these children are subjected to
years of hardship, abuse, and involuntary domestic servitude. At one time the practice may
have benefitted both child and the host family, but for most restaveks it is now a modern form
of slavery.

The roots of the restavek system reach back generations, and mirror involuntary child domestic
servitude patterns in West Africa. The practice is so entrenched in Haitian society that it is not
limited to the upper classes -- poor families routinely keep one or more restaveks who come
from even poorer families.



                                                   318
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763959 Date: 07/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763959 Date: 07/31/2015




Estimates from NGOs and the Haitian government of the number of restaveks in the country
run from 90,000 to 300,000, the majority of whom are girls between the ages of six and
14. NGOs believe another 3,000 Haitian restaveks are in the Dominican Republic. Exploited
restaveks in either country typically work excessive hours on physically demanding tasks
without pay or adequate food, do not attend school, and are often physically and sexually
abused by their host family.

On average, parents offer their children to host families when they are as young as six. Girls
are primarily trafficked into private homes in the city, while boys more often end up exploited
for labor on farms.

Restaveks who do not run away or escape usually remain with the host family until they are 14-
years old; Haitian labor laws require employers to pay domestic workers over 15 years old, so
many host families force restaveks out of the household before that age. Abandoned and
runaway restaveks make up a significant proportion of the large population of children living on
the street, where most are forced into prostitution or street crime by violent criminal gangs. The
restavek system thus has a destabilizing effect far beyond the individuals involved.

Some restaveks do escape, and those who are picked up by the authorities are referred to the
social welfare organization IBESR (Institut pour le bien-etre social et la recherche), and then
temporarily cared for in dedicated shelters. Two centers in Port au Prince receive financial and
technical support from the International Organization for Migration (IOM) to provide shelter,
food, medical and psychosocial services for these children until their parents can be found and
conditions are in place for the children to return to their families.

The shelter's capacity is limited, however, and the rescued children cannot always return to
their families. Since 2005, IOM has only been able to assist about 300 children.

Action Needed:

The permanent demise of the restavek system cannot come about without overhauling both the
Haitian legal system -- which does not prohibit or punish this form of modern slavery -- and the
historical institutions and attitudes which support it.

Some of these changes are already in process, although without long-term international support
they are likely to prove fruitless. The UN, USAID, World Bank, IOM, US Institute of Peace,
and other reputable organizations currently conduct rule-of-law and legal reform assistance
programs that seek in part to revise Haiti's criminal laws, which have been in place relatively
untouched since 1826.

Most programs plan to develop a new legal structure that is easy for the general public to
understand, fosters trust in the government, and develop a culture of the rule of law. This
overall structure could allow for the development of effective specific legislation which not

                                                   319
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763959 Date: 07/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763959 Date: 07/31/2015




only prohibits the restavek practice in all forms as well as the abuse, exploitation, or
enslavement of any child or adult.

Prospects for this specific anti-trafficking outcome, however, may hinge on donors' inclusion of
specific goals addressing the restavek problem in their broader rule of law and legal reform
programs. A parallel donor effort to aid to the Haitian police child protection unit — the Brigade
for the Protection of Minors — would boost the Haitian government's capacity to investigate and
punish the exploitation of these child slaves.

G/TIP Activities in Haiti

Last month, G/TIP funded the International Organization for Migration ($315,000) and we are
in the process of awarding to the NGO Free the Slaves/Anti-Slavery International a grant of
$200,000 to address the needs of some child trafficking victims. The Free the Slaves project
will include the disbursement of micro-grants and training of parents, while increasing public
awareness of trafficking and gathering data on trafficking issues in Haiti. This project will
partner with the local NGO Fondasyon Limy& Lavi (Light of Life Foundation), which has done
groundbreaking work against this practice.

In the past, G/TIP funded the Pan-American Development Foundation, complementing separate
funding from USAID, for work in preventing cross border trafficking from Haiti to the
Dominican Republic.




                                                   320
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763959 Date: 07/31/2015
