UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766694 Date: 07/31/2015




 SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED                                                      RELEASE
                                                                                 IN FULL

                           The Secretary's Call Sheet for
                  Peruvian Foreign Minister Jose Garcia Belaunde
                        rgahr-SEE-ah bay-lah-OON-deh"1
                                       TBD

 Purpose of Call: To retain Peru's support for the November 29 elections in
 Honduras.

 • IAEA Vote on Iran: We appreciate your principled position on the IAEA
   Board of Governors vote. A strong, unified signal to Iran is vital as we try to
   move forward.

  • Honduras: We appreciate your announcement that Peru will accept the
    November 29 elections in Honduras. We see transparent, free, and fair
    elections as a vital part of the process to resolve the crisis and restore
    democracy there.

  • Bilateral Relations: We value our partnership with Peru, and want to continue
    looking for ways to strengthen our partnership. I am impressed that Peru has
    been able to maintain economic growth despite internal security challenges.

  • (If Raised) Deputy Secretary Visit: Deputy Secretary of State Steinberg
    regrets that he is unable to visit Peru at this time, but I know he looks forward
    to doing so in the future.

  Background: Although Foreign Minister Garcia Belaunde announced November
  25 that Peru will accept the November 29 elections in Honduras, we are concerned
  that Brazil could put pressure on Peru to reverse its position. Thus, besides
  expressing appreciation for Peru's vote on the IAEA resolution regarding Iran, this
  call is intended to maintain Peru's supportive position on Honduras. The Peruvian
  government is disappointed that Deputy Secretary Steinberg will not travel to Peru
  (he was planning to travel to Colombia and Peru the week of November 30 but had
  to postpone the trip due to the OSCE Ministerial) and the Foreign Minister may
  mention the issue.

  Call Notes:




                           SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766694 Date: 07/31/2015
