UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764491 Date: 07/31/2015



  SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
                                                                              RELEASE IN PART B5


                               The Secretary's Call Sheet for
                             UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
                                      August 24, 2009

  Purpose of Call: You are calling UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to ask him
  to co-host with you an event at UNGA to advance the Global Partnership for
  Agriculture and Food Security.

  • UNGA Food Security Event: I would like to co-host with you an event to
    advance the global agenda on food security. We see country-led processes as a
    centerpiece of a new global agenda. This event would most likely take place on
    Thursday, September 24, at 3:30pm. If you cannot co-host the meeting, I would
    welcome the participation of your representative at the meeting.

  • Event Content: We would like this event to be an opportunity for a broad
    group of global stakeholders to commit to the food security principles agreed to
    at the L'Aquila summit. We hope to extend the L'Aquila food security
    principles to countries that were not present at the summit. The event will also
    focus on highlighting country-led processes, such as the Comprehensive
    African Agricultural Development Program (CAADP). I welcome your
    thoughts on other issues you would like the meeting to cover. We look to the
    UN to provide leadership in advancing a global agenda.

  • Event Partners: We envision inviting Heads of State or senior ministers from
    donor countries, signatories to the L'Aquila joint statement on food security,
    and developing nations. We would also like to include foundations, NGOs, the
    private sector, media, and multilateral organizations.

  Background: We want Ban Ki-moon and the UN High Level Task Force to play
  a leading role in combating global hunger. We believe that co-hosting this event
  with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon would highlight the global nature of our
  food security strategy.
                                                                                                            B5

  Call Notes:




                          nroI Tgl
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmen      tartm      seT-INTO -12.01142104A391 arol-
                                     eTICIal-                            c TNITC05764491 Date: 07/31/2015
