    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765231 Date: 07/31/2015



                                                                                          RELEASE IN FULL




From:                         Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                         Friday, November 6, 2009 3:26 PM
To:
Subject                       FW: President Obama Taps Cassandra Butts to Serve as Senior Advisor at the
                              Millennium Challenge Corporation




                                          THE WHITE HOUSE
                                       Office of the Press Secretary

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
November 6, 2009

          President Obama Taps Cassandra Butts to Serve as Senior Advisor at the
                          Millennium Challenge Corporation

WASHINGTON - Today, President Barack Obama announced that he will name Deputy White
House Counsel Cassandra Q. Butts as Senior Advisor in the Office of the Chief Executive Officer at
the Millennium Challenge Corporation.

President Obama said, "I am honored to appoint my dear friend and trusted colleague Cassandra to
serve in this important role. The Millennium Challenge Corporation is an essential partner as we
work to combat global poverty, and Cassandra brings a depth of experience and true passion for
justice that will be invaluable to its success in the future. I am grateful for Cassandra's tireless service
in this administration and look forward to continuing to work with her in the years ahead."

President Obama made the following announcement today:

Cassandra Q. Butts, Senior Advisor, Office of the Chief Executive Officer, Millennium Challenge
Corporation
Cassandra Butts is currently the Deputy White House Counsel where she has focused on judicial
nominations. Ms. Butts was the general counsel to the Obama-Biden Transition Project. She also
served as the Senior Vice President for Domestic Policy at the Center for American Progress. Prior to
joining CAP, she was a senior advisor to House Democratic Leader Richard A. Gephardt (D-MO)
where she worked on refugee, asylum and immigration issues and served as the policy director on
his 2004 presidential campaign. Ms. Butts also served as director of Senator Obama's Senate
transition in 2004-2005. Previously, she was an Assistant Counsel for the NAACP Legal Defense &
Educational Fund and also served as Legislative Counsel to Senator Harris L. Wofford (D-PA). Ms.
Butts was an international election observer to the Zimbabwean parliamentary elections in 2000. She
is a graduate of Harvard Law School and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

                                                      ###




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765231 Date: 07/31/2015
