      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766463 Date: 07/31/2015


                                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Saturday, October 24, 2009 7:41 AM
To:                               Pally, Maura M
Subject:                          RE: IG report press coverage



Maura:

This has really been great work. Thanks for keeping everyone focused and organized and together during the storm,
especially after Miller left, and for providing the leadership to start implementing the changes before the report was
done to create such a good outcome.

In short — thanks for stepping up and being you.

Help is on the way though she likely won't be confirmed for a bit but you've done such a great job as Acting through this
process that it will be a piece of cake to stand on your head until the A/S arrives.

cdm


From: Pally, Maura M
Sent: Friday, October 23, 2009 7:05 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: IG report press coverage

I am happy to report that thus far the press on the IG report has been as good as I could have hoped. Last night
CNN.com and two PA papers (Phili Inquirer and Times Tribune) did quick same day stories. CNN.com did a surprisingly
mild piece and used an old 13.1 quote. Today the AP ran a story after interviewing me and it turned out well —focus on
importance of the program, steps we have/will take, and acknowledgement that problems needed fixing. Sen. Casey
also put out a press release giving the Department credit for taking action adding that more action is needed and he is
encouraged "by the new leadership of U/S McHale" (that made me a little sad dog, but not enough to dampen my huge
relief that this is so boring to everyone!).


State Dept IG: Exchange programs need closer watch
Oct 23 04:27 PM US/Eastern
By MICHAEL RUBINKAM
Associated Press Writer
SCRANTON, Pa. (AP) - The nation's foreign exchange student programs need better federal oversight, the State
Department's internal watchdog concludes in a new report following a scandal in which students were placed in
shoddy homes in Pennsylvania.

Acting Inspector General Harold Geisel said in the report, released this week, the department's Bureau of
Educational and Cultural Affairs has largely abdicated its responsibility to ensure the well-being of thousands of
exchange students who come to the United States each year.

Instead, the sponsoring organizations themselves have been left to monitor their own programs and self-report
problems to federal regulators, the report said.

"There are insufficient dedicated resources at ECA to conduct effective oversight of youth exchange programs," the
report said.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766463 Date: 07/31/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766463 Date: 07/31/2015




The inspector geneial began its review in July, following allegations that an employee of a San Francisco-based
exchange program placed students in filthy homes around Scranton in northeastern Pennsylvania. Edna Burgette
was fired from Aspect Foundation after being charged in July with five felony counts of criminal negligence.

Aspect said it deplored Burgette's actions and had no prior knowledge of the neglect, but the agency was penalized
by the State Department.

"We're absolutely committed to strengthening our programs, making them the best they can be and ensuring that all
students have safe and rewarding experiences," Maura Pally, acting assistant secretary of state for educational and
cultural affairs, told The Associated Press on Friday.

In the wake of the Scranton case, the bureau added staff, established a separate unit to conduct site visits, e-mailed
current students to inquire about how their experiences are going, and set up a database to track problems, among
other fixes meant to improve oversight.

Also, proposed federal regulations would tighten requirements for host families and set up more rigorous
background checks.

"We acknowledge there were serious problems with our monitoring and oversight, and we agree with the IG's
assessment that things needed to change," Pally said. "The way things were operating was just not acceptable, and
we began making changes even before the report was released."

Copyright 2009 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.


mac=
Report calls for more oversight of student exchange
programs
     •    STORY HIGHLIGHTS
     •    Inspector general's report cites programs receiving State Department grants
     •    Report calls for stronger monitoring of youth placement groups
     •    Report comes after some foreign students complained of neglect, abuse
     •    Report: Establish requirements for criminal history checks of host families


WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Youth exchange programs receiving U.S. State Department grants are suffering from
insufficient oversight and attention from the federal government, according to an inspector general's report
released Thursday.




An inspector general's report calls for more oversight of student exchange programs.



The report calls for stronger monitoring of youth placement groups that receive federal grants to sponsor
exchange students. It finds that the department has been "relying instead on the coordinator to self-monitor."
Participants in the exchange programs are typically 15 to 18 and are among "the most vulnerable," according
to the report.



         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766463 Date: 07/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766463 Date: 07/31/2015




In 2008, the State Department gave 17 such groups $39.4 million in taxpayer funds to manage programs
involving exchange students.

One of those groups, Aspect Foundation, received $1.08 million of those funds. However, Aspect came under
fire this year after students from Europe, Africa and South America — whom the California-based foundation
had placed in Scranton, Pennsylvania -- came forward with allegations of mistreatment and abandonment.

CNN aired a detailed report on the case in July, after which the State Department said it would set up a toll-
free telephone number that foreign exchange students could use to report problems and tighten its oversight of
government-funded exchange student programs.

The inspector general's report notes that previous audits of the State Department's Bureau of Educational and
Cultural Affairs (ECA), which also found deficiencies in program oversight, found the department slow to make
changes.

"The incidents in Northeastern Pennsylvania were allowed to happen, in part, because of a lack of clear
regulations that allowed sponsor organizations to interpret the rules in a manner that ultimately endangered
these students," said Sen. Bob Casey, D-Pennsylvania, on Thursday.

In May, Casey pushed for an investigation into the Department of State's oversight of youth exchange
programs following reports out of Scranton.

One student was placed in a Scranton home with a person who had been convicted of a drug-related felony,
Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania, District Attorney Andrew Jarbola has told CNN. Some students were so
malnourished that one was treated in a hospital for dehydration; another was put up in a home that was later
condemned by the city, he said.

The families that housed the students say the allegations are untrue. The Aspect Foundation first denied any
problems existed, then said it had corrected them and fired those responsible.

The State Department sanctioned Aspect by reducing the number of students it can bring over for the 2010-
2011 school year, a penalty that amounted to a loss of revenue of about $540,000, according to the
department.

"We at the Department of State recognize [because we] are responsible for this program we have to make
sure we are aggressively overseeing this program and make sure children are well-suited," said State
Department spokesman P.J. Crowley at the time.

The inspector general's report released Thursday does not specifically mention Aspect. It does review four
State Department programs, including Youth Exchange Study (YES) and the Future Leaders Exchange
(FLEX), both of which have given grants to the foundation.

The report calls on the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs, which oversees the grant programs, to
establish requirements for criminal history checks of host families and put more resources into site visits at
placement groups.

"The Department of State has taken action to rectify its failure in the oversight and monitoring of exchange
programs," Casey said. "However, the real measure of progress will be what specific steps are taken to
prevent this problem from happening again."




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766463 Date: 07/31/2015
