      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765321 Date: 07/31/2015



                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL



From:                           Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                           Thursday, September 24, 2009 1:18 AM
To:
Subject                         Fw: They're torturing me, Zelaya claims




From: Greene, Malcolm
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: NEWS-WHA; SES-Line_UNGA; M_SpecialAssistants; SES-O_SWO-Only
Sent: Thu Sep 24 01:14:47 2009
Subject: FW: They're torturing me, Zelaya claims



From: Rathod, Rona R
Sent: Thursday, September 24, 2009 1:05 AM
To: Task Force Honduras
Cc: SES-O_Shift-I
Subject: They're torturing me, Zelaya claims


BY FRANCES ROBLES
froblesaMiamiHerald.com

It's been 89 days since Manuel Zelaya was booted from power. He's sleeping on chairs, and he claims his
throat is sore from toxic gases and "Israeli mercenaries" are torturing him with high-frequency radiation.

"We are being threatened with death," he said in an interview with The Miami Herald, adding that
mercenaries were likely to storm the embassy where he has been holed up since Monday and
assassinate him.

"I prefer to march on my feet than to live on my knees before a military dictatorship," Zelaya said in a
series of back-to-back interviews.

Zelaya was deposed at gunpoint on June 28 and slipped back into his country on Monday, just two
days before he was scheduled to speak before the United Nations. He sought refuge at the Brazilian
Embassy, where Zelaya said he is being subjected to toxic gases and radiation that alter his physical
and mental state.

Witnesses said that for a short time Tuesday morning, soldiers used a device that looked like a large
satellite dish to emit a loud shrill noise.

Honduran police spokesman Orlin Cerrato said he knew nothing of any radiation devices being used
against the former president.

"He says there are mercenaries against him? Using some kind of apparatus?" Cerrato said. "No, no,
no, no. Sincerely: no. The only elements surrounding that embassy are police and military, and they
have no such apparatus."
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765321 Date: 07/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765321 Date: 07/31/2015




Police responded to reports of looting throughout the city Tuesday night. Civil disturbances subsided
Wednesday afternoon, when a crush of people rushed grocery stores and gas stations in the capital.

Israeli government sources in Miami said they could not confirm the presence of any "Israelis
mercenaries" in Honduras.

Zelaya, 56, is at the embassy with his family and other supporters, without a change of clothes or
toothpaste. The power and water were turned back on, and the U.N. brought in some food. Photos
showed Zelaya, his trademark cowboy hat across his face, napping on a few chairs he had pushed
together.

"Look at the shape he's in — sleeping on chairs," de facto President Roberto Micheletti told a local TV
news station.

Micheletti took Zelaya's place after the military, executing a Supreme Court arrest warrant, burst into
Zelaya's house and forced him into exile. The country's military, congress, Supreme Court and
economic leaders have backed the ouster, arguing that Zelaya was bent on conducting an illegal
plebiscite that they feared would ultimately lead to his reelection.

Micheletti said he was prepared to meet with Zelaya and a delegation from the Organization of
American States, but only to discuss one topic: November elections.

On Wednesday, the U.N. cut off all technical aid that would have supported and given credibility to
that presidential race. Conditions do not exist for credible elections, U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-
moon said.

"I proposed dialogue, and they answered with bullets, bombs, a state of siege and by closing the
airport," Zelaya said.

Zelaya told The Herald that Washington should be taking a stronger stance against the elite
economic interests that "financed and benefited" from the coup that ousted him three months ago.

If President Barack Obama hit Honduras with commercial sanctions or suspended free-trade
agreements, the coup "would last just five minutes."

The Obama administration suspended economic aid to Honduras and withdrew the visas of members
of the current administration.

About 75 percent of Honduras' commerce depends on the United States, Zelaya said. And because
powerful economic forces were behind Zelaya's ouster, Obama should hit those forces where it hurts
most, Zelaya said.

"I have told this to Obama, to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, to the U.S. Embassy here and
anyone else who will listen," Zelaya said. "They know how to act. Until now, they have been very
prudent."

With Micheletti showing a new willingness to talk with the OAS, and the U.N. Security Council set to
meet to discuss the embassy situation soon, it isn't the moment for more penalties, the U.S. State
Department said.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765321 Date: 07/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765321 Date: 07/31/2015




"Right now, when there are openings for dialogue, is not the time to announce new sanctions," a
State Department official said.

Dates for the OAS visit, which could include emissaries from 10 countries, are being worked out, the
official said.

Spokesman Ian Kelly said the U.N. Security Council meeting came at the request of the Brazilian
government. No date has been set for the meeting.

"In general, we continue to work with our partners in the U.N. and the OAS to come up with means to
promote a dialogue and defuse the tensions, of course with the ultimate goal of resolving the crisis,"
State Department spokesman Ian Kelly said at a media briefing in Washington. "And we're
continuing our consultations with our partners in the region, and enlisting wherever we can their
assistance in this process."

The U.S. Embassy here spent the day denying rumors that Zelaya planned to move to American
grounds. The rumor may have started because U.S. Embassy vehicles were used to evacuate Zelaya
supporters who left the Brazilian Embassy willingly Tuesday.

"The embassy has been turned into a bunker for Zelaya," Assistant Foreign Minister Martha Lorena
Alvarado de Casco told The Herald. "He's turned it into his headquarters, and he is using it to call for
insurrection."

Brazilian Foreign Minister Celso Amorim told CNN en Espanol that his government asked Zelaya to
tone down his rhetoric while he remains an embassy guest.

"The word 'death' should not even be mentioned," he said.

Rioting broke out in various parts of the capital Tuesday night, and lines hundreds deep formed at
supermarkets when desperate shoppers scrambled to buy food after a round-the-clock curfew was
briefly lifted.

"I have no food in my house," said Patti Vasquez, a housewife who, after two hours, still had not
reached the front doors of a supermarket in an upscale shopping mall. "I need to get milk and juice
and eggs."

Zelaya says he has no plans to leave the embassy anytime soon.

. "I am the president the people of Honduras chose," Zelaya said. "A country can't have two
presidents --just one."

Miami Herald staff writer Jim Wyss and special correspondent Stewart Stogel contributed to this
report.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05765321 Date: 07/31/2015
