      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775444 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                                 RELEASE IN
                                                                                                                 PART B6



From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Monday, October 25, 2010 11:09 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: State of USAID


Scroll down and read this woman's email to Raj.

I want to be helpful and creative in thinking through a response.

Cdm



From: Shah, Rajiv (AID/A) <rshah@usaid.gov>
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Smith, Jeannemarie E; Slaughter, Anne-Marie; Radelet, Steven C
Cc: Steinberg, Donald (AID/A); Sullivan, Jacob J
Sent: Mon Oct 25 17:25:44 2010
Subject: Fw: State of USAID


While this email is somewhat amazing in that someone actually sent this to me, I really believe our overall narrative lacks
credibility and do believe the qddr will need be a key document in terms of trying to win over the building.

I don't place too much stock in this one email but I do believe I need your help and commitment to my leadership and the
credibility of my overall narrative to be successful on behalf of the secretary.

Usaid and development should be a major part of her legacy and I feel I can deliver that but I need your help on the
initiatives in particular because so much of my personal credibility rests on those.

Thanks for your help and support. Jeanne and I had a very long but helpful talk today.

For everyone one of these totally crazy emails/people there are 100 moderate people that we need to win over - and they
are watching with skepticism right now.

In the meantime I am going to use this email as a teaching moment but I am not sure how - stay tuned...

Raj


From:
To: Shah, Rajiv (AID/A)
Sent: Mon Oct 25 17:08:05 2010
Subject: State of USAID
Dear Mr. Shah,

I witnessed once again the total lack of understanding that you have of USAID and development given the
disastrous situation we now find ourselves in today. We spoke with several colleagues and the following sums
up the basic feelings of most of us in USAID after your talk.

USAID is nothing more than a slush fund for the State Department to as they please. No one can take you
seriously and I hope you spend a minute to read before you delete this email as we.I do care about USAID and
U.S. foreign assistance. We worked for USAID before you came and we will work for USAID after you
depart. Please understand;


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775444 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775444 Date: 11/30/2015




An agency that does not control its budget is not an agency.

An Administrator that does not report to the president is but an office director in the Department of State, not an
Administrator.

You are too young and inexperienced to be of any service as a development professional as you have no
experience and neither do the people who run USAID from the Department.

You asked USAID employees for their opinion, we responded to this request and you ignored the major
questions posed.

You have evidently ignored the requests from two previous administrators in your last town hall. Their basic
guidance was---control of the USAID budget or no control and no USAID. McPherson was right on (and
probably the last legitimate Administrator in USAID) after the last three or four sold USAID down the tubes for
political expediency. You ignored them and the questions posed to you by your employees. Seems like you
only care about what Jack Lew or his replacement will offer, this is evident.

USAID is supposed to do basic development... .we are overcharged and not served by the Department and we
are bullied overseas by the Department State and by your meaningless exhortations, so poorly done in the last
two months only make you look like the puppet you are.

Do us a favor and quit with at least some dignity, that way you will not be but a person serving tea at the
Departments tea and crumpet's events as you have no real standing in the Department or in the Agency you
allegedly lead. To lead means leadership and you are nothing more than a patsie for Drew Luten, Hillary
Clinton and others in the Department.

Sincerely,




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775444 Date: 11/30/2015
