     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792304 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                         Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Tuesday, August 7, 2012 1:11 PM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: Turkey condemns Iranian accusations over Syria (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker@state.gov [mailto:OpsNewsTicker@state.gov]
Sent: Tuesday, August 07, 2012 11:32 AM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Subject: Turkey condemns Iranian accusations over Syria (Reuters)

ISTANBUL (Reuters) - Turkey's Foreign Ministry on Tuesday condemned comments by an Iranian official
blaming Ankara for the bloodshed in Syria and warning Turkey it would be next, as unacceptable and
inappropriate, and urged Iran to honour its ties as neighbours.

   "It is unacceptable and irresponsible that Iranian officials in various posts continue to target our country
through their statements, although Turkey's principled foreign policy is known to everyone," the Foreign
Ministry said in a statement.

   "Everyone knows who, inside and outside Syria, is responsible for the human tragedy, caused by the Syrian
regime. They will be called to account by history and human conscience."

  The statement came just ahead of an unscheduled visit by Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Salehi to
Turkey on Tuesday.

   The Foreign Office singled out the "baseless allegations and inappropriate threats" made by the Iranian chief
of general staff Hassan Firouzabadi on the website of the Iran Revolutionary Guards.

   Firouzabadi said Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Turkey were responsible for the bloodshed and accused them of
helping the "war-raging goals of America".

    Salehi's talks are to focus on Syria and a group of Iranians seized by rebels there.

   "Our minister will particularly raise these issues with Iranian foreign minister Mr. Salehi in their meeting
today," the statement said, adding: "We call Iranian officials to stop baseless statements about our country and
act in a way to honour our neighbour relations."




News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792304 Date: 11/30/2015
