UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                 RELEASE IN
                                                                                 FULL


                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                               September 28, 2010



  For: Hillary
  From: Sid
  Re: Latest political information


             From right-wing sources:
             1. The House Republicans are in a state of barely constrained chaos in anticipation
                of victory, when they will inevitably descend in a matter of a few months into
                pandaemonium. The implosion that took the Republicans about 18 months after
                the 1994 takeover to produce is replicating itself on a faster schedule, proving the
                acceleration of history, or else that events repeat themselves the first time as
                tragedy, the second as farce. Nearly everybody in the House Republican
                Conference considers Boehner a liability. Eric Cantor privately talks of
                challenging him for Speaker, but undoubtedly lacks courage. Paul Ryan is in a
                snit, privately whining that nobody listens to his brilliant ideas, despises the
                "Pledge To America" platform as empty, and bears contempt for Boehner and his
                people. Kevin McCarthy, the other of the so-called trio of "Young Guns," is
                merely the happy-go-lucky greeter at the casino and wants to be the whip. The
                right-wing rank and file are restive, ready to revolt against Boehner at any slight
                sign of regular Republicanism (or reason), just as they did against Gingrich. The
                congressional leadership simultaneously fears the Tea Party, targeting regular
                Republicans, and slavers over exploiting it for short-term gain. Democrats, of
                course, remain clueless about the unstable internal condition of their opponents.
             2. On the Senate side of the GOP: Jim DeMint is operating entirely on his own, a
                party of one, undermining his fellow Republicans. He has already cost the
                Republicans a Senate majority by supporting whack-job Christine O'Donnell
                against Mike Castle. DeMint has independent sources of funding and is making
                preliminary plans to make a run for the presidential nomination.
             3. John Bolton is running for president. He is the candidate of the Cheney faction.
                He has already secured funding through Cheney's sources. The scenario is not to
                win the nomination but dominate the party's foreign policy, a subject about which
                the Tea Party and Republicans generally have almost nothing to say. If the
                 Republican candidate were to win in 2012, Bolton and the neocons hope to have
                momentum to have him appointed Secretary of State.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




             4. Karl Rove has emerged as the kingpin of the "super-PACs" unleashed by the
                 Citizens United decision. His group has accumulated unlimited funds for negative
                 attacks on Democrats. The Koch brothers front-group, Americans for Job
                 Security, the other large super-PAC, is deferring to Rove. Together they have
                 gained cooperation from the Club for Growth. Rove has become the kingmaker of
                 kingmakers.
             Meanwhile:
             1. A group of Democrats, including Paul Begala and David Brock, have given up on
                 the White House, raised some money on their own, hired pollsters, drawn in Mike
                 McCurry and others, and are plotting last minute desperate strategies. Welcome to
                 Fort Apache. Begala says that after floating constant ideas to Rahm they are all
                 knocked down by Obama himself.
             2. Obama, as you have noticed, is on a nostalgia binge, campaigning on campuses,
                 and sending cabinet secretaries to school gymnasiums across the country,
                 attempting to relive. the concert tour of 2008.
            3. Rahm, as you know, is almost certainly leaving on Friday. Dutiful dolt (too kind a
                 description) Jim Messina has taken over the politics. Politically, therefore, there is
                 now no White House.
            4. Stan Greenberg's frantic gambit to get the House Democrats to take up tax cuts
                has collapsed, leaving them worse off than before, appearing ineffectual and
                divided. Nobody, it seems, anticipated this predictable outcome, not to mention
                that this approach wouldn't help Democrats much and might marginally hurt them
                by raising tax cuts to the center of the campaign.
            5. David Axelrod is whining about Rahm and Obama not following his wisdom,
                whining that he hates Washington, isn't part of it, doesn't get it, doesn't want to
                get it, and yearns to leave. The inner circle loyalist turns disloyal, but in a miracle
                of utter obliviousness has no idea he's damaging his principal and tarnishing the
                reputation (his own) he's trying to save, unintentionally proving his larger point
                that he doesn't fit in Washington—all laid out in excruciating detail in an article
                in The New Republic. My friend, John Judis, at TNR, tells me that Axelrod
                backgrounded the writer of the piece. I've included it below. Skip the bio parts;
                just read Axelrod's Complaint. Only Philip Roth could do this tragicomic justice.
              Tick, tick, tick...
            1. Very little time left before the elections. Interesting pattern of Democrats coming
                back in California and parts of the West. Hispanic voters should be encouraged;
                they are the reason. Despite economic difficulties in the West, there is more of a
                sense of the future and hope there than in the Rust Belt states, which are
                beocming increasingly toxic. Jobs, jobs, jobs.
            2. Typical Democratic consultant paint-by-numbers won't work. Short-term policy
                proposals, like Greenberg's conceit, will, have no impact, or even a negative one.
                Obama is flailing. Off message doesn't begin to describe his wanderings on
                campus.
            3. Bill's empathetic appeal to voters to give the Democrats a chance for two more
                years can only be done by him.
            4. I have suggested to the Begala-Brock group that the message should be wholly .
                political: Karl Rove's dirty tricks campaign to put in their candidate John




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




                     Boehner, special interest poster child. Assemble a ten-point counter-Republican
                     program taken from statements of their nutcase candidates, beginning with Social
                     Security privatization, push it against their "Pledge," and have Democrats press
                     Republicans to take stands on the real GOP extremist plan. Oh, well...



  The New Republic October 14, 2010



  What's Eating David Axelrod?
  The disillusionment of Obama's guru.
  Noam Scheiber

  "I think he's not having fun," says an administration official.
  "On the other hand, he doesn't know
  how to escape the situation." He is stuck
  in a city he never wanted to inhabit, surrounded
  by people at ease with the practice
  of ritual sacrifice. "It's a hard town. It
  wants scalps. Sometimes he's very dour
  about it," says an administration veteran.




               mong the many distinctions David Axelrod has

  achieved in his career, there is one that requires
  special elaboration: He is, it turns out, one of the
  few customers to have ever run a tab at Manny' s,
  the Chicago cafeteria and deli. This is not because
  the odd knish ($4.25) or side of potato chips ($0.75) threatened
  to leave him cash-poor. It is, rather, because Axelrod has long
  styled himself someone who accumulates wisdom at places regular
  people frequent, not the lacquered haunts of downtown
  Washington. What the Oval Room is to Beltway consultantdom,
  Manny's is to Axelrod.
  This detail helps explain why the chief strategist always insisted
  he wouldn't follow his boss, Barack Obama, to the White
  House. Axelrod considered himself an enemy of Washington
  groupthink, and not just on matters of culinary preference.
  There was, for example, that annoying Washington habit of
  carving voters into niches and plying them full of micro-spiels-.--
  more like a marketing exec surveying the cable dial than a leader
  bestriding history. Axe, as he is known, spent eight years at




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




    the Chicago Tribune before entering politics. And although it
    had been decades since he'd left the ranks of scribblers, he still
    thought in broad narratives and stirring set pieces—"macrotrends,"
    he'd joke. Among the deviations from the standard playbook
    that the Obama campaign made famous: an eight-day trip
    to Europe and the Middle East, a 30-minute infomercial costing
    millions of dollars, a nomination speech set under the Rocky
    Mountain sky (with no backup venue for rain!).
    If the Obama landslide dragged Axelrod to Washington
    against his better judgment (his wife said he'd never forgive himself
    for staying put), the one judgment he never set aside was
    the inanity of D.C. custom. Even before Obama arrived at the
    White House, Axelrod had grand plans for scrambling protocol.
    Recent presidents had materialized at the Capitol like patriotic
   bunting. Axelrod imagined Obama traveling by train from
    Springfield, Illinois, gathering up ordinary folks along the way.
   "We wouldn't just bring their concerns to Washington, we'd bring
   them to Washington," says one inauguration official. Compared
   to the feats Team Obama had pulled off during the campaign,
   this one hardly rated as revolutionary. But you had to appreciate
   the symbolism. Lincoln took a similar journey to his first
   swearing-in. Besides, why give the Oval Room set its run of the
   inauguration? They could share it with the country.
   At which point things got complicated.
   Logistics aides pointed out that there
   was no direct route from Springfield to
    Washington—the train would have to
   make long detours through Chicago and
   Pittsburgh. The Secret Service worried it
   might not be up to the task of securing
   nearly 1,000 miles of track, to say nothing
   of the frequent stops. When Axelrod and
   his colleagues realized the trip could take
   a week, even they became discouraged.
   "We couldn't hold the media's attention
   that long," says the inauguration official.
   "CNN on the fourth day of the whistlestop
   would be like, seriously?" Reluctantly,
   they abandoned the idea, settling on a
   day trip from Philadelphia instead.
   It was the sort of annoyance that
   seemed to greet Axelrod regularly in his
   new hometown. His relations with Senate
   Democrats got off to a shaky start
   last year when he tried to move a weekly
   Senate luncheon that he was scheduled




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




   to address, prompting grumbling over
   breached etiquette. Since then, he's faced
   off with congressional Democrats over
   everything from health care (Al Franken
   once demanded Axelrod tell him when
   the president would "apologize for his
   stupid idea" of airing negotiations on cspan)
   to general political strategy (House
   Democrats complained this spring that
   Obama's stump speech was killing them).
   There have been public spats with the
   business community and differences of
   opinion with the Obama economic team.
   (Axelrod once e-mailed White House economic
   adviser Larry Summers wondering
   if he'd be more comfortable in the "cafeteria
   at Goldman Sachs," though several
   administration officials say the ribbing is
   good-natured—Axelrod refers to Summers
   as his "brother in dishevelment"—
   and runs in both directions.)
   Axelrod rents a spare, two-bedroom
   apartment in the Logan Circle neighborhood
   and sees his family in Chicago
   once a month. Friends routinely describe
   him as homesick and bone-weary. "This
   is an experience that you could never,
   ever trade away," says his former campaign
   colleague Jim Margolis. "On the
   other hand, when he's walking up 15th
   Street late at night going home from the
   White House, he's probably wishing he
   was on the way to Lake Michigan." Axelrod
   has told reporters he also finds it
   achingly difficult to be apart from his
   adult daughter, Lauren, whose severe
   epilepsy has left her disabled.
   At a sturdy six-foot-two, Axelrod can
   look like a character out of a gritty police
   drama. He has a menacing, salt-and-pepper
   moustache and infrequently
   tamed hair. But other features betray him. scribed the nightmare that would ensue
   without an adequate response. "This is
   your 'holy shit moment,' "Romer announced,
   playing off a phrase Axelrod
   had used earlier in the day.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




  Less well known is the reason Axelrod
  had coined the phrase in the first
   place. Just before the larger meeting,
  Axelrod had huddled with the incoming
  economic team, including Romer and
  Austan Goolsbee, another senior aide, to
  hear their prognosis. The political team
  had polled the public's knowledge of the
  crisis, and after the economists brought
  him up to speed, Axelrod lamented how
  little the average voter grasped its seriousness.
  "The world hasn't had a holy shit
  moment, where they say, 'Holy shit, we
  have to do something,' "he said, according
  to Goolsbee.
  If you want to understand the overwhelming
  source of Obama's political
  troubles, you can trace it back to this
  problem. The Bush and Obama administrations
  (and the Fed) stopped the spiral
  into depression. But the ordering of
  events most people observed—first the
  government intervened, then unemployment
  reached 26-year highs—made the
  response look like it had either failed
  or exacerbated the problem.
  That Axelrod would home in on this
  from the outset—he told the president-elect
  after the meeting that his numbers
  would be in the toilet in twelve to 18
  months and "all of us who were geniuses
  are going to be idiots"—is a testament to
  his legendary fatalism. In his recent campaign
  memoir, Plouffe recalls Axelrod
  as a brooding presence with a gift for
  finding the booby trap in every field of
  daisies. "This could be an unmitigated
  disaster," Axelrod announced to Plouffe
  and strategist Robert Gibbs as Obama
  trooped off to his first primary debate.
  Axelrod had been refining this mordant
  streak at least since young adulthood,
  when his career brought him face-to-face
  with the urban political machine—and
  its knack for crushing aspiring dogooders.
  After graduating from the University




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




  of Chicago in 1976, he won a
  coveted internship at the Tribune and
  parlayed it into a full-time job. For several
  years, he covered City Hall, which
  was dominated by Democratic apparatchiks.
  He saw the local political establishment
  as inbred and corrupt and naturally
  rooted for the reformers. "David came in
  with a different viewpoint," says Bill Griffin,
  a colleague who hailed from a long
  line of Chicago cops and took a more sanguine
  view of the machine. "The independents—
  we would be dismissive of them.
  David gave them a voice in the paper."
  With his mournful eyes and the voice of a
  classical music deejay, he would never
  have cut it on "Homicide." There's also his
  gift for cringe-inducing puns, which have
  helped make him a beloved figure around
  the White House. (Axelrod on the plumbers'
  union endorsement: "Are they flush
  with cash?") Part mascot, part coach, he
  is known for two standbys at daily staff
  meetings: irritation over leaks to the
  media and jokes about whatever tie has
  become the latest casualty of his breakfast.
  As it happens, food mishaps are central
  to the Axelrod mystique. He was
  famous during the campaign for having
  disabled a BlackBerry with a stray piece
  of donut glaze. He once convened a meeting
  with a gravity-defying clump of oatmeal
  clinging to the frame of his glasses.
  Internal camaraderie notwithstanding,
  the last few months have been especially
   grueling—a streak of lousy economic
   data and worse political news (the Gulf
   oil spill, the Charlie Rangel ethics scandal,
   the Ground Zero Islamic center) that
   would have tested any White House. At
   times, Axelrod has mused about returning
   to Chicago, but there's no way out, at
   least not before the Democrats' day of
   reckoning in November. "I think he's not
   having fun," says an administration official.
   "On the other hand, he doesn't know




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




   how to escape the situation." He is stuck
   in a city he never wanted to inhabit, surrounded
   by people at ease with the practice
   of ritual sacrifice. "It's a hard town. It
   wants scalps. Sometimes he's very dour
  about it," says an administration veteran.
  And yet it's not as if the mores of contemporary
   Washington come as news to
  Axelrod, who has described the capital
  as a place where "too many people spend
  too much time kneecapping each other to
  certify their own importance." "In terms
  of the short-term mentality, the unwillingness
  to take risks, the way every day
  is scored like the Super Bowl—all those
  things he believed, I think, have been
  confirmed in the extreme," says David
  Plouffe, the former Axelrod partner who
  managed the Obama campaign. "But it's
  not like he was caught by surprise. He
  understood that. It's what he expected."
  Which raises a question: What's really
  eating David Axelrod?


  M      uch has been written of the
 famous December 16, 2008,
 meeting in Chicago in which
 the president-elect and his aides debated
 a massive stimulus package. During the
 meeting, Christina Romer, whom Obama
 had asked to chair his Council of Economic
 Advisers, reviewed the data on the
 economy's spectacular collapse and de-scribed the nightmare that would ensue
 without an adequate response. "This is
 your 'holy shit moment,' "Romer announced,
 playing off a phrase Axelrod
 had used earlier in the day.
 Less well known is the reason Axelrod
 had coined the phrase in the first
 place. Just before the larger meeting,
 Axelrod had huddled with the incoming
 economic team, including Romer and
 Austan Goolsbee, another senior aide, to
 hear their prognosis. The political team
 had polled the public's knowledge of the




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




  crisis, and after the economists brought
  him up to speed, Axelrod lamented how
  little the average voter grasped its seriousness.
  "The world hasn't had a holy shit
  moment, where they say, 'Holy shit, we
  have to do something,' "he said, according
  to Goolsbee.
  If you want to understand the overwhelming
  source of Obama's political
  troubles, you can trace it back to this
  problem. The Bush and Obama administrations
  (and the Fed) stopped the spiral
  into depression. But the ordering of
  events most people observed—first the
  government intervened, then unemployment
  reached 26-year highs—made the
  response look like it had either failed
  or exacerbated the problem.
  That Axelrod would home in on this
  from the outset—he told the presidentelect
  after the meeting that his numbers
  would be in the toilet in twelve to 18
  months and "all of us who were geniuses
  are going to be idiots"—is a testament to
  his legendary fatalism. In his recent campaign
  memoir, Plouffe recalls Axelrod
  as a brooding presence with a gift for
  finding the booby trap in every field of
  daisies. "This could be an unmitigated
  disaster," Axelrod announced to Plouffe
  and strategist Robert Gibbs as Obama
  trooped off to his first primary debate.
  Axelrod had been refining this mordant
  streak at least since young adulthood,
  when his career brought him face-to-face
  with the urban political machine—and
  its knack for crushing aspiring dogooders.
  After graduating from the University
  of Chicago in 1976, he won a
  coveted internship at the Tribune and
  parlayed it into a full-time job. For several
  years, he covered City Hall, which
  was dominated by Democratic apparatchiks.
  He saw the local political establishment
  as inbred and corrupt and naturally
  rooted for the reformers. "David came in




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




   with a different viewpoint," says Bill Griffin,
   a colleague who hailed from a long
   line of Chicago cops and took a more sanguine
   view of the machine. "The independents—
   we would be dismissive of them.
   David gave them a voice in the paper." By the early '80s, the Tribune had promoted
   its chief political writer, a more
   conservative man named Dick Ciccone,
   to the position of managing editor. It replaced
   him with Axelrod, who used his
   weekly columns to flay the city's ruling
  class. Axelrod observed that, on the one
  day of the year City Hall welcomed public
  testimony, the mayor had fled to a nearby
  hotel to finalize the party's election slate.
  Another column compared campaignfunding
  laws in Illinois and Wisconsin.
  Wisconsin, Axelrod noted, had spending
  limits and public financing. "[O]ur own
  system of 'public financing,' "he wrote,
  "works like this: Employees, unions, lawyers,
  and businesses that reap tax dollars
  from government pour some of the
  money back into the campaigns of the incumbents
  to keep the spigot open."
  Only in his late twenties, Axelrod appeared
  to have landed his ideal job. But
  there were strains. His predecessor, Ciccone,
  had the title "political editor," but
  management withheld it from Axelrod.
  When the paper transferred a writer
  from its Washington bureau to supplement
  his coverage, Axelrod "was pissed,"
  as he told Chicago magazine in 1987. He
  also bristled at the way editors treated
  his copy. "He used to grouse, 'They
  changed this, didn't let me say that.' It
  happens to everybody, but he was very
  sensitive," recalls Jeff Lyon, a colleague
  and close friend at the time. He fumed
  when they buried a story showing how
  a leading mayoral candidate had stoked
  racial fears.
  Axelrod's hypersensitivity notwithstanding—
  he couldn't touch coffee because
  it made him too jittery—it became




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




  obvious that management was thwarting
  him. "It might have been his politics,"
  Lyon says. "The Tribune, even though it
  had undergone a metamorphosis of sorts
  . . . was still far from liberal. David was a
  liberal." Whatever the reason, Axelrod
  grew increasingly frustrated. "He came
  out of a fairly affluent family in Manhattan.
  So it wasn't like he was devoid of
  any knowledge that people could do this,"
  says Lyon. "But yeah, it affected him a lot.
  We've all had those kinds of experiences.
  They shape you."
  One Saturday night in 1984, Axelrod
  met Lyon and a handful of colleagues for
  dinner at a Mexican restaurant. He announced
  he was leaving the Tribune to
  work as press secretary for Congressman
  Paul Simon, who was running for
  Senate. He was nervous but resolute. For
  years, he'd toyed with going into politics
  anyway. Now, he said, he was leaving
  because he didn't want to be kicked
  around anymore. His dinner companions were stunned.
  "I don't think anyone said it was a brilliant
  career move," says Lyon. But, as it happens,
  the decision almost perfectly distilled
  Axelrod's mix of fatalism and brash
   idealism. On the one hand, he saw that
   he was being stymied by forces beyond
   his control. On the other hand, he was
   willing to trade a remarkable amount of
   success for a job that might not last six
   months (Simon was a big underdog) in a
   line of work he had no experience in, with
   a wife and two small children at home.
   The only explanation is that something
   about the liberal Simon—the picture of
   an anti-politician, with his horn-rimmed
   glasses and bow tie—spoke to Axelrod.
   And so he jumped.


   I   n the spring of 2009, White House
   officials gathered in the Roosevelt
   Room to discuss the direction of



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




   health care reform. One of the looming
  questions was the so-called tax exclusion.
  Under the status quo, a worker making
  $75,000 per year with no benefits would
  pay taxes on all his compensation. But a
  worker making $50,000 plus $25,000 in
  health benefits would only pay taxes on
  his income; the benefits would be untouched.
  This gave employers an incentive
  to provide generous insurance, which,
  in turn, led workers to consume too much
  health care. Pretty much every wonk in
  the administration believed that taxing
  benefits was essential. But the political
  team saw a problem: During the presidential
  campaign, Obama had criticized
  John McCain for a similar proposal.
  Axelrod was especially concerned
  about reversing course. The campaign
  had run millions of dollars in ads specifically
  on the issue. To underscore the
  point, he screened a roughly ten-minute
  montage of every Obama ad blasting Mc-
  Cain as a tax-raiser. It was to little avail.
  By late July, when the president held an
  Oval Office meeting with several prominent
  health economists, it was clear he
  intended to endorse the tax (though it
  ultimately fell hardest on upper-income
  workers). Axelrod stood off to the side
  and said little.
  As long as Axelrod was helping Obama
  capture the White House, it was easy to
  assume both men subscribed to the same
  worldview—not least because Axelrod's
  reverence for his candidate was irrepressible.
  Neera Tanden, a top Hillary Clinton
  campaign aide whom Obama hired
  for the general election, recalls Axelrod's
  pitch to her as follows: "Obama is
  a leader who tries to do the right thing.
  He's running a campaign that is a teambelieves in them. It would be great for
  you to see that."
  Back then, the details of Obama's proposals
  had been less important than the
  way they advanced the broader narrative.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




  Obama wouldn't just tout the benefits of
  health care reform. He'd point out that
  every Democrat since FDR had tried and
  failed to bring universal coverage; only
  a different kind of politician could succeed.
  But, for all they have in common,
  Axelrod is a liberal with a populist streak;
  Obama is more of a technocrat who leans
  left but generally shuns ideology. When
  it came time to govern, the differences
  between the president and his top political
  adviser became harder to finesse.
  One of the first major political questions
  the White House faced after the inauguration
  was how to handle public outrage
  over bonuses at bailed-out companies.
  Missouri Senator Claire McCaskill offered
  an answer: a bill preventing any executive
  at a company on government life-support
  from making more than the president, or
  $400,000 per year. "David liked that a lot,"
  says a strategist close to the White House.
  But Obama ultimately sided with Treasury
  Secretary Timothy Geithner, who
  believed it would discourage firms from
  participating in programs designed to stabilize
  the financial system.
  In the weeks that followed, Axelrod
  actually blessed the compensation plan
  the economic team devised. The idea was
  to tie pay to recovery—permitting large
  bonuses, but only once the companies
  had paid back their bailout funds. "What
  Axe railed against was not the idea of
  high compensation, but where it seemed
  divorced from the president's responsibility
  ethos," says one administration official.
  "Axe was fine with the initial guidance
  because it said you only get paid well if
  you bring your company back."
  But, in mid-March, the press reported
  that AIG owed executives at its financial
  products division $165 million in performance
  bonuses. Taxpayers struggled to
  understand why they owed anything to
  the people whose disastrous real-estate




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




    bets required a $170 billion government
    lifeline, much less tens of millions in performance
    incentives.
    The development shattered the tentative
    understanding between Axelrod and
    the wonlcs. Geithner believed that you
    cease to be an advanced economy once
   the government starts dissolving contracts.
   Axelrod and other senior political
   aides, like Gibbs, felt the administration
   had to respond to the country's legitimate
   outrage. They began to worry that Geithner's
   principled caution, while noble,
   could bring the administration down. but has had trouble nudging the president
   beyond his comfort zone. "With
   David, [you're] pushing on an open door,"
   says one person who's been in touch with
   the White House on these matters. Axelrod
   has always been harder-edged than
   the president, after all. "Barack would go
   everywhere but to negative. Rahm would
   cut your heart out. Axelrod is in the middle
   of that triangle," says Jim Cauley, who
   managed Obatiria's 2004 Senate race.
   But when it comes to the idea of changing
   Washington—of uprooting a system
  that gives outsize influence to special interests
  and rewards hyperpartisanship-
  Axelrod and Obama see eye to eye. For
  good reason. It arguably accounts for the
  millions of first-time voters who backed
  Obama by large margins in 2008. Perhaps
  more importantly, Obama and
  Axelrod both believe in changing Washington
  for its own sake. "It's in the president's
  nature, it's also in David's nature,"
  says Stephanie Cutter, a senior White
  House aide.
  Indeed, on the level of worldview, it's
  probably their deepest bond. Dating back
  to his Tribune days, Axelrod has believed
  that the biggest problem with interest
  groups and party hacks is that they take
  for themselves what belongs to ordinary
  citizens. In Obama's mind, special interests
  and partisanship corrupt good policymaking-




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




 both for the common man and
 everyone else. If it were up to Axelrod,
 the language of the Obama presidency
 might tilt a bit more populist. If left to
 his own devices, the president's words
 might be a bit wonkier. (It's hard to imagine
 Axelrod having written Obama's policy
 manifesto, The Audacity of Hope, for
 example.) The place where they completely
 overlap is the belief that Washington
 must change. And so, rhetorically
 at least, they won't give up on it.
 That helps explain why, despite the
 pressure from members of Congress
 and every Democratic wise guy in town,
 Axelrod and Obama keep returning to
 some version of the anti-Washington
 message, albeit one that increasingly lays
 blame with the GOP. "The context for the
 Washington-is-broken argument applies
 today, to the midterms," says Larry Grisolano,
 a top Obama campaign official who
 attends a weekly meeting with Axelrod
 and other senior consultants from the
 campaign. "It's different than what we
 had [in 2008]. . . . But he hasn't discontinued
 where he's coming from. He's applying
 it to the current context."


  T   he problem is that, while the administration
 remains rhetorically
 committed to changing Washington, at times it has abandoned the pursuit
 of that goal. In late February of 2009,
 Obama faced a small but telling decision.
 Congress had larded Bush's final budget
 with earmarks, the spending that members
 can sneak into legislation without
 a vote, and which Obama frequently derided.
 According to The Promise, Jonathan
 Alter's account of Obama's first
 year in office, the White House legislative
 staff had heroically trimmed the
 number of earmarks from over 20,000 to
 9,000 and urged the president to sign on.
 But Axelrod was worried about the old-



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




    Washington stench. "Nine thousand or
   two—earmarks are earmarks," he complained,
   in Alter's telling. After some
   agonizing, Obama sided with his legislative
   aides. "We've got big stuff going on
   here," he said.
   During the campaign and the first
   months of the administration, it had
   been possible to believe Obama wouldn't
   have to choose between his twin goals of
   passing legislation and taming Washington.
   But, over time, a combination of
   structural factors (the effective 60-vote
   requirement in the Senate) and circumstances
   (a Republican Party determined
   to oppose him at every turn) made the
   choice inescapable.
   No progressive can begrudge Obama's
   decision to sacrifice procedural change
   in order to notch big wins on health care
   and financial reform. But the tension between
   the administration's rhetoric and
   its approach isn't costless. "The strategy
   Obama had [during the campaign]
   is a great message for getting the country
   angry at Washington," says an official
   who joined the administration early
   on. "But some would argue that it's not
   a good message for achieving legislative
   victory that mires you in not changing
   Washington—in using the levers that
   are available in Washington." If anything,
   Axelrod feels this tension more acutely
   than even Obama. "Barack is a pragmatist,
   Axe believes," says Cauley.
   Last spring, chief of staff Rafun Emanuel
   began pursuing a series of deals with
   interest groups—insurers, pharmaceutical
   manufacturers, hospitals—to grease
   the passage of health care. When Axelrod
   eventually turned to the issue, he
   became frustrated. The deals Emanuel
   was negotiating were moving the legislation
   forward. But they risked provoking
   a public backlash. "During the
   campaign we fought against insurance




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




  companies," Axelrod said in discussions
  with Emanuel and the president. "After
  the deals with insurance companies, the
  deals with Pharma—all theseIt's possible that Axelrod was speaking
  strictly in his role as a communications
  adviser. Certainly no strategist would
  relish explaining how "changing Washington"
  had given way to co-opting special
  interests. But there appears to have
  been a deeper revulsion at work. For
  one thing, Axelrod had been fighting the
  health care–industrial complex since his
  Tribune days, when his daughter's medical
  bills consumed a quarter of his salary.
  And while he craved the end result
  of health care reform, the process had
  a way of mocking his principles. "David
  has a very idealistic streak," says the official.
  "He does not see politics as the
  art of the transaction. He sees it much
  more in a human context, that people
  are motivated by a connection to something
  bigger than themselves. That view
  is just very different from passing legislation
  like health care, where you have
  to cut deals."
  That would certainly be consistent
  with Axelrod's longstanding outlook. In
  late 2003, while he was working for John
  Edwards's presidential campaign in Iowa,
  Axelrod began meeting with Joe Trippi,
  then the campaign manager for Howard
  Dean. "He was one of the few people
  [in the party] that was interested in what
  we were doing," Trippi recalls. "Most of
  the other campaigns, candidates, staffs,
  thought we were Martians from outer
  space." The two men would sit for hours
  at the bar in the Hotel Fort Des Moines
  and riff about the way the Internet empowered
  ordinary voters and undercut
  special interests. Trippi sensed Axelrod
  had a pang of longing for what Dean
  was pulling off "I'm not saying he loved
  my guy," Trippi allows. "But he wanted
  to change politics, and here's something




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




   happening that's changing politics."


   W       hen Axelrod was five years old,
  he fell in love with John F. Kennedy
  after glimpsing him from
  atop a mailbox in New York City. The first
  politician he fell in love with as an adult
  was a Chicago Democrat named Jane
  Byrne. Byrne was an unlikely reformer.
  She'd been a protégé of the longtime
  mayor Richard Daley and was serving as
  his consumer-affairs commissioner when
  he died in office. But Daley's successor,
  a gray machine hack named Michael
  Bilandic, fired her in 1977 after she'd
  accused him of secretly negotiating a fare
  increase with local cab companies.
  The following year, Byrne announced
  she was likely to challenge Bilandic in
  the primary. "His heart is not with the
  people, it's with the bankers," she said, according
  to a story Axelrod wrote for the Tribune. "I'll raise money with contributions
  from the people. . . . I won't make
  any sweetheart deals." Axelrod and the
  younger writers at the paper were spellbound.
  "We cheered her on," recalls
  Lyon. In his story on the night of Byrne's
  primary victory, Axelrod called it the
  "upset of the century in Chicago."
  Within months of taking over as mayor,
  though, Byrne proved to be a spectacular
  disappointment. She began stocking
  agencies with friends and family, cutting
  deals with the machine pols she'd promised
  to sideline. Axelrod was more disillusioned
  than most. One piece of his
  straight reportage early in Byrne's term
  began, "Apparently piqued over published
  reports involving her husband,
  the normally outspoken Mayor Byrne
  has curtailed her exchanges with press."
  (It went on to include this priceless deadpan:
  "Mrs. Byrne, who has declined to
  discuss her sudden reticence. . . ") As a
  columnist, Axelrod bemoaned Byrne's




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




  fundraising quid pro quos. He joked that,
  for one contractor who'd siphoned $1.5
  million from city coffers, "it was a small
  sacrifice to return $62,000 to the mayor's
  campaign fund."
  In the end, Axelrod partly blamed
  himself for the fiasco. Trying to puzzle
  through how Byrne became "the mayor
  she ran against," he wrote: "[The lesson]
  is that voters should look at the history
  of a candidate in assessing the sincerity
  of their promises. There was little in Jane
  Byrne's background to suggest she would
  be the one who would finally clean up
  Chicago government."
  Notwithstanding such self-reflection,
  the pattern of bubbling enthusiasm followed
  by disillusionment would recur in
  Axelrod's career. The campaign of Byrne's
  successor, Harold Washington, also inspired
  a certain romance in him, but soon
  he was grumbling about the mayor's disorganization
  and fecklessness. (Axelrod
  did later work for Washington.) As
  a consultant in 1990, Axelrod helped a
  wealthy lawyer named Dick Phelan replace
   George Dunne, the longtime president
   of the Cook County Board. Axelrod
   had worked for Dunne four years earlier;
   he eventually soured on Phelan, too.
   In 1991, Axelrod signed on to work for
   another wealthy lawyer, who was challenging
   Illinois Senator Al Dixon in the
   Democratic primary. His commercials
   claimed Dixon was "Paid by the Taxpayers.
   Owned by the Special Interests."
   Dixon had a well-deserved reputation as
   a Washington dealmaker, but there was
   an added wrinkle: He was a close friend
   of fellow Illinois Senator Paul Simon, the
   man who'd given Axelrod his break inpolitics. Years later, Axelrod would credit
   Simon's 1984 victory with launching his
   career. He regarded the liberal Simon
   as a father figure and would speak of
    him reverentially.
    Several weeks before the primary,




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




    Simon began vouching for Dixon's bona
    fides and barnstorming the state at his
    side. Axelrod was crestfallen. In what he
    assumed was an off-the-record interview
    with National Journal, he laid into Simon
   as "an aspiring hack trapped in a reformer's
    body." "I think it's safe to say we were
   disappointed at Simon's rather strong
   involvement in propping up Dixon,"
   says John Kupper, a longtime Axelrod
   partner who worked on the campaign.
   "Clearly, Dixon was not the reform candidate
   in that race." (Axelrod promptly
   called Simon to apologize and has said
   the quote was one of his biggest regrets;
   they reconciled and remained close until
   Simon's death in 2003.)
   Whatever his tendency to fall in and
   out of love with politicians, there's no
   evidence Axelrod has soured on Barack
   Obama. Quite the contrary—he is said
   to take enormous pride in the president's
   legislative accomplishments. "When
  Obama rejects Axe's political advice,
  David's attitude is not like, 'Why isn't he
  listening to me?' "says one administration
  official. "It's more like, 'This is why
  I love this guy. He's willing to follow his
  heart even when the short-term politics
  are not with him.' "Instead, the source of
  Axelrod's disillusionment these days is
  Washington itself.
  In retrospect, Axelrod's diagnosis
  from 25 years ago wasn't entirely right.
  The lesson of Jane Byrne isn't that her
  background left her unprepared to clean
  up City Hall, though that's certainly one
  reason she failed. The lesson of Jane
  Byrne and Harold Washington and
  George Dunne and Dick Phelan—and
  even Paul Simon and Barack Obama-
  is that cleaning up City Hall is unspeakably
  hard. Much more so than it appears
  to an outsider.
  As long as he was a civilian, Axelrod
  could blame the pace of change on the




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015




  flawed politicians he helped elect. He
  could always move on and invest his
  hopes in someone else. But now that
  he's serving in government, it's clear
  that the problem isn't so much flawed
  people—though, like anyone, Obama has
  his flaws—as a ferociously stubborn, possibly
  irredeemable system. For an idealist
  like David Axelrod, that may be the most
  terrifying thought of all.
  Senior editor Noam Scheiber is a Schwartz
  Fellow at the New America Foundation.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775194 Date: 11/30/2015
