      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796693 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                            RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                            B6



From:                          H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                          Monday, November 12, 2012 12:15 PM
To:                            'cheryl.mills           jake.sullivan
Subject:                       Fw: H: been working with Jane. fyi. read. S



Fyi


From: Sidney Blumenthal
Sent: Monday, November 12, 2012 12:07 PM Eastern Standard Time
To: H
Subject: H: been working with Jane. fyi. read. S



November 11, 2012


      Paraeus Puzzle: Were olities involved?
Posted by




The director of the C.I.A. has resigned over an extra-marital affair two days after a Presidential
election in which the Agency's role in Libya was of burning concern—what is really going on here?
There. seem 'co be some potentially fascinating political aspects of this story that have yet to be
explored. Why, for instance, did this news explode publicly when it did? Both the
and the                     report that the F.B.I. had found, after months of inyesti;ation, that neither
retired General David Petraeus, now the former director of the C.I.A., nor the Nvornan with. whom he
was evidently involved, his biographer Paula Broadweli, had broken any laws, Congressional
intelligence officials reportedly want to know why they were not informed earlier that the F.B.I. was
investigating Petraeus. But what I am wondering is why, if the F.B.I. had indeed. concluded that they
had no criminal case, this matter was brought to anyone's attention at all.
The inyestig,ation apParently began .whei. another woman Petraeus knew—the A.P.,                     j:w7,-Las
             a 'Florida woman with connections to the military—complained about harassing e-mails,
vvhich turned out to have been frorn Broadwell. Its not yet clear how directly the e-mails involved
Petraeus. As an official told the Wall Street Journal, "This investigation wasn't about the C.I.A.
director, it was aboint what looked like a cniber crime." In this case, like any other, the official went on,
"There are strict rules, there is a wall, about sharing information on ongoing criminal investigations."
According to the Times, approximately two weeks ago, F.B.I. investigators confronted Petraeus
personally about the matter. After talking to him, they were satisfied that there were no breaches of
 national security or other crimes involved. It was then, the Times reports, that Petra.eus certainly
became aware of the investigation, if he had not known of it before. Interestingly, he did not offer his
 resignation at once, raising the question of whether he would have resigned at all if he hadn't been
 asked to when the issue was about to become public. With the e!ection two weeks away, and the
 C.L.A.'s potential intelligence failures in the fatal ambush of American's diplomats in Libya a
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796693 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796693 Date: 11/30/2015




campaign issue, Petraeus surely recognized that if he resigned, the scandal would shake the Obama
Administration, perhaps giving more fodder to its Republican critics in what appeared to be an
extremely close election.
The Times uses the word "murky" to describe what happened next, and there are many puzzling
aspects. But according to the Times, at the end of October, a week or so after the F.B.I. investigators
confronted Petraeus, an unidentified F.B.I. employee took the matter into his own hands. Evidently
without authorization, he went to the Republicans in Congress. First he informed a Republican
congressman, Dave Reichert of Washington state. According to the Times, Reichert advised this F.B.I.
employee to go to the Republican leadership in the House. The F.B.I. employee then told what he
sknew about the investigation to Eric Cantor, the House Majority Leader. Cantor released a statement
to the Times confirming that he had spoken to the F.B.I. informant, whom his staff described as a
"whistieblower." Cantor said, "I was contacted by an F.B.I. employee who was concerned that
sensitive, Classified information might have been compromised." But what, exactly, was this F.B.I.
employee trying to expose? Was he blowing the Whistle on his bosses? If so, why? Was he dissatisfied
with their apparent exoneration of Petraeus? Given that this drama was playing out in the final days
of a very heated Presidential campaign, and he was taking a potentially scandalous story to the
Republican leadership in Congress, was there a political motive?
According to the Times, Cantor said he took the information, and "made certain that director
Mueller"--that is Robert Mueller III, the director of the F.B.I.—"was aware of these serious
allegations, and the potential risk to our national security.' This is a strange way to explain his contact
i,,vith the RBI on this matter, because it is alniost inconceivable that director Mueller was not already
aware that the bureau he runs had examined the e-mail account of the director of the CIA., and,
further, confronted 'him in person. Such a meeting between the bureau and head of the C.I.A. would
have been extraordinary, and it is fairly unthinkable that Mueller wouldn't have been consulted. So
what information was Cantor conveying when he got in touch with Mueller?
One obvious point of the call would have been to inform the F.B.I. director that Republicans on the
 Hill knew about Petraeus's vulnerability, and also about the investigation. if the F.B.I. had. ever
 entertained hopes of keeping it secret, the odds of doing so were fast diminishing. The same message
would have become clear to Petraeus, who was due to testify in front of a House panel next week.
 If Cantor spoke with Mueller on Halloween, as the Times chronology suggests, what happened
between then and November 6th, which is when the .F.B.I. reportedly informed James Clapper Jr., the
 Director of National Intelligence, about Petraeus's extra-marital affair? The internal pressure must
 have been enormous on Petraeus during this period. Perhaps he tried to outlast the election in order
to shelter Obama from the ffillout of his own personal foibles. Perhaps the F.B.I. director, Mueller,
 who has a. reputation for integrity, tried to keep the scandal from political exploitation by keeping it
 under wraps until Election Day. Cantor, too, appears to have kept quiet, despite the political
 advantage his party might have gained from going public Why? It is possible that, because the
 investigation had national-security iniplications, those in the know needed to tread carefully for legal
 reasons.                                •
 A final question, at least from my standpoint, is whether Petraeus had to resign at all. It appears that
 Clapper, who like Petraeus is a military man, saw it as a no-brainer. Within the military, there are
 rules about adultery. But within civilian life, should there be? The line of the day on the morning talk
 shows in Washington seemed to be that Petraeus did the "honorable" thing, or "he had to resign." The
 Old saw that, if he wasn't squeaky clean, he could be subject to black-n22n by his enemies, thus
 endangering national security, was 'mentioned again and again. To me, the whole Victorian shame
 game seems seriously outdated. Something like half the marriages in the country now end in divorce,
 and you can bet a great many of those involved extra-marital affairs. Is it desirable to bar such a large
  number of public servants from top jObs? It certainly seems fair to crnestion Petraeus's judgement,
  ethics, and moral fibre in this matter. But if infidelity wasn't treated as career-threatening, its value to
 black-mailers would be much reduced (the fear of a. spouse is another matter). In this instance,
  evidently, there were no crimes. So why again did this blow up as it has? Fans of thrillers, like me, are
  waiting for more answers.
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796693 Date: 11/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796693 Date: 11/30/2015




Photograph by AP Photo/ISAF.


Read more: http:/ /wv,nev,yorker.com./onlineiblogs_Lnewsdesk/ 2 012/11/david-petraeus-paula-
broadweli-were-politics-invoived.html?printable=true&currentiL
                                                             'age=a11#ixzz2CirdEAvt




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796693 Date: 11/30/2015
