     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796226 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                             RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                             Thursday, October 4, 2012 10:44 PM
To:                               'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                          Fw: ASSK - mission accomplished



Pls print.


From: Mills, Cheryl D [mailto:MillsCD@state.gov]
Sent: Thursday, October 04, 2012 04:45 PM
To: H
Subject: FW: ASSK - mission accomplished




From: Mitchell, Derek J
Sent: Thursday, October 04, 2012 12:47 PM
To: Murphy, W Patrick; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Sonenshine, Tara D; Kennedy, Patrick F; Campbell, Kurt M
Cc: Yun, Joseph Y; Reed, Ike; Barboriak, Eric M; Rogers, Heather; Murphy, Erin L; Pesaru, Shilpa; Brown, Medora K;
Brenner, Angela L; Courtney, Morgan L
Subject: RE: ASSK - mission accomplished

Thank you, Patrick, for taking on the marathon task as well! I joined ASSK and her team on the final leg back home and
had a chance to talk with her about many substantive things. But she started by expressing her deepest gratitude to
Patrick and Shilpa for their incredible and effective work. I do believe the visit will help the relationship and our work
out here. Thanks again to all. Derek


From: Murphy, W Patrick
Sent: Thursday, October 04, 2012 11:12 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Sonenshine, Tara D; Kennedy, Patrick F; Campbell, Kurt M; Mitchell, Derek 3
Cc: Yun, Joseph Y; Reed, Ike; Barboriak, Eric M; Rogers, Heather; Murphy, Erin L; Pesaru, Shilpa; Brown, Medora K;
Brenner, Angela L; Courtney, Morgan L
Subject: ASSK - mission accomplished

Colleagues:

The marathon, historic ASSK visit concluded yesterday with departure from Los Angeles en route to Rangoon — where
she is expected to arrive at this hour.
As I have reported separately along the way, the visit was highly successful for our Burma policy, the bilateral
relationship, and our support of the pro-democracy movement. ASSK engaged directly with at least 40,000 persons, plus
tens of thousands more via live streaming. Press attention was heavy, especially international coverage during the
Washington and New York portions and more traditional Burma- and locally-focused coverage during the rest of the
program.

The members of ASSK's delegation also benefited: Phyo Zeya Thaw, the youngest member of parliament and a former
political prisoner; Zaw Min Oo, an original member of the NLD and a committed activist for the past 24 years; and
ASSK's Chief of Staff, Dr. Tin Mar Aung, who we renamed "Dr. 54" for her solo responsibilities that match the large
delegation that accompanied the Burmese President on his parallel visit to New York.

ASSK and her delegation could not have pulled off this visit without us, and she expressed deep appreciation for the
Secretary's and the Department's support. We also benefitted from the cooperative members of her delegation, the

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796226 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796226 Date: 11/30/2015




largesse of hosts and benefactors, and the deep pockets of several ASSK personal friends and relatives who joined our
entourage for portions of the visit. At the end of the day, however, it was core State support that made this all possible.

It takes a team — and there are dozens who contributed to this effort. I'd like to thank in particular Counselor Mills and
Director Sullivan for guidance; U/S Sonenshine and the R family and EAP A/S Campbell and team for footing key portions
of the cost; U/S Kennedy and his team for miraculous solutions to vexing logistical and financial needs; Embassy
Rangoon for the heavy advance work with the delegation; and the dedicated members of the Special Rep Office and
EAP/MLS Burma team who worked for the better part of three months to pull this off (especially Medora Brown and Erin
Murphy). I was also deeply blessed to be joined on the trip by numerous of our highly professional Diplomatic Security
colleagues (led by superb agent-in-charge Angela Brenner) and, from the protocol office, the indefatigable Shelpa
Pesaru — who did an incredible, flawless job managing the entourage, possessions, and movements — she is clearly one
of the Department's best assets for such a unique undertaking.

Thank you all, and kind regards - Patrick



From: Murphy, W Patrick
Sent: Monday, September 17, 2012 10:01 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Sonenshine, Tara D; Kennedy, Patrick F; Campbell, Kurt M; Mitchell, Derek J
Cc: Yun, Joseph Y; Reed, Ike; Barboriak, Eric M; Rogers, Heather; Murphy, Erin L; Pesaru, Shilpa; Brown, Medora K
Subject: ASSK - Day One (Sept 17)

Team:

Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and her delegation of three Burmese NLD members arrived today in Washington, DC on schedule
and in excellent spirits. ANA gave her a complimentary upgrade from Tokyo to Washington, so she flew in comfort and
security (which helped avoid the curiosity seekers who pursued photos and conversation during her Bangkok-Tokyo
leg). Thanks to excellent DS and protocol work at Dulles, the arrival, per ASSK's druthers, was quiet, efficient, and
devoid of paparazzi and the legions of supporters who had hoped for a more raucous entry.

ASSK and her team settled into a superb hotel suite, began receiving off-schedule guests (supporters and friends), and
launched into preparations for a very busy Tuesday tomorrow: meeting with the Secretary, DOS Rule of Law roundtable,
HIV/AID discussion with USG agencies, Asia Society/USIP award event (with the Secretary's participation), visits to RFA
and VOA, a bilateral with World Bank President Kim, and a private dinner with the Secretary.

We'll do our best to provide you with occasional updates on her visit: 17 days, ten cities, 60 events. As the pace
quickens, this may be irregular — but we'll certainly apprise you of any major developments or issues.

Thank you for the excellent intra-bureau cooperation and support in helping put together an usual and complex visit.

Regards - Patrick

W. Patrick Murphy
Special Representative and Policy Coordinator for Burma, Acting
US. Department of State
(202)647-4700




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796226 Date: 11/30/2015
