     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793295 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL


From:                             Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS@state.gov>
Sent:                             Tuesday, September 18, 2012 8:35 PM
To:                               H
Subject:                          NATO



I'm heading back from meetings on women, peace and security at NATO. The chief implementer of WPS at DOD also
traveled with me. It was extremely productive. SG Rasmussen chaired a meeting on 1325 today of all the NATO member
and partner ambassadors, incl Dalder. The new NATO special rep for 1325 -- the position sponsored by Norway and
approved at the Chicago summit --- gave her inaugural address, and my DOD colleague and I discussed the US efforts
both generally and in Afghanistan. We were followed by extensive remarks from the NATO ambassadors, all of whom
touched on the importance of women's role in security and NATO's mission, as well as applauded US leadership. Many
mentioned you in their interventions! The ambs from Serbia, Azerbaijan and Georgia pointed to their own national
action plans (their existence was a surprise to us), as well as the new structures they have put in place to implement
them. The ambassador from Azarbaijan even said that he is hopeful women will contribute to ending their regional
conflict (I will tell Morningstar). The new special rep - a seasoned diplomat who knows her way around NATO --- wanted
me to tell you how much you have inspired her --- something I hear everywhere!
I'm confident our NATO visit also served to reinforce the importance of the NAP and the US role with our own people
both at NATO and DOD.

I was sorry to miss the discussion with ASSK but there are more events with her tomw. We are working hard on getting
the engagement of Burmese women into the formal peace structures being put in place to end the ethnic conflicts.

I also met with Vivian Redding at the EU who, despite her efforts, is unlikely to get a quota for women on public boards
of directors adopted. She too expressed her admiration of you and your leadership.

In addition to everything that's been said about Chris Stevens, he really understood the important role the women in
Libya were playing in peace and security. Whenever I met with Libyan women at meetings in the region, they went out
of their way to tell me how much he supported them and how much affection they had for him. Such an awful loss.

You've been magnificent throughout all this, despite how wrenching it's been.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793295 Date: 11/30/2015
