     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                               RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                            Sidney Blumenthal <                                                                  B6
Sent:                            Thursday, November 15, 2012 9:57 AM
To:
Subject:                         H: whole lot of things. Sid



See below. Projection, madness, revenge--you pick the Shakespeare plot. Most of them truly believe in
their fevered visions. McCain? Back to Shakespeare, last category. Not to mention the Dittohead FBI
agent. Eric Cantor's explanation that he wanted to prevent the investigation from being "politicized"
doesn't rise to risible.
Spoke with Peter Westmacott, UK ambassador, last night, at strange Tina sponsored event, "Hero
Summit," where Petraeus was to be keynote and McRaven delivered a testimonial to Petraeus'
character as the finest officer he had ever met, etc. to stormy applause (what the hell, see brain
washed testimonials to Raymond Shaw in Manchurian Candidate). (Melanne was there.) Peter
volunteered that he had been at MacDill and witnessed the financially and personally sketchy Jill
Kelley's appalling social envelopment of virtually the entire social life of the base, coopting the
generals, admirals and their wives with herself at the center as queen bee. So who the hell is she?
South Korean honorary consul? Huh? Even if she is just an ambitious dope (or in another jargon,
unwitting asset of someone or some power), the scene is squalid. This is the center of the war on
terror? Or is it the set of the next season of Homeland?
My advice to you? Publicly and directly puncture conspiracy fever on Benghazi before any closed
hearing, in response to press question that you make yourself available to.

       KRAUTHAMMER'S CONSPIRACY THEORY. ABC's Sarah Parnass reports: [A] growing number of
       conservative commentators contend that the resignation of former CIA Director David Petraeus is more
       than simple amends made for a personal wrong. Charles Krauthammer, the Fox News and Washington
       Post commentator, believes the Petraeus' sex scandal is linked to a closed briefing that he gave two days
       after the attack that killed four Americans, including Ambassador Chris Stevens, in Benghazi, Libya.
       Krauthammer said on Fox News Tuesday that ties he sees between what Petraeus' told the Congress in
       September and his fear for his future at the CIA make his affair with biographer Paula Broadwell
       important to the public. http://abcn.ws/UrnPue
       SENATORS WANT WATERGATE-STYLE HEARINGS ON BENGHAZI. As the Petraeus scandal heats
       up, so does Republican senators' interest in the Benghazi attack, ABC's Sunlen Miller reports: Three
       Republican Senators today called for the establishment of a Watergate-style select congressional
       committee to investigate the administration's handling of the attack on the US consulate in Benghazi. "We
       believe the complexity and the gravity of this matter warrant the establishment of a temporary select
       committee that can conduct an integrated review of the many national security issue's involved," Seri.
        John McCain, R-Ariz., said today. The Senator, along with Sen. Kelly Ayotte, R-NH., and Sen. Lindsey
       Graham, R-SC., called for former CIA director Gen. Petraeus as well as Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
        to testify before the committee, if the Senate approves its formation. They intend to probe "all the way up
        to the President of the United States."




    Original Message
From: politicalUnit@abcnews.go.com <politicalUnit@abcnewsnow.com>
To: sbwhoeop <sbwhoeop                                                                                                B6
Sent: Thu, Nov 15, 2012 9:25 am
Subject: The Note: Republicans Return Romney's Parting Gift




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015




Republicans Return Romney's
Parting Gift
November 15, 2012 09:18 AM

Scott Olson/Getty Images
By MICHAEL FALCONE ( Pmichaelpfalcone ) and AMY
WALTER ( @amyewalter )
NOTABLES:

   • 'UNMASKED - THE AGENT WHO LAUNCHED
     THE PETRAEUS PROBE: ABC's Brian Ross
     reports for "Good Morning America" that the FBI
     agent who launched the probe was identified
     overnight. Tampa socialite Jill Kelley went to 47-year-
     old bureau veteran Fred Humphries, whom she new
     personally, to report she had received harassing
     emails from Paula Broadwell. According to his lawyer,
     Humphries helped launch the investigation and later
     approached a member of Congress when he thought
     there was a cover-up. http://abcn.ws/S044Ma
     Additional reporting form ABC's Rhonda
     Schwartz and Jason Ryan:
      http://ahcn.ws/ZN4omt

   • PETRAEUS TO TESTIFY: Amid the scandal,
     former CIA Chief David Petraeus will testify on the
     attack in Benghazi, Libya, ABC's Martha Raddatz
     reports. http://abcn.ws/XIw3VD

   • OBAMA ADDRESSES THE SCANDAL: President
     Obama held his first press conference since his re-
     election and ABC's Jonathan Karl reports for "World
     News" that Obama said former CIA chief David
     Petraeus failed to meet his own standards. "I have no
     evidence at this point, from what I've seen, that
     classified information was disclosed that in any way
     would have made an impact on our national security."
     http://abcn.ws/XcbIsI

   • TROOPS, FAMILIES FROM JAKE TAPPER'S
     'THE OUTPOST' WEIGH IN: The scandal
  UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015




   involving Gen. David Petraeus, and now Gen. George
   Allen, has hit as ABC's Jake Tapper debuted his book
   about American military courage, "The Outpost: An
   Untold Story of American Valor," which retells one of
   the war in Afghanistan's deadliest battles. On
   Wednesday, some troops and families who appear in
   the book told Jake what they think of the current
   scandal: Former Sergeant, Blackfoot Troop, 6-4 Cav:
   "I think it is a shame how selfish our leaders have
   become starting at the top. I served in the Army for 6
   years and from day one 'integrity' was drilled into
   everything we do. As a sergeant, I tried to live the best
   I could hoping others would do the same. Our men
   and women are putting their lives on the line everyday
   and deserve to have leaders who uphold our values."
   a€: A Gold Star mother whose son, a member of Black
   Knight Troop, 3-61 Cav, was killed in the October 3,
   2009 attack on Combat Outpost Keating: "Disgusted,
   with all the time they put in to these females, when did
   they have time for the troops. They are the ones the
   soldiers are to look up too. lead by example."
   http://abcn.ws/ Xch47q

• UNION CHIEF - THERE IS NO FISCAL CLIFF:
  AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka will deliver a
  speech in Washington, DC today - his first since
  meeting with President Obama along with other labor
  and progressive leaders this week. Here's a preview of
  what he will say: "There is no fiscal cliff! What we're
  facing is an obstacle course within a manufactured
  crisis that was hastily thrown together in response to
  inflated rhetoric about our federal deficit. Don't
  misunderstand me. I don't for a moment think that
  America's deficit is not a long-term problem. It is, but
  it's not our short term crisis. But all the deficit chatter
  has distracted us from our real crisis-the immediate
  crisis of 23 million unemployed or underemployed
  workers, a crumbling national infrastructure, an
  under-supported manufacturing sector, all of which
  require significant federal investments, all of which


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015




         will allow our economy to grow out of this crisis,
         instead of digging us further in."

THE NOTE:
It's been just over a week since his defeat at the hands of
President Obama and already a chasm between Mitt Romney
and some prominent members of the Republican Party seems
to have opened up.
The failed GOP presidential hopeful's candid assessment of
why he lost the race, which he offered on conference calls
with donors yesterday, instantly drew a sharp rebuke from
Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal who called Romney's take
"absolutely wrong."
Romney told top donors he came up short on Nov. 6 because
"what the president's campaign did was focus on certain
members of his base coalition, give them extraordinary
financial gifts from the government, and then work very
aggressively to turn them out to vote, and that strategy
worked." (Watch ABC's David Muir's "World News"
report: http://abcn.ws/XccplI)
According to Romney some of the best "gifts," went to
Hispanic voters, a group that voted overwhelmingly for
President Obama.
"One, he gave them a big gift on immigration with the
DREAM Act amnesty program, which was obviously very,
very popular with Hispanic voters, and then number two was
Obamacare," Romney said on a conference call, audio of
which was obtained by ABC News.
Romney added, "It's a proven political strategy, which is, give
a bunch of money to a group and, guess what, they'll vote for
    11
you.
But speaking at a Republican Governors Association meeting
in Las Vegas, Gov. Jindal dismissed Romney's explanation
during a press conference yesterday.
"I don't think that represents where we are as a party and
where we're going as a party," Jindal, a potential 2016 GOP
presidential contender, said. "If we're going to continue to be
a competitive party and win elections on the national stage
and continue to fight for our conservative principles, we need
two messages to get out loudly and clearly: One, we are
fighting for mo percent of the votes, and secondly, our

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015




policies benefit every American who wants to pursue the
American dream." http://politi.co/RUVQpV
And Romney's appraisal even sounds discordant when
compared to the words of his own campaign spokesman,
Kevin Madden, who spoke on a panel at the Atlantic's
Washington Ideas Forum yesterday.
"I don't think the Obama campaign gets enough credit for
actually changing the electorate," Madden said. "I think their
turnout model is extraordinary   . . They did very well, and they
made sure they had the exact model of the electorate that
they needed to win." http://bitly/SW&Gm
Back at the gathering of governors in Las Vegas, former
Mississippi Gov. Haley Barbour didn't mince words, calling
for a "brutally honest assessment of what we did," and
recommending a "a very serious proctology exam" for the
GOP. http://bit.ly/W8a;Fg
While his Republican counterparts were recommending the
political equivalent of a colonoscopy for their party, Romney
ended the conference call with donors yesterday on a wistful
note.
"We're still having a hard time, just contemplating what could
have been versus what is, and it just doesn't seem real, we're
still in the stage of denial at my house," Romney said
chuckling. "We still think the campaign is going on."
NOTE IT!
The Note's virtual political roundtable.
ABC's RICK KLEIN: If Mitt Romney really believes he lost
the election because President Obama gave key voting blocs
"gifts" - or, if he doesn't believe it but continues to tell people
that he does - he's doing no favors to the Republican Party,
his own role in it, and the healing of divisions after the
election. It gives Romney and the GOP an easy out that won't
result in a productive internal party conversation;
Republicans are not going to out-gift Democrats, at least not
this side of a Medicare prescription drug benefit. And of
course, it echoes the "47 percent" comment, which is why
Gov. Bobby Jindal came out strong in denouncing the
sentiment. More immediately, it steers the nation back
toward division and confrontation, as the post-election glow
of healing fades faster than anticipated.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015




MORE HIGHLIGHTS FROM ROMNEY'S CALL WITI1
DONORS: Courtesy of ABC's Chris Good, below are some
highlights from one of at least two calls Mitt Romney held
with donors yesterday, explaining President Obama's election
win and blaming it on giveaways to voters in the Obama
coalition.
-Romney credits his team and said there was "really no
drama in the campaign."
-Romney says president Bill Clinton called him after
the election and said he might have won if not for Hurricane
Sandy. Romney: "I spoke with president Clinton the day
before yesterday, he called and spent thirty minutes chatting
with me. He said a week out I thought you were going to win.
And he said, but the hurricane happened, and it gave the
president a chance to be presidential, and to look bipartisan,
and you know he got a little more momentum, and of course
he also said that when he was watching Ann speak at the
Republican convention, he decided he was tempted to join
the Republican Party. So he may have just been effusive with
generous comments as he chatted."
-Romney on the "gifts" to Hispanic voters: "For any
lower-income Hispanic family, Obamacare was massive, I
mean for-the average income for a household in America is
fifty thousand dollars a year, that's the median, fifty K per
year. For the Hispanic household, my guess is it's lower than
that, maybe it's forty thousand a year. For a home earning
let's say thirty thousand a year, free health care, which is
worth about ten thousand dollars a year, I mean is massive,
it's huge. So this-he did two very popular things for the
Hispanic community."
-The primary was "nuts." Romney: "We had 20
Republican debates, that was absolutely nuts, it opened us up
to gaffes and to material that could be used against us in the
general, and we were fighting these debates for a year, and
the incumbent president just sat back and laughed." Romney
said he wants his group of donors to stay together to pressure
 Republicans to abbreviate their primary process.
-Criticized networks that hosted debates. Romney's
suggestion for the debates next time "agree that we're gonna
 do, you know, I dont' know, eight debates, and we're gonna,
we're gonna do one a month, and we're gonna pick stations
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015




that are reasonable, it's not all gonna be done by CNN and
NBC, alright, I mean we're gonna try and guide this process
so that it's designed to showcase the best of our people as
opposed to showcasing liberals beating the heck out of us."
THE BUZZ:
with Chris Good ( Pc good)
OBA1VIA'S BUDGET BOTTOM LINE. More from ABC's
Jonathan Karl: President Obama drew a hard line on budget
talks: that any deal must include tax increases on the wealthy
"More voters agree with me on this issue than voted for me,
so we've got a clear majority of the American people," Obama
said at the news conference. WATCH:
http://abcn.ws/XcbIsI
OBAMA OFFERS AN OLIVE BRANCH. ABC's Devin
Dwyer reports on President Obama's news conference
yesterday: President Obama today heaped praise on his
defeated rival, GOP nominee Mitt Romney, saying the former
governor's record and ideas "could be very helpful" in
shaping policy over the next four years "My hope is, before
the end of the year AC; that we have a chance to sit down and
talk," Obama told reporters in his first post-election press
 conference. http://abcn.ws/QfJXgi
 PETRAEUS CALLED TO THE HILL. ABC's Sunlen
 Miller reported Wednesday morning that David Petraeus has
 told Sen. Dianne Feinstein he will appear before her Senate
 intelligence committee, and ABC's SarahParnass follows up:
 Republican senators and representatives-and at least one top
 Democrat-urged the former Afghanistan general to testify,
 despite his resignation from his post as CIA director. AC1
 Petraeus was scheduled to testify at a Senate Intelligence
 hearing on Benghazi, set for 2:30 p.m. Thursday, but because
 of his resignation in light of the disclosure of his affair with
 biographer Paula Broadwell, Acting CIA Director Mike Morel
 was scheduled to appear in his place at the closed-door
  hearing. Senate Intelligence Committee members are likely to
  meet casually today to discuss what to do next regarding
  Petraeus, according to an aide to Feinstein, but so far no
  additional meetings or hearings have been scheduled in
  regards to Petraeus' extramarital affair, nor Benghazi.
  http://abcn.ws/RE0jKK


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015




PAULA BROADWELL STRIPPED OF SECRET
CLEARANCE. ABC's Pierre Thomas and Martha Raddatz
report: aula Broadwell, the author suspected of carrying on
an affair with former CIA director David Petraeus, has been
stripped of her military security clearance after a federal
probe alleged she was storing classified military material at
her home. "Appropriate actions with regard to this officer's
clearance and access have been taken," said Army spokesman
George Wright of Broadwell, an Army reservist and West
Point graduate. http://abcn.ws/UHjDqE
ICRAUTHAMMER'S CONSPIRACY THEORY. ABC's
Sarah Parnass reports: [A] growing number of conservative
commentators contend that the resignation of former CIA
Director David Petraeus is more than simple amends made
for a personal wrong. Charles Krauthammer, the Fox News
and Washington Post commentator, believes the Petraeus'
sex scandal is linked to a closed briefing that he gave two days
after the attack that killed four Americans, including
Ambassador Chris Stevens, in Benghazi, Libya. he;
Krauthammer said on Fox News Tuesday that ties he sees
between what Petraeus' told the Congress in September and
his fear for his future at the CIA make his affair with
biographer Paula Broadwell important to the public.
 http://abcn.ws/UrnPue
 SENATORS WANT 'WATERGATE-STYLE'
 HEARINGS ON BENGHAZI. As the Petraeus scandal
 heats up, so does Republican senators' interest in the
 Benghazi attack, ABC's Sunlen Miller reports: Three
 Republican Senators today called for the establishment of a
 Watergate-style select congressional committee to investigate
 the administration's handling of the attack on the US
 consulate in Benghazi. "We believe the complexity and the
 gravity of this matter warrant the establishment of a
 temporary select committee that can conduct an integrated
 review of the many national security issues involved," Sen.
 John McCain, R-Ariz., said today. The Senator, along with
 Sen. Kelly Ayotte, R-NH., and Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-SC.,
 called for former CIA director Gen. Petraeus as well as
 Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to testify before the
  committee, if the Senate approves its formation. They intend


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015




to probe "all the way up to the President of the United
States."
BOEHNER REJECTS MIDDLE-CLASS TAX
EXTENSION. Sound familiar? After President Obama
called on Congress to extend the Bush tax cuts only for lower
incomes, ABC's John Parkinson reports: [House Speaker
John] Boehner rejected the president's call earlier
Wednesday for House Republicans to quickly pass Senate
legislation that would extend middle class tax cuts, and he
alternatively called on the Senate to take up House-passed
legislation to extend all of the current tax rates for one year.
"Instead of the House moving on the Senate bill, the Senate
ought to move on the House bill," Boehner said. "We are not
going to hurt our economy and make job creation more
difficult, which is exactly what that plan would do. It's not thE
direction that we want to go because it's going to hurt job
creators in America." http://abcn.ws/Tri2P
MCCAIN VOWS TO BLOCK SUSAN RICEfiC: ABC's
Sunlen Miller reports: Some Republican senators are
indicating that they would do "whatever is necessary" -
including a filibuster - to stop UN Ambassador Susan Rice
from becoming the next secretary of state, if nominated by
 President Obama. "I don't trust her and the reason I don't
trust her is because I think she knew better and if she didn't
 know better she shouldn't be the voice of America," Sen.
 Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., said today, "I don't think she
 deserves to be promoted, there are a lot of qualified people in
 this country the president could pick but I am dead set on
 making sure we don't promote anybody who is an essential
 player in the Benghazi debacle." Rice, along with Sen. John
 Kerry, D-Mass., are reportedly being considered among
 others to replace Secretary of State Hillary Clinton when she
 steps down. http://abcn.ws/W9cAZ7
 'WAND OBAMA BRISTLES. After Sens. John McCain
 and Lindsey Graham have threatened to block the
 nomination of U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Susan Rice, if
 President Obama seeks to make her Hillary Clinton's
 replacement as secretary of State, ABC's Elizabeth Hartfield
 and Sunlen Miller report: "They should go after me,"
 [Obama] said. "If Senator McCain and Senator Graham and
 others want to go after somebody, they should go after me,"
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015




said Obama [in his news conference Wednesday]. "And I'm
happy to have that discussion with them. But for them to go
after the U.N. ambassador, who had nothing to do with
Benghazi and was simply making a presentation based on
intelligence that she had received and to besmirch her
reputation is outrageous." http://abcn.ws/TGcPbV
ANGUS KING PICKS A SIDE. ABC's Sunlen Miller
reports: Maine's newly elected Independent senator-elect,
Angus King, announced today that he'll caucus with the
Democrats in the Senate, boosting the party's control to 55
seats, compared with 45 held by Republicans in the new
Congress. "I have decided to affiliate with the Democratic
Caucus because doing so will allow me to take independent
positions on issues as they arise and at the same time be an
effective representative of the people of Maine," King
announced in Congress this morning. http://abcn.ws/T4tdYs
RON PAUL'S FAREWELL SPEECH: 'OUR
CONSTITUTION ae: HAS FAILED.' In a sprawling, 52-
minute address-likely his last ever from the House floor-Rep.
Ron Paul blasted what he calls an authoritarian government,
corporations, politicians, undeclared wars, the federal
 reserve-in a nutshell, the entire U.S. political system. "Our
Constitution, which was intended to limit government power
and abuse, has failed," Paul said. "The Founders warned that
a free society depends on a virtuous and moral people. The
 current crisis reflects that their concerns were justified." And
 yet, Paul also said the answer lies in a return to the
 Constitution and its restrictions on governmental power.
 Read about it and WATCH, courtesy of C-SPAN:
 http://abcn.ws/T38bIM
 ANOTHER GEORGE BUSH CONSIDERS A RUN IN
 TEXAS. ABC's Elizabeth Hartfield reports: Political
 observers, take note of this name: George Prescott Bush. The
 son of former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and nephew of former
 President George W. Bush filed paperwork with the Texas
  Ethics Commission to run for office, and is apparently
 considering a run for land commissioner in the Lone Star
 State. Bush's filings did not specify the office that interests
  him, but his father today sent an email to his own supporters
  asking for donations to George P's exploratory account. In the


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015




email, Jeb specified that his son was eyeing the job of land
commissioner in 2014. http://abcn.ws/S—   YCz5i.
SECESSION-SIGNATURE STATES TOOK MILLIONS
IN FEDERAL MONEY. After a wave of user-submitted
petitions has hit WhiteHouse.gov, calling on President
Obama to let states secede from the Union, ABC'S Sarah
Parnass reports: Census records show that six of the seven
states that amassed more than 25,000 signatures on their
petitions to form independent nations in the past week took
more than $in million in revenue from the federal
government that year. The seven states-Texas, Florida,
Louisiana, Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee and North Carolina-
took more than 23 percent of all federal revenue allotted to
the states that year. http://abcn.ws/QICFkV
NOTED: UNION FOREVER! ANTI-SECESSION
PETITIONS GAIN CLICKS, TOO. The seceders have
gathered online "signatures" at a rapid pace, but some snarky
anti-secession petitions at the White House site "We the
People" have taken aim at them. Among the most bitter and
retributive, one asks Obama to strip the citizenship of
everyone who's signed a petition to secede. It's also the most
popular, having gained 10,652 signatures at the time of this
posting. Another asks that Austin, Texas, be allowed to
secede from the rest of the state (which leads all states in
secession signatures) and take several other towns with it.
Another asks that any state be required to pay back its share
of the federal debt before seceding. http://abcn.ws/SOAt6Z
WHO'S TWEETING?
?RealClearStcott: One overlooked reason why Obama
won is that he got more votes than Romney did.
(&seartspicer: Good read: @WSJ editorial: President's Tax
 Math: We're beginning to think he wants to go over the cliff
this year http://on.wsj.com/TFBflP
 PICLSoltis: The GOP has to get over this idea that "if you're
 explaining, you're losing."
 http://www.usnews.com/opinion/articles/2012/11/15/the-
 gop-cant-fall-for-the-false-center-v-right-debate AC;
 (&clithornell: The sore losers club
 http://www.sa1on.com/2m2/11/15/the sore losers club 2
 a€1 via @Salon


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015




 AscottwongDC: So Charlie Crist says he never dated
Tampa socialite Jill Kelley, but Marco Rubio did meet her
once a€: http://politi.co/TMkqrM pmarcorubio
AZekeJMiller: yikes RT pBloombergNews: BREAKING:
U.S. Postal Service lost $15.9 billion in FY2012, had seen $15
billion loss

This email was sent to sbwhoeopi

Please do not reply to this email as this address is not monitored.

Newsletter Unsubscribe
If you no longer wish to receive the newsletter "Political Unit: The Note" at this email address, you
may click here to unsubscribe.

Add me to the ABC News Do Not Email List
This email contains an advertisement from ABCNews, 7 WEST 66th Street, New York, NY 10023.
To unsubscribe from all types of future commercial email from ABC News regarding its products
and services, click here.

© 2012 ABC News Internet Ventures. All rights reserved. ,




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793840 Date: 11/30/2015
