     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796153 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                 RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                 B6



From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Wednesday, August 22, 2012 2:03 PM
To:                                'NidesTR@state.gov'
Subject:                           Request



To

Could you have someone follow up on this request which was forwarded to me?



    Original Message
From: Harry Siklas [mailto
Sent: Friday, May 25, 2012 Lui PM
To: Marc Mezvinsky
Subject: Hey

Hey bud,

On the professional front, I've been involved, as a passive investor, with a privately held deep sea mining company,
Neptune Minerals, Inc., a Nevada corporation founded on January 5th, 2011 for the purpose of engaging in the business
of Sea floor Massive Sulfide (SMS) Mining - they have the second most extensive prospective tenement position in the
South Pacific after rolling up the number 2 and 3 players in the industry, Neptune Minerals Plc. and Dorado Ocean
Resources Ltd.-(http://www.neptuneminerals.com )

The next phase for me may be working with them directly in some capacity. A very close friend of mine, Josh Adam,
started the company. I introduced them to GS and the bankers took them on as a client.

We can go into further detail at anytime, but there is a favor I need to ask, and hopefully it will not put you out, as I'm
not one to ask for favors typically.

I need a contact in Hillary's office: someone my friend Josh (and I perhaps) can reach out via email or phone to discuss
SMS mining and the current legal issues and regulations. They may be very interested in this, as Secretary Clinton just
went in front of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on May 23rd, urging to ratify the Law of the Sea Convention,
and spent a good third of her time talking about deep sea mining.

Josh Adam, my friend, co-founder and SVP of Finance for the company, is one of the smartest, logical, understated and
honest people I know. He (we) would feel very fortunate to have someone's ear on this topical issue, with the hope that
at some point we get in front of the Secretary herself. However, for now, if you, or your better half, know someone in
her office who would at least READ an email or take a fifteen minute call, it would be a huge boon.

Again, if this is not possible or you cannot get involved: NO PROBLEM at all.
I just wanted to get this out in writing since it may be easier. Would love to chat about it as well if you need further
detail.

Thanks man,

Harry




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796153 Date: 11/30/2015
