     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792743 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                         Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Friday, August 10, 2012 1:24 AM
To:                                           H
Subject:                                      Fw: Chavez says U.S. citizen arrested for entering Venezuela illegally (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker@state.gov [mailto:OpsNewsTicker@state.gov]
Sent: Friday, August 10, 2012 12:05 AM
To: NEWS-CA; NEWS-Mahogany; NEWS-WHA
Subject: Chavez says U.S. citizen arrested for entering Venezuela illegally (Reuters)

Embassy Caracas reports they contacted the Venezuelan Foreign Ministry to request consular access to the
American citizen reportedly in custody.

CARACAS (Reuters) - Venezuelan security forces have arrested an American citizen who entered the nation
illegally with geographical coordinates in a notebook, President Hugo Chavez said on Thursday.
    In the tense run-up to an Oct. 7 presidential election, the socialist leader has frequently mentioned the
possibility of violence by opponents with U.S. backing.
    Foes say that is typical grandstanding nonsense from Chavez, intended to curry support with the masses for
his re-election bid by presenting himself as a victim of "imperial" plots.
    At a campaign rally in the coastal town of Catia La Mar, Chavez said the man, of Latin American origin, was
arrested four or five days ago crossing into Venezuela from Colombia.
    "He has the look of a mercenary. We are interrogating him," Chavez said, adding that the man had stamps in
his passport from visits to Iraq, Afghanistan and Libya.
    When he was detained, the man tried to destroy a notebook full of coordinates, Chavez said in the middle of
a speech carried live on state TV, implying a plot was afoot.
    "We have reconstructed the pages," he said. "He says he was fleeing from someone ... It's a powerful sign.
This citizen wanted to enter the country illegally, for who knows what reason. He cannot say where he was
going, or who was waiting for him."




News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792743 Date: 11/30/2015
