       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791122 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                    Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                                    Tuesday, July 3, 2012 7:04 AM
To:
Subject:                                 Fw: NYT: Fighting for Economic Equality




From: Kornbluh, Karen F
Sent: Tuesday, July 03, 2012 06:51 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: FW: NYT: Fighting for Economic Equality

Dear Secretary Clinton,
I'm delighted the NYT appreciates the value of the Gender Initiative we launched at the OECD Ministerial you Chaired!
Thank you for encouraging my writing years ago, as well as for championing work-family issues before they were front
page news (especially child care and the FMLA), and your continued leadership as Secretary. It's been a true pleasure
collaborating with your team on important issues like this over the last three years.
Warm regards, Karen


FEMALE FACTOR

Fighting for Economic Equality
By NICOLA CLARK

Published: June 29, 2012

             —
PARIS Karen Kornbluh remembers the moment in 2004 when she realiZed that she was helping to steer
a shift in the conversation about women.

Enlar:,e This Ima:e
      I LJ   L. Li 1\ LI    UN U   AIU




                                                                                               Agnes Dherbeys for the International Herald Tribune

Karen Kornbluh, the U.S. ambassador to the Paris-based Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. "Even if all you care about

is economic growth, you have to care about gender issues," Ms. Kornbluh said.

As a Harvard-trained economist and newly hired policy director for then-Senator Barack Obama, she had
been writing for years about the need to update U.S. economic policies and social institutions — rooted in
the post-World War II boom — for a digital, globalized economy where half the U.S. work force is female
and more than 70 percent of mothers work at least part time. But most debate — "Mommy Wars: Episode
I" — was still franied as one of lifestyle choices, not economic necessity.

Until George W. Bush, seeking re-election, spoke at the Republican National Convention. "The workers of
our parents' generation typically had one job, one skill, one career, often with one company that provided
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791122 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791122 Date: 11/30/2015




health care and a pension. And most of those workers were men," he said. "Many of our most fundamental
systems — the tax code, health coverage, pension plans, worker training — were created for the world of
yesterday, not tomorrow."

Ms. Kornbluh, watching on television, was stunned: A conservative president was embracing her
arguments on a national stage. "I dropped a glass on my kitchen floor," she confessed in a recent
interview.

The Bush administration ultimately delivered few big policy initiatives aimed at women and "juggler
families" — a term for two-career parents that Ms. Kornbluh coined a decade before Anne-Marie
Slaughter, a former high-level State Department aide under Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton,
raised it in last week's much-discussed Atlantic magazine article.

As chief architect of the Democratic Party platform in 2008, Ms. Kornbluh said she pressed her
"obsession" with the gender dimension in discussions ranging from pay discrimination to education and
health care reform.

Four years later, Ms. Kornbluh, 49, is U.S. ambassador to the Paris-based Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development — and as passionate as ever that women's issues are fundamentally about
economics. Her approach, she said, has been to persuade (mostly male) fellow ambassadors that
championing women is ultimately in their national self-interest.

"Even if all you care about is economic growth, you have to care about gender issues," said Ms. Kornbluh,
whose priorities at the 34-member body include fighting corruption, promoting sustainable development
and nurturing Internet commerce. "Women are not a separate issue from the economy. Women are half
the economy."

As a mother who struggles herself to balance career with family needs, Ms. Kornbluh said she had chafed
most of her working life against the "antiquated options" available to most women — the very constraints
that Ms. Slaughter argues fly in the face of the post-197os myth that they can "have it all."

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/29/us/fighting-for-economic-eauality.html?pagewanted=all




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791122 Date: 11/30/2015
