UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794706 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL




        PPI Member News                                       June 5,2012


        PPI member and speaker at previous Roundtables Dr. Jeffrey Leonard is President & Founder of
        Global Environment Fund (GEF) and an investor in Asia for over two decades. Dr. Leonard shares his
        first-hand perspectives on the current state of India in preparation for the upcoming Summer
        Roundtable.


        Impressions of India and the World Economic Situation
        by Dr. Jeffrey Leonard


        I am in Mumbai this week, and against a backdrop of considerable negative sentiment all around the
        world, the Indian economy feels increasingly vulnerable and in stasis. Your summer PPI meetings will
        come at an interesting time for the world in general and a critical crossroads for India. It will make
        for lively, if worrisome, deliberations!

        Given that I am on three continents in the span of two weeks, I have had an opportunity to develop
        some interesting, pan-global perceptions of the world economic situation, and how India feels in
        relation to this. Being on the ground, dealing with operating businesses and a number of significant
        General Partners who are among our EMPEA member's, in rapid succession on multiple continents
        leaves an indelible impression as to how delicate the world economic flower is right now. And, I
        have not even landed in Europe yet


        First, all over my world, where GEF holds investments in operating companies sensitive to local
        economies, growth is losing steam. Weak jobs and uncertainty in US is not good news because as
        bad as it seems in America, the truth is that the Fed is pumping money to keep Europe afloat, and
        the rest of the world probably still depends on America as the engine to pull it all out of the mud.

        From my vantage of the Chinese economy, the overall slowdown to lower than 8% growth is driven
        by weakening not only of demand for exports, but also by the fact that domestic demand has
        reached a saturation point. One indicator of this is that in the smaller private sector firms, those
        with less large government participation, and less exposure to export markets, the data are showing
        that contraction has definitely set in as the operating mode. We feel it in GEFs investments in China,
        which are all domestic market facing rather than exporters. The somewhat scary proposition is that
        Chinas surplus manufacturing capacity could be as much as 50%, not only in export-oriented
        industries, but also in many new domestically focused manufacturing industries. A lot of economic
        adjustment, and ripples into banking and finance portfolios.


        In Africa last week, at the annual meeting of the African Development Bank, there is a sense that the
        bloom is off the newly flowered rose. Whereas, in February, when I spoke at a financial conference
        in Johannesburg, there were clear signs of growing optimism for key African economies, the
        situation is far more guarded today, with eyes on Europe and China as the most deflating potential
        influences. South African growth has slowed to 2.3%. Even in East Africa, where growth is highest in




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794706 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794706 Date: 11/30/2015




        30 years, the situation has turned, with currencies being crushed and economies face derailment as
        linkage with EU demand and Euro weighs heavy.


        As for Brazil, where we hold a large energy supplier company that is extremely sensitive to corporate
        demand, the economy is spinning wheels, after several years of white hot growth, it is weighed
        down by the inability of the political elite to make structural adjustments and facing stagnating
        growth, inflation rising and interest rates high.


        So, maybe I was already morose, even before my arrival in India, but I feel there is a fog that has set
        in here. I am really struck by the sense that recent economic data have sent shockwaves of alarm
        across Indian economists and corporate execs, on the one hand, and yet, on the other hand, the
        increased sense of unreality the political debate holdsmaybe a mirror of the US? The headline today:
        Jolted Government Swings into Action, is the sudden buzz, but in India action is usually deliberation,
        not concerted government measures to address the problem. The malaise just goes on. Early 1990s
        all over again?


        This week, recent quarterly growth figures for India were slashed from 6.1% to 5.3%. Consensus
        estimates for this years economic growth rates keep being adjusted downward by economic analysts
        and the government economists.


        Unfortunately, I see a confluence of a number of simmering challenges that are going to weigh down
        India.


            1.   Crisis of Leadership. There is no voice in the government that is exerting firm leadership, a
                 coherent understanding of the challenges, or coordinated intervention.
            2.   Stalled Reform. Long-term reforms of tax policies, financial regulations, and many other
                 areas of the economy have almost completely fallen by the wayside, except episodic,
                 populistic threats, such as to tax foreign flows.
            3.   High Fiscal and Current Account Deficits. Subsidies for all manner of commodities and fuels
                 continue to increase, not decrease (up 200% since 2007-2008), and this weekend the
                 government has had to rollback its efforts to reduce gasoline subsidies. The high fiscal
                 subsidies continue to drive a current account deficit that was about 4% of GDP in the
                 recently concluded fiscal year.
            4.   Rising Inflation. Despite cooling economic activity, domestic bottlenecks continue to drive
                 excess demand and inflation is now approaching 7.5%.
            5.   Prolonged Rupee Depreciation. Having grown accustomed to a relatively stable currency,
                 Indians seem deeply alarmed by the slide of the rupee against the dollar over the past 18
                 months. This is in spite of rather obvious reasons (deficits and high inflation) for the
                 weakness of the currency.
            6.   Interest Rates Remain High. From under 5% in 2010, official government interest rates
                 have hovered between 8 and 9% this year, inhibiting business expansion.
            7.   Electricity Shortages are Rampant. After several years of reform and renewed investment,
                 the electricity sector is suddenly in shambles, with strikes and underproduction in the coal
                 sector, lagging supplies of natural gas for new power plants, and state electricity boards
                 returning to their old patterns of insolvency and abrogated payments for contracted power
                 producers.
            8.   Investment Rates are Falling. Not surprisingly, with political uncertainty, high interest rates
                 and shortages of electricity and infrastructure, overall investments have dropped to under
                 30% of GDP, the lowest rate in almost a decade.
            9.   Declining Portfolio Inflows. Portfolio inflows, evidencing both savings and FDI, have
                 dropped by almost 50% from last year.




                                                                      ci



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794706 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794706 Date: 11/30/2015




        Much of this, alas, is par for the course in India, and I still remain very upbeat on the long term
        potential here, but I am struck by the considerable change in sentiment since the beginning of the
        year here. It may take time, patience, and a much more cohesive political response to right the ship
        of the Indian economy.




        ABOUT JEFFREY LEONARD
        Jeffrey Leonard is the president and founding partner of Global Environment Fund (GEF). Dr. Leonard
        is the primary architect of GEFs global private equity investment program, with a focus on clean
        technology, independent power, gas distribution, water treatment, consumer products, health care and
        forestry sectors. Dr. Leonard is the author of five books and numerous technical articles relating to
        world trade, technology development and global environmental industries. He served as a member of
        U.S. Department of Energys Hydrogen Technical Advisory Panel to the Secretary of Energy, and as an
        advisor or consultant to the World Bank, the U.S. Agency for International Development, the World
        Resources Institute, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Office of Technology
        Assessment and the Consultative Group on International Agriculture Research, and others. Dr.
        Leonard holds a bachelors degree, magna cum laude, from Harvard University, a masters degree from
        the London School of Economics and a Ph.D. from Princeton University. At the Winter Roundtable
        2011, Dr. Leonard was a speaker for the session "Are the U.S. & China in a Footrace or a Marathon?"


        If you have problems opening the link or viewing this email, please do not hesitate to contact Mark Mancao, PPI
        membership and communications officer mmancaoApacificpension.om .




                           Pacific Pension Institute, a member-driven, nonprofit educational
                              organization, assists pension funds, corporations, financial
                       institutions and endowments worldwide with carrying out their fiduciary
                         responsibilities, especially with respect to Asia and the Pacific region.

     info@pacificpension.org                Pacific Pension Institute                              Phone: 415.576.1187
     www.pacificpension.org 465 California St., Suite 610, San Francisco, CA 94104                   Fax 415.576.1189




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794706 Date: 11/30/2015
