      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772289 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL


From:                               Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov >
Sent:                               Monday, August 30, 2010 4:56 PM
To:
Subject:                            Gates Foreign Affairs article



I know this is only a comment, but it is his statement after the QDR. Given that the QDDR is really your brainchild and
part of your legacy, it is fitting that ours is longer and more detailed. But overall, I really think that yours is a worthy
peer. AM


From: McAuliffe, Marisa S
Sent: Monday, August 30, 2010 4:47 PM
To: Slaughter, Anne-Marie
Subject: RE: pse find and reforward to me the Gates Foreign Affairs article? thanks.




Helping others defend themselves: the future of U.S.
Security Assistance.(Comment).

Foreign Affairs 89.3 (May-June 2010)(2076 words)

Hide details
Show details
Author(s):        Robert M. Gates.
Document Type: Magazine/Journal
Bookmark:         Bookmark this Document




Full Text :

COPYRIGHT 2010 Council on Foreign Relations, Inc.

In the decades to come, the most lethal threats to the United States' safety and security--a city poisoned or
reduced to rubble by a terrorist attack—are likely to emanate from states that cannot adequately govern
themselves or secure their own territory. Dealing with such fractured or failing states is, in many ways, the main
security challenge of our time.

For the Defense Department and the entire U.S. government, it is also a complex institutional challenge. The
United States is unlikely to repeat a mission on the scale of those in Afghanistan or Iraq anytime soon--that is,
forced regime change followed by nation building under fire. But as the Pentagon's Quadrennial Defense
Review recently concluded, the United States is still likely to face scenarios requiring a familiar tool kit of
capabilities, albeit on a smaller scale. In these situations, the effectiveness and credibility of the United States
will only be as good as the effectiveness, credibility, and sustainability of its local partners.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772289 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772289 Date: 11/30/2015




This strategic reality demands that the U.S. government get better at what is called "building partner capacity":
helping other countries defend themselves or, if necessary, fight alongside U.S. forces by providing them with
equipment, training, or other forms of security assistance. This is something that the United States has been
doing in various ways for nearly three-quarters of a century. It dates back to the period before the United States
entered World War II, when Winston Churchill famously said, "Give us the tools, and we will finish the job."
Through the Lend-Lease program, the United States sent some $31 billion worth of supplies (in 1940s dollars)
to the United Kingdom over the course of the war. U.S. aid to the Soviet Union during those years exceeded
$11 billion, including hundreds of thousands of trucks and thousands of tanks, aircraft, and artillery pieces.

Building up the military and security forces of key allies and local partners was also a major component of U.S.
strategy in the Cold War, first in Western Europe, then in Greece, South Korea, and elsewhere. One of the
major tenets of President Richard Nixon's national security strategy, the Nixon Doctrine, was to use military
and economic assistance to help U.S. partners and allies resist Soviet-sponsored insurgencies without using U.S.
troops in the kind of military interventions that had proved so costly and controversial in Korea and Vietnam.

ADVISORY DUTY

The global security environment has changed radically since then, and today it is more complex, more
unpredictable, and, even without a superpower adversary, in many ways more dangerous. The U.S. military,
although resilient in spirit and magnificent in performance, is under stress and strain fighting two wars and
confronting diffuse challenges around the globe. More broadly, there continues to be a struggle for legitimacy,
loyalty, and power across the Islamic world between modernizing, moderate forces and the violent, extremist
organizations epitomized by al Qaeda, the Taliban, and other such groups. In these situations, building the
governance and security capacity of other countries must be a critical element of U.S. national security strategy.

For the most part, however, the United States' instruments of national power -military and civilian--were set up
in a different era for a very different set of threats. The U.S. military was designed to defeat other armies,
navies, and air forces, not to advise, train, and equip them. Likewise, the United States' civilian instruments of
power were designed primarily to manage relationships between states, rather than to help build states from
within.

The recent history of U.S. dealings with Afghanistan and Pakistan exemplifies the challenges the United States
faces. In the decade before 9/11, the United States essentially abandoned Afghanistan to its fate. At the same
time, Washington cut off military-to-military exchange and training programs with Pakistan, for well-
intentioned but ultimately shortsighted--and strategically damaging--reasons.

In the weeks and months following the 9/11 attacks, the U.S. government faced a number of delays in getting
crucial efforts off the ground--from reimbursing the Pakistanis for their support (such as their provision of
overflight rights to U.S. military aircraft) to putting in place a formal Afghan military. The security assistance
system, which was designed for the more predictable requirements of the Cold War, proved unequal to the task.
The U.S. government had to quickly assemble from scratch various urgently needed resources and programs.
And even after establishing funding streams and authorities, the military services did not prioritize efforts to
train the Afghan and, later, the Iraqi security forces, since such assignments were not considered career
enhancing for ambitious young officers. Instead, the military relied heavily on contractors and reservists for
these tasks.

More recently, the advisory missions in both the Afghan and the Iraqi campaigns have received the attention
they deserve--in leadership, resources, and personnel. Within the military, advising and mentoring indigenous
security forces is moving from the periphery of institutional priorities, where it was considered the province of
the Special Forces, to being a key mission for the armed forces as a whole. The U.S. Army has established
specialized Advisory and Assistance Brigades--now the main forces in Iraq--and is adjusting its promotion and
assignment procedures to account for the importance of this mission; the U.S. Air Force is fielding a fleet of
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772289 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772289 Date: 11/30/2015




light fighter jets and transport aircraft optimized to train and assist local partners, and it recently opened a
school to train U.S. airmen to advise other nations' air forces; and the U.S. Navy is working with African
countries to improve their ability to combat smuggling, piracy, and other threats to maritime security.

One institutional challenge we face at the Pentagon is that the various functions for building partner capacity are
scattered across different parts of the military. An exception is the air force, where most of these functions -
from foreign military sales to military training exchanges--are grouped under one civilian executive (the
equivalent of a three-star general) to better coordinate them with larger goals and national strategy. This more
integrated and consolidated approach makes better sense for the Pentagon and for the government as a whole.

The United States has made great strides in building up the operational capacity of its partners by training and
equipping troops and mentoring them in the field. But there has not been enough attention paid to building the
institutional capacity (such as defense ministries) or the human capital (including leadership skills and attitudes)
needed to sustain security over the long term.

The United States now recognizes that the security sectors of at-risk countries are really systems of systems
tying together the military, the police, the justice system, and other governance and oversight mechanisms. As
such, building a partner's overall governance and security capacity is a shared responsibility across multiple
agencies and departments of the U.S. national security apparatus--and one that requires flexible, responsive
tools that provide incentives for cooperation. Operations against extremist groups in the Philippines and, more
recently, Yemen have shown how well-integrated training and assistance efforts can achieve real success.

But for all the improvements of recent years, the United States' interagency tool kit is still a hodgepodge of
jury-rigged arrangements constrained by a dated and complex patchwork of authorities, persistent shortfalls in
resources, and unwieldy processes. The National Security Act that created most of the current interagency
structure was passed in 1947, the last major legislation structuring how Washington dispenses foreign assistance
was signed by President John F. Kennedy, and the law governing U.S. exports of military equipment was
passed in 1976. All the while, other countries that do not suffer from such encumbrances have been more
quickly funding projects, selling weapons, and building relationships.

BRIDGING THE POTOMAC

In 2005, to address the country's most pressing needs, the Defense Department obtained authorities that enable
the military to respond to unforeseen threats and opportunities by providing training and equipment to other
countries with urgent security needs. These new tools came with an important innovation: their use requires the
concurrence of both the secretary of defense and the secretary of state in what is called a "dual key" decision-
making process. In recent years, the secretaries have used these authorities to assist the Lebanese army, the
Pakistani special forces, and the navies and maritime security forces of Indonesia, Malaysia, and the
Philippines.

Those authorities and programs--and the role of the Defense Department in foreign assistance writ large--have
stirred debates across Washington. I never miss an opportunity to call for more funding for diplomacy and
development and for a greater emphasis on civilian programs. I also once warned publicly of a "creeping
militarization" of aspects of U.S. foreign policy if imbalances within the national security system were not
addressed. As a career CIA officer who watched the military's role in intelligence grow ever larger, I am keenly
aware that the Defense Department, because of its sheer size, is not only the 800-pound gorilla of the U.S.
government but one with a sometimes very active pituitary gland.

Nonetheless, it is time to move beyond the ideological debates and bureaucratic squabbles that have in the past
characterized the issue of building partner capacity and move forward with a set of solutions that can address
what will be a persistent and enduring challenge. Last year, I sent Secretary of State Hillary Clinton one
proposal that I see as a starting point for discussion of the way ahead. It would involve pooled funds set up for
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772289 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772289 Date: 11/30/2015



security capacity building, stabilization, and conflict prevention. Both the State Department and the Defense
Department would contribute to these funds, and no project could move forward without the approval of both
agencies. A number of other countries--in particular the United Kingdom, the primary model for this proposal--
have found that using pooled funds from different ministries is an effective way of dealing with fragile or
failing states. What I find compelling about this approach is that it would create incentives for collaboration
between different agencies of the government, unlike the existing structure and processes left over from the
Cold War, which often conspire to hinder true whole-of-government approaches.

Whatever approach we take to reforming and modernizing the United States' apparatus for building partner
capacity, it should be informed by several principles. First, it must provide agility and flexibility. Under normal
budgeting and programming cycles, a budget is put together one year, considered and passed by Congress in the
next, and then executed in the third. This is appropriate and manageable for predictable, ongoing requirements.
But as recent history suggests, it is not well suited to dealing with the emerging and unforeseen threats--or
opportunities--often

found in failed and failing states.

Second, there must be effective oversight mechanisms that allow Congress to carry out its constitutional
responsibility to ensure that these funds are spent properly. Tools that foster cooperation across the executive
branch could also enhance cooperation across the jurisdictional boundaries of congressional committees--
thereby actually strengthening congressional oversight in the national security arena.

Third, security assistance efforts must be conducted steadily and over the long term so as to provide some
measure of predictability and planning for the U.S. government and, what is more significant, for its partners
abroad. Convincing other countries and leaders to be partners of the United States, often at great political and
physical risk, ultimately depends on proving that the United States is capable of being a reliable partner over
time. To be blunt, this means that the United States cannot cut off assistance and relationships every time a
country does something Washington dislikes or disagrees with.

Fourth, any government decision in this area should reinforce the State Department's leading role in crafting and
conducting U.S. foreign policy, including the provision of foreign assistance, of which building security
capacity is a key part. Proper coordination procedures will ensure that urgent requirements for military capacity
building do not undermine the United States' overarching foreign policy priorities.

Finally, everything must be suffused with strong doses of modesty and realism. When all is said and done, there
are limits to what the United States can do to influence the direction of radically different countries and
cultures. And even the most enlightened and modernized interagency apparatus is still a bureaucracy, prone to
the same parochial and self-serving tendencies as the system it has replaced.

Helping other countries better provide for their own security will be a key and enduring test of U.S. global
leadership and a critical part of protecting U.S. security, as well. Improving the way the U.S. government
executes this vital mission must be an important national priority.

ROBERT M. GATES is U.S. Secretary of Defense.



From: Slaughter, Anne-Marie
Sent: Monday, August 30, 2010 4:33 PM
To: McAuliffe, Marisa S
Subject: pse find and reforward to me the Gates Foreign Affairs article? thanks.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772289 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772289 Date: 11/30/2015




Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772289 Date: 11/30/2015
