      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793787 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                              B6




From:                                 Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivanil@state.gov>
Sent:                                 Wednesday, November 14, 2012 6:48 AM
To:
Subject:                              FVV: Burma



fyi


From: Jonathan Powell [mailto
Sent: Wednesday, November 14, 2012 4:31 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3.
Subject: Burma


Dear Jake
I thought I ought to update you and the Secretary on what we have been doing in Burma before your visit.
With the support of the British government we have been working to share our experiences from Northern Ireland with the
government, ASSK and the armed ethnic groups with the aim of supporting their tentative steps towards a peace process.
In July I took Gerry Kelly and Jeffrey Donaldson to Yangon, Napiydaw and to Chiang Mai to meet the government including Aung
Min, the opposition including ASSK and Generation 88, the ethnic political parties and the leaders of all the armed groups. The sheer
show and tell effect of having an IRA leader who blew up the Old Bailey, a hardline Unionist who was in the army and whose close
relatives were killed by the IRA and a government figure made an impact and there was quite a lot of interest in the lessons we had
learned. We tried to help them focus on moving into a systematic political process with a structure and a timeline once the final
ceasefire, with the Kachin, is in place. There is a danger if this doesn't happen swiftly the ceasefires will collapse.
We followed that up with a trip in September by Gerry Kelly to see the military commanders of the armed groups in their bases along
the border. As a former leader of an armed group he managed to build some close relationships and help them understand some of the
challenges that the IRA and Sinn Fein faced during the Northern Ireland peace process and how they managed to deal with them to
reach a peace agreement.
We are following up with teach-ins for the Karen and for all the armed groups in Thailand with Gerry, Jeffrey, Yair Hirschfeld (who
negotiated Oslo) and Martin Griffiths (Aceh and ETA) on approaches to negotiation and power sharing. We are also arranging a visit
to Northern Ireland for Aung Min and his team (which has now been postponed until the New Year as a result of your visit).
We are also planning to take two retired generals with experience of peace processes including Northern Ireland to Burma to talk to
the Tatmadaw. This arises from advice from ASSK on the importance of getting the serving military to open their minds.
If you have any thoughts on what else we should do or what we should prioritise after your visit I would be most grateful if you would
let us know.
Given the Secretary's experience of Northern Ireland I thought she would be interested in the impact that peace process is having on
thinking on all sides in Burma.
Enjoy the visit.
Jonathan




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793787 Date: 11/30/2015
