        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794499 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL




From:                            H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                            Monday, April 30, 2012 2:05 PM
To:                              'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                         Fw: EU Commission op-ed on US-EU HLWG



Pls print.


From: Sullivan, Jacob J [mailto:SullivanJJ@state.gov]
Sent: Monday, April 30, 2012 12:53 PM
To: H
Subject: FW: EU Commission op-ed on US-EU HLWG

Worth a read.


From: Harris, Jennifer M
Sent: Monday, April 30, 2012 10:00 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J; Harrell, Peter E
Subject: EU Commission op-ed on US-EU HLWG

Worthy read. Peters is one of Barroso's leading advisors on the US-EU HLWG. And French to boot. Note his call for "an
ex ante mechanism to make regulatory systems converge." Kind of exceptional, especially from French origins. Other
useful bits highlighted.
 -Jen

28/04/2012 I Eric Peters I Europe I Lu 665 fois I 2 commentaires



The XXIst century: an opportunity for the emerging
Atlantic Space
LE CERCLE. While the United States' return to the Pacific region
continues to make headlines, a subtle but no less important reality is
also taking shape: the integration of the economies of the European
Union (EU) and United States is poised to cross a significant
milestone.
Ecrit par


 Eric Peters
 Conseiller au Bureau de politique europeenne
 Presidence de la Commission europeenne.


 At the EU-US summit at the end of 2011, a high level working group was effectively given the task of
 exploring ways to boost jobs and growth through the development of trade and investment. This work is still
 ongoing, and is opening up the realistic prospect of a transatlantic common market.
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794499 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794499 Date: 11/30/2015




After decades of hesitation and failed attempts, the politics and economics of the two sides have never been so
aligned.

Politically, the priority of the moment is to search for sources of growth. Trade can contribute to this, at a time
when budget and monetary policies are heavily constrained. The politics of trade deals have also changed, in
light of the lack of progress at Doha, the increasing demand for more reciprocity in trade and the accelerating
shift of power to Asia. The Transatlantic endeavour has become a winning formula both for supporters of open
trade and for those who are concerned with reciprocity, as well as those concerned with social and
environmental dumping. Last but not least, both sides have drawn the conclusion that the only means of
overcoming past obstacles is to focus on the future, with a XXIst century agenda on technology, services and
the supply chain - and the setting up of ex-ante mechanism to make regulatory system converge.

The economics stakes of such an agreement are more considerable than ever. Overall, the U.S. and the EU make
up 48% of world production, 30% of world trade and more than two thirds of foreign investment. The United .
States invests more in Belgium than in China or India, while European investments in the US are 8 times greater
than those destined for China or India combined. The gains to be expected from a free trade agreement are
commensurate with this unique relationship — one which generates 15 million jobs and whose daily commerce
amounts to just less than 2 billion Euros. The dismantling of industrial tariffs would produce an additional GDP
of around 0.5% to 1%. The contribution of business services — professional, distribution, financial or
transportation services — would also be substantial, and would encourage services to open up within both
domestic markets. Millions of j obs would benefit from harmonization of standards and the end of regulatory
barriers, which penalize both SMEs and multinationals. The overall quality of the bilateral relationship would
be enhanced, allowing an end to be put to situations such as that between Airbus and Boeing: a zero-sum game
that primarily benefits their competitors in emerging countries.

The support of the political and economic world, including the social partners, has never been so strong on both
sides of the Atlantic. This is essential, because whatever the benefits, discussions will be difficult. Strong and
determined leadership at the highest level on both sides of the Atlantic will be required. In this respect, the
many positive signals recently issued by European Heads of Government show that the EU is ready to play its
part with ambition and realism.

A transatlantic agreement would be a real game changer in geopolitics. Consequences should be anticipated,
particularly with regard to emerging countries. The EU must notably be careful not to fall into the trap of
adopting a protectionist and a defensive posture vis-a.-vis China and other emerging countries, based on a fear of
decline. A clear strategy will be needed.

First, faced with tectonic shifts in geopolitics, Europe should keep on a clear course in favor of the multilateral
system, making sure that short term decisions do not undermine the achievement of a strong multilateral system
in the long term.
Second, the EU should strengthen its ties with China, especially in investment, enabling European companies to
participate in the growing Chinese market and benefit from foreign investment.

Finally, the EU could turn its attention beyond the United States, and consider complementing this initiative
with the establishment of an Atlantic Space from Greenland to the Cape of Good Hope, and from Morocco to
Mexico. The energies of willing industrialized and developing countries on both sides of the Atlantic would be
gathered in a common Atlantic space of prosperity and shared values, building on the dense network of existing
bilateral or plurilateral (NAFTA) trade deals. The benefits would be multiple: the construction of a global
production area, the optimization of production lines, coupling with the future growth of Africa and America
and the setting up of a cultural and geopolitical area balancing the Asia-Pacific zone.

 Such a global strategy would enable Europe to strengthen its leadership in the international arena and to
 promote further growth and jobs. Finally, it would be a late response — but one more relevant than ever — to the
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794499 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794499 Date: 11/30/2015




declaration made by JFK at Independence Hall on July 4, 1962: ";The United States is prepared to endorse a
Declaration of Inter-dependence, that we will be prepared to discuss with a united Europe the ways and means
of forming a concrete Atlantic partnership, a mutually beneficial partnership between the new Union now
emerging in Europe and the United States."; On the eve of the fiftieth anniversary of this declaration, it is now
time to acknowledge the its farsighted nature and to extend it to the broader challenges of the twenty-first
century.

Eric PETERS, Advisor in the Bureau of political advisers to the President of the European Commission; former
advisor to Peter Mandelson and Christine Lagarde. The views expressed in this article do not represent those of
the European Commission




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794499 Date: 11/30/2015
