UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796468 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                            RELEASE IN FULL



                                     Lucy Jarvis
      In a remarkable broadcast career spanning nearly fifty years, Lucy Jarvis has
      made her name by achieving the impossible. In 1963, she was in Moscow filming
      a documentary when the Cuban Missile Crisis erupted. Undeterred, Jarvis fired
      off a cable to the White House demanding that President Kennedy end his "little
      argument" so that she could continue shooting. Afterward, Kennedy joked: "I told
      Khrushchev if he got the missiles out of Cuba, I would get Lucy Jarvis out of the
      Kremlin!" The Kremlin was the first of many award-winning documentaries and
      specials that Jarvis would make for NBC News. Savvy, connected, indomitable,
      there were few doors that she could not pry open, from the restricted inner
      sanctums of the Louvre and Scotland Yard to the impenetrable (or so it seemed)
      enclave of China's Forbidden City. Along the way, Jarvis also produced a string
      of investigative documentaries about the crucial social issues of our time, from
      gun control to drug abuse to the imbalances of the medical system. When she
      left NBC in 1976 to become an independent producer, Jarvis was one of the first
      women in history to launch her own production company. Through it all, she
      credits her success to motherly advice: "She made me believe there was nothing
      I couldn't do, and I believed it and, therefore, did it."

      Born in New York City in 1919, Jarvis attended Cornell University, where she
      supplemented her studies in home economics and nutrition with courses in
      architecture, public speaking, and finance, while also serving as president of the
      drama club. "It was as though I was preparing myself for whatever decision I
      would make for the rest of my life," she explained in an interview for an alumnus
      newsletter in 2005. Upon graduation, Jarvis found a job as a dietitian with New
      York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, where one of the doctors with whom she
      worked recommended her for an opening as the food editor of McCall's
      magazine. Jarvis, who had already written and published a cook book, flourished
      in the position, particularly when called upon to make appearances on locally
      produced television talk shows. The burgeoning medium held an allure for the
      ambitious, exquisitely curious young woman, who decided that she had
      "something I want to say ... and the place for me to do that is on television."

      As she mulled her next career step, Jarvis left McCall's to raise her two
      children—"enjoying every minute of it"—while also volunteering for the
      Organization for Rehabilitation through Training (ORT). Here she got her first
      taste of film production when she made Passport to Freedom, a documentary on
      ORT's global efforts to provide skills training to Jewish war refugees, taking
      them, as Jarvis explained, "from hopelessness to education to a new place of



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796468 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796468 Date: 11/30/2015




                                               2


      living, a new home, and a new hope." Jarvis eventually resumed her professional
      career by working as a staffer for various radio and television outfits, such as
      David Susskind's Talent Associates, and serving, for a time, as women's
      television editor for Pathe News. In 1957 she collaborated with Martha Rountree,
      the creator of .Meet the Press, on a Washington, D.C.–based public affairs radio
      show known as Capitol Close-Up. The program attracted such notable guests as
      President Dwight Eisenhower, Vice President Richard Nixon, Senator John F.
      Kennedy, and FBI director J. Edgar Hoover, and subsequently earned Jarvis an
      invitation to join NBC News.

      Jarvis began her career with NBC as an assistant producer for The Nation's
      Future, a forum on current and controversial issues in which two opposing
      personalities shared their ideas and opinions. This was the time of the space
      race between the United States and the Soviet Union, and one of her earliest
      successes was the exclusive pairing of American astronaut John Glenn with
      Russian cosmonaut Gherman Titov, an event which was carried live by all three
      networks. In 1962, Jarvis, by then promoted to producer, was sent to Moscow to
      arrange for the filming of a documentary about the cultural and political history of
      the Soviet Union. While NBC had tried and failed for a number of years to bring
      cameras into the Kremlin, the inner bastion of communism, Jarvis, who took a
      crash course in Russian, succeeded by what she later characterized as "sheer
      manipulative wile." After much persistence and political maneuvering—indeed,
      her tenacity prompted her Soviet hosts to dub her the "Field Marshall"—Jarvis
      secured permission for the project from no less a figure than Soviet Premier
      Nikita Khrushchev (whom she would subsequently profile in the 1967
      documentary Khrushchev in Exile: His Opinions and Revelations). Jarvis
      remained in Russia for the next five months, coordinating the various aspects of
      the production, and regularly smoothing local feathers with gifts of American
      cigarettes and home-baked brownies. Airing in 1963, The Kremlin dazzled
      audiences and critics alike and won an Emmy Award for its cinematography.

      Jarvis next produced a dual tour of the Louvre in Paris and the National Gallery
      in Washington, D.C., Museum Without Walls, which aired on NBC in 1963. The
      logistically complex project—among the first to utilize telecommunications
      satellite technology—served as a forerunner to a more detailed exploration of the
      Louvre that Jarvis had in mind. The previous year she had accompanied
      Kennedy on a state visit to Paris and it was there, during a social event, that she
      had first broached the idea of a documentary about the hallowed institution to
      French President Charles de Gaulle and Minister of Culture Andre Malraux. In a
      feat comparable to getting approval to shoot inside the Kremlin, Jarvis finagled
      permission to bring a camera crew into the Louvre; when the museum's curators
      expressed concern that the intense lights required to gain a proper exposure (for
      the sake of aesthetic, the film was shot in color on 35mm rather than the


                                                2
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796468 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796468 Date: 11/30/2015




                                               3



     customary black and white 16mm) might damage their treasured paintings, Jarvis
     reassured them by saying, "If Khrushchev trusted me, why can't you?" The color
     cinematography was an important element for Jarvis; indeed, General Sarnoff,
     chairman of NBC, the parent company of RCA, credited her programs on the
     Kremlin and the Louvre with helping to sell four million color television sets. The
     Louvre: A Golden Prison, airing in 1964, was recognized with a staggering
     number of awards, among them six Emmys, a Peabody, and a Radio-TV Critics
     Award. In 1968, Jarvis became the first woman—and one of the few
     Americans—ever to receive the French government's prestigious Chevaliere de
     l'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres.

      Jarvis returned to her roots in healthcare with the 1965 documentary Who Shall
      Live?, a landmark investigation of the medical, moral, and economic issues
      surrounding the use of artificial kidney machines. The broadcast sparked a
      firestorm of controversy over whether life-saving treatment should only be limited
      to those affluent enough to afford it and is considered one of the cornerstones of
      the modern bioethics movement. As a result of the film and the debate it stirred,
      the federal government made funding available for artificial kidney machine
      centers around the country, prompting the National Dialysis Committee to state:
      "Each new patient treated with the therapy of dialysis on the artificial kidney will
      owe some portion of his life to the camera and cutting shears of Lucy Jarvis."
      Who Shall Live? was but the first of many crusading documentaries that Jarvis
      would make on medical and social issues. Among her other works in this vein are
      the NBC News specials Pain! Where Does It Hurt Most?, Dr. Bamard's Heart
      Transplant Operations, The Pursuit of Youth, A Shooting Gallery Called America,
      and What Price Health? (which she made for NBC Reports), and two programs
      for the venerable NBC White Paper series, Cry Help (about mental illness among
      teenagers) and Trip to Nowhere (about the drug epidemic).

      Continuing her trend of "missions impossible" Jarvis embarked on an ambitious
      film about Scotland Yard, headquarters of London's Metropolitan Police Service.
      Although the Yard had never before allowed its internal operations to be captured
      on camera, Jarvis, quite naturally, prevailed and her film, Scotland Yard: The
      Golden Thread, aired to great acclaim in 1971. Jarvis next ventured to
      Communist China—becoming the first Westerner ever to film there—
      documenting the Peking Opera production of Red Detachment of Women (1972),
      a political ballet about the struggle between a peasant and her master. In
      perhaps the greatest coup of her career, she gained access to the fabled
      Forbidden City, the ancient stronghold of imperial China, which had been off-
      limited to Westerners, and most Chinese, since the fourteenth century. As with
      the Kremlin, Louvre, and Scotland Yard projects, obtaining permission to shoot
      inside the walled city required intense diplomacy; at one point, she was told her
      request would have to wait because elsewhere in Beijing, Henry Kissinger had


                                                3
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796468 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796468 Date: 11/30/2015




                                               4


     arrived to arrange a state visit for President Nixon.

     Negotiations of a different sort awaited her back in the States: at that time, the
     editor's union was only open to men, but Jarvis insisted that her editing-room
     assistant, a woman, receive "special dispensation," and, thus, a full credit on the
     completed film, China and the Forbidden City, which aired in 1973. "I fought hard
     to help women move up the ladder," Jarvis explained in 2004 when she was
     honored by New York Women in Communication, "because I always felt that the
     more successful women there were around me, the better it reflected on me."

      On the cultural side, Jarvis has produced such documentaries as Mary Martin:
      Hello Dolly! 'Round the World (1966), which followed the cast of the popular
      musical on a tour from San Francisco to Japan, South Vietnam, and London, and
      Bravo, Picasso (1967), which presented, via satellite, a simultaneous exhibition
      of the artist's work from museums around the world. Jarvis ended her eighteen-
      year association with NBC in 1976, when she left to produce a series of Barbara
      Walters specials for ABC. Soon thereafter, she formed her own production
      company, Creative Projects, Inc., and tried her hand at fictional films, such as the
      two-part television movie Family Reunion (1981) starring Bette Davis, while
      continuing to produce and even host documentaries like The Incas Remembered
      (1984). In 1987, she started a second company, Jarvis Theater and Film Limited
      (eventually merging the two entities), and produced the first collaborative U.S.—
      Soviet musical of Duke Ellington's Sophisticated Ladies in Moscow. In 1990, she
      brought the Russian rock opera Junon and Avos to New York City. Still going
      strong as she approaches her ninetieth year, Jarvis remains an inspiration to
      other women in television. As SM/ honoree Sheila Nevins, president of
      documentary and family programming for HBO, notes: "Lucy lasts and lasts and
      lasts. She's sexy, defies age, and gives bounce to every ounce. A trailblazer for
      women, she makes it easy for the rest of us. I love Lucy."




                                               4
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796468 Date: 11/30/2015
