      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793989 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                        RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Sunday, March 4, 2012 6:16 PM
To:                                'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                           Fw: Weekend Reading: I think you will like this -- it's a short personal reflection I wrote
                                   for The Rotarian



Pls print.


From: Anne-Marie Slaughter [mailto:
Sent: Friday, March 02, 2012 06:46 PM
To: H
Cc: Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov >
Subject: Weekend Reading: I think you will like this -- it's a short personal reflection I wrote for The Rotarian



I really   don't see how your job could get any harder! AM


Do-it-yourself democracy
by Anne-Marie Slaughter

The Rotarian -- February 2012




Illustration by Louisa Bertman

I owe my existence to Rotary. In 1956, my father went to Brussels for a year as an Ambassadorial Scholar. One
enchanted evening, as he would put it, he looked across the room at a beautiful young Belgian woman and fell
in love. They were engaged three months later and married in the summer of 1957. I arrived in September 1958.
And every Tuesday night throughout my childhood, my father went to his Rotary club.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793989 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793989 Date: 11/30/2015




My family is a direct testament to how Rotary builds bridges of international exchange and understanding.
Today technology is multiplying those bridges exponentially, across every country, region, continent, and
ocean. It is theoretically possible to connect every human being on the planet to one other and to vast stores of
knowledge and sources of assistance. All it takes is seven billion smartphones, a relatively small order in a
multitrillion-dollar world economy.

Connections are wonderful in many ways. According to Steve Jobs, "Creativity is just connecting things." The
great novelist E.M. Forster wrote, "Only connect." I have argued that in a networked world, connectedness is a
measure of power. "Power over" assumes that the power-wielder is at the top of a ladder and exercises power
over those below. "Power with" assumes that the power-wielder is at the center of a web of relationships and
can mobilize all her direct and indirect connections to solve a problem with the combined resources, energy,
and talent across the web. More traditionally, "connections" have long been presumed to be the preserve of the
powerful — connections to get a job, an audition, an interview, an opportunity. Less conspiratorially, think about
how Rotary clubs empower their members by bringing diverse individuals from across a community together.

Global connections

That's the rosy side. But Al Qaeda is equally powered by global connections; that is part of what makes it so
hard to fight. Defeat it in one country and it moves to another. Global criminal networks that traffic in drugs,
arms, money, and people take advantage of the same technology that human rights or environmental networks
do. Governments determined to crush popular opposition can track connections in ways that give them a
dangerously precise map of political and social activity. Thus, the question of whether technology helps or hurts
the cause of global peace and conflict resolution will inevitably have a mixed answer. But in the Rotarian spirit
of optimism, let me offer five ways in which technology is advancing peace and prosperity, at least over the
longer term.

First, as the revolutions that have swept across the Middle East and North Africa over the past year continue to
demonstrate, the lightning connections and communication enabled by social media have allowed the
technology of liberation to stay ahead of the technology of oppression. Revolutions occurred long before the era
of Twitter and Facebook, but in recent decades, surveillance technology has steadily strengthened the power of
the state to lock up activists and snuff out dissent almost before it starts. The speed and decentralization of
social media gave the protesters in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, Bahrain, Syria, and Yemen a fighting chance by
enabling them to stay one step ahead of state security forces. Technology alone is no match for a government's
willingness to use obliterating force, but even today in Syria, one of the ways the protesters maintain
determination and cohesion is by persistently bearing witness to the government's atrocities and exposing them
to the world at large.

A second way in which technology is changing the face of conflict is through the individualization of both war
and international law. War traditionally has been army to army, or army to insurgent force. Today the
technology of drones, smart bombs, and precision-guided missiles, and soon the miniaturization of countless
deadly weapons, makes it possible to fight an enemy one human target at a time. As frightening as the perpetual
threat of assassination may seem, and as desperately as we need to adapt the traditional rules of war to govern
new technologies and tactics, the individualization of war could save millions of civilian lives — the women, the
old, and the young, who were the collateral damage of clashing armies. The individualization of international
law similarly holds the promise of holding individual leaders accountable for their crimes against other
countries and their own people, rather than punishing their populations through sanctions and even invasion.
Technology plays a critical role in making international criminal cases possible, because any bystander or even
victim can photograph evidence of a government's crimes both as they are happening and as they are covered
up. It is that evidence that allows international and domestic criminal prosecutors to build their cases.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793989 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793989 Date: 11/30/2015




In a third and very different direction, technology reduces global conflict by saving lives directly — particularly
the lives of women, who can then care for their children, educate their families, and anchor their communities.
Cell phones are lifelines to better maternity care, allowing pregnant women to monitor the course of their
pregnancies by receiving general information about what to expect and how to care for themselves and their
fetus week by week, and by providing information about what they are feeling and experiencing well before
labor begins.

Do-it-yourself

Fourth, technology and globalization together enable do-it-yourself foreign policy through public-private
partnerships and bottom-up coalitions of social actors. Where once development was the province of
government ministries and international organizations, today actors such as the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation, nongovernmental organizations such as Oxfam and CARE, and countless smaller organizations,
universities, research institutes, and corporations are all actively engaged. Where once the United States gave
through USAED, hundreds of thousands of Americans now contribute hundreds of millions of dollars through
Kiva, an online lending platform that allows individuals to find development projects they wish to support
directly. Where government-funded foundations such as the National Democratic Institute and the International
Republican Institute specialize in monitoring elections in countries around the world, now citizens can send in
real-time information about what they see happening at their local polls through Ushahidi, a software mapping
platform developed by four entrepreneurial Africans. Created to allow Kenyans to share information about
disputed national elections that were descending into violence, Ushahidi has been used to share and map crisis
information in many different situations around the world; State Department officials helped adapt it for disaster
relief efforts after the Haiti earthquake. The State Department, USAID, and the White House are all opening
and expanding offices dedicated to orchestrating and welcoming public-private partnerships of many different
shapes and sizes.

Finally, perhaps most elusively but most optimistically, scholars such as Yochai Benkler argue that the Internet
has enabled the cooperative human activity that has helped us survive as a species for millennia to take its
rightful place alongside the egoistic self-interested behavior that drives our markets, our conflicts, and our
current assumptions about human nature. The Internet thrives on a culture of generosity, with people willing to
share everything from recipes to medical information to technical assistance on almost anything. Benkler draws
on psychology, neurobiology, sociology, behavioral economics, computer simulations, and his own
multidisciplinary experiments to demonstrate the deeply rational roots of cooperation and the ways in which
technology and transparency can now empower cooperators as much as egoists. If in fact technology can make
the two-thirds of people who are more likely to participate in positive-sum than zero-sum activity aware of one
other's preferences, thereby diminishing the fear of becoming a sucker in a ruthlessly selfish world, the
prospects for genuinely improving the human condition just may be brighter than ever before.

Certainly the spirit of Rotary is the spirit of cooperation. When I spoke at the Rotary Club of Princeton, N.J.,
last spring, I was also struck by how effectively Rotary strengthens global connections at the local level,
bringing together business and civic leaders who have ties to countries all over the world. Those local clubs
engage in many different projects that are generated by their members, in addition to Rotary's formal programs.
They are animated by a spirit of collective human potential, powered by coming together and working together.
Spreading that philosophy and acting on it, citizen to citizen, is the best long-term antidote to conflict and
prescription for peace.


Anne-Marie Slaughter
Bert G. Kerstetter '66 University Professor of Politics and International Affairs
Princeton University
440 Robertson Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793989 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793989 Date: 11/30/2015




Assistant: Terry Murphy
Website: www.princeton.edu/—slaughtr




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793989 Date: 11/30/2015
