     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796826 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                            RELEASE IN
                                                                                            PART B6

From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.conn>
Sent:                               Saturday, January 26, 2013 11:43 AM
To:                                 'monica.hanley
Subject:                            Fw: here is the topper i did



Pls print.


From: Sullivan, Jacob 3 [rnailto:SullivanJJ©state.gov]
Sent: Saturday, January 26, 2013 11:39 AM Eastern Standard Time
To: H
Subject: here is the topper i did

It wasn't as sharp as it should be because it was the first question and I hadn't collected my thoughts:

QUESTION: Okay. What would be — I have some specific questions, but
before I ask them — specific ones, maybe just from your perspective, I
think there — what is it that you think she accomplished as Secretary
of State?


And also, there's another thing that's a little trickier to get at,
but I think it's important, which is that any principal in these
administrations, they have an influence within the administration
that's not always manifest. Sometimes they don't. Sometimes their
advice isn't accepted. But since we're on background and we're not
quoting you and ail that stuff unless — without your permission, maybe
you could give us our take on what you think she's accomplished and
where she was — maybe worked within the administration, as any
principal does, to try to shape things.


SENIOR STATE DEPARTMENT OFFICIAL: Yeah. So I guess ! can talk about
my view of her accomplishments at three levels.


So the first is the most concrete, and that is specific policy
initiatives and diplomacy that produced results. That list includes a
major influence on the rebalance to the Asia Pacific in totality and
with respect to specific elements like South China Sea diplomacy and
the opening to Burma; her role in putting together the coalition that
led to the fall of Qadhafi; her role in putting together and holding
together the coalition on Iran sanctions; her role in putting together
an effective partnership with ISAF countries to do both the increase
in troops, including the troop contributions from those other
countries as well as their contributions to the ANSI= and Afghanistan's
economic development agenda going forward; her role in the Ga2a
cesse.fire. [Here you could add the Sudan-South Sudan oil deal, the
NATO strategic concept, the New START treaty, responding to the coup
in Honduras, Haiti earthquake response, and her role in national
security decisions like bin Laden.] So you've got a set of kind of
very specific accomplishments that you can take a look at.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796826 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796826 Date: 11/30/2015



The second level is what she did to sort of reorient the building, to
change the way this building does business. And there you have an
economic statecraft agenda that has put economics more at the center
of our foreign policy, both on the commercial diplomacy side and in
terms of using economics as a tool of statecraft. So in the Middle
East and North Africa; through the New Silk Road, et cetera. Her
technology and innovation agenda, putting women at the center of
basically every aspect of diplomacy and development, elevating
development as a core pillar of American power. So a set of
fundamental institutional changes that really.mark a profound
difference in the way diplomacy is practiced and institutional changes
within the State Department from the creation of new bureaus to
changed practices, changed training, changed promotion principles and
so forth, that are all sort of collectively embodied in the QDDR but
can be parceled out in more concrete terms.

And then the third and I think most profound impact that she's had
over the last four years has to do with American — the question of
American leadership and what diplomacy looks like today as compared
with 60 years ago. So your present at the creation generation, your
Achesons, basically could create a few major organizations, and that
is the global architecture — the UN, the Bretton-Woods system, NATO.

Today you don't — you have to deal with an exponentially greater
number of actors, both on the governmentside and the nongovernment
side. So it's not about creating or advancing a couple of
institutions. It's about putting the U.S. at the center of an
incredible number of different types of partnerships and networks,
some of which are formal institutions, some of which are strategic
dialogues, some of which are public-private.

And if you look at the list of things that she has done to build that
and the way in which she has made the job of Secretary of State be a
constant gardener. From the Global Counterterrorism Forum to the
Climate and Clean Air Coalition to her work with ASEAN and the Arab
League and the AU to this entire operation around public-private
partnerships to her reaching beyond government to engage with the
private sector, civil society, et cetera, that, I think, is going to
have to be the way that the United States practices leadership in
mobilizing coalitions of actors to solve global problems. And it's
going to be marked by persistent shoe-leather diplomacy combined with
kind of innovative networks and new ways of doing business. And the
results are going to come drop by drop as opposed to in big sweeping
changes.

And I think her recognizing the moment that we're in, the landscape
that we face, and adjusting America's role and the role of American
diplomacy is probably going to end up over time being her most
profound legacy.

And just on that point, I would add that it's easy to forget now four
years later just what a deep hole we were in when she came into
office. So much of the work that she had to do was repair work,

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796826 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796826 Date: 11/30/2015



restoring our alliances, both in Europe and in the Asia Pacific;
strengthening partnerships with the emerging powers that were on more
shaky foundations; returning the United States to the center of
various international institutions; elevating our standing and our
voice at not just policy levels but at values levels. And now we're
sort of used to an Obama-Clinton era in foreign policy, but back when
we started things looked a heck of a lot different. So she deserves a
lot of credit for that too.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796826 Date: 11/30/2015
