      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793677 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                     B6


From:                              Reines, Philippe I <reinesp@state.gov>
Sent:                              Monday, December 24, 2012 9:57 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: SecState's Health



I have a few ideas




    Original Message
From: Bill Frist
Sent: Sunday, December 23, 2012 10:02 PM
To: Reines, Philippe I
Subject: Re: SecState's Health

I love her and respect her and I can help. Not sure how exactly buy I know I can help. I will Keep all Confidential. In a
meeting now but can talk later tonight




William H. Frist, M.D.
www.tnscore.org
www.hopethroughhealinghands.org
www.billfrist.com
Recent OpEd: http://bit.ly/J1Imin



On Dec 23, 2012, at 8:30 PM, "Reines, Philippe l" <reinesp@state.gov> wrote:

> Senator Frist,

> Thank you for allowing your contact information to be passed on to me - hopefully after reading this you won't regret
doing so!

> I've worked for Secretary Clinton since 2002, including as her Press Secretary when she served in the Senate. During
that time I had the chance to get to know Rob Hoppin and Mary Ann Voight, both of who raved about how much they
enjoyed working for you. And I remember vividly sitting in your conference room in June 2005 as you and then Senator
Clinton talked through your Health IT initiative prior to your joint appearance at GW Hospital - which is ironic given the
reason for my note.

> As you've likely read, the Secretary recently sustained a concussion. She had been in Europe the week of the 3rd, was
hit hard with a stomach virus when we got back to the US on the 7th. We were scheduled to head to the Middle East on
Monday the 10th, but given her condition we delayed our departure by 24 hours, and then cancelled the trip entirely
when it was clear she couldn't go forward with it. Towards the end of that week, her doctors came to the determination
that she had in fact sustained a concussion when she fainted, brought on by severe dehydration. Their strong advice
was.a complete cancellation of her schedule this past week, which we took seriously.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793677 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793677 Date: 11/30/2015



> Unfortunately, this past week was an especially important one. She was scheduled to testify before both the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee and the House Foreign Affairs Committee to present the Accountability Review Board's
findings regarding the terrorist attacks on our compounds in Benghazi, Libya.

> And because of that, politics reared its ugly head. Uglier than usual - which you know is saying a lot. Critics such as
John Bolton, Charles Krauthheimer, and Laura Ingraham, have blatantly accused her of lying and faking the entire thing
so as to not have to appear before Congress.

> While I've seen a lot over the last decade, this has shocked me. At four points over the past two weeks we have issued
statements updating everyone on what was happening with her health. On the same day we informed people that her
doctors determined she had sustained a concussion, we also released a statement from her doctors where they laid out
what happened, what they concluded, and what they advised. So the degree to which these critics (and many others)
have felt entirely comfortable and within their right to call the sitting Secretary of State of the United States a liar, faking
her illness, laughing about it, disregarding the word of her doctors and the Department - without so much as even
pretending to base it on even a shred of contradictory evidence - has astounded me. It's a new low in a town with not
that many lows left to stoop to.

> At some point during this very frustrating week, your name popped into my head as someone to enlist in a defense
that I am angered even needs to be waged. I thought of you not only because of the letters MD attached to your name,
but also because of the letters SEN, HRC, MCC, and admittedly, GOP.

> You served with her. Both as Senator, and later as an MCC Board Member. You have worked with her, and far more
often, against her. But even those who disagree with or outright oppose her know that Hillary Clinton doesn't shirk her
responsibilities to her country, to those she represents, or to those she has been entrusted to lead.

> While I'm sure that you are the right person to appeal to, I'm not entirely sure what I'm even asking of you. I'm
pushing to propriety to the limit as it is, I don't want to presumptuously suggest anything specific. But I do want to be
completely clear that it's me and me alone that is soliciting your help. She does not know that I am reaching out to you.
She would probably not be happy with me. (But that's nothing new.) I just don't want you to think you'd be saying no to
anyone aside from me. And I would completely understand your not wanting to wade into this.

> In any event, I hope this note finds you well, and thank you for taking the time to read it.

> Philippe



> Philippe Reines
> Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
> U.S. Department of State
> Washington, DC




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793677 Date: 11/30/2015
