     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795180 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                            RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                                    H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                                    Monday, March 12, 2012 7:34 AM
To:                                      'slaughtr
Subject:                                 Re: Sunday night reading



Thanks for sending me what you want to me to read. I will do so.


From: Anne-Marie Slaughter [mailto:
Sent: Sunday, March 11, 2012 06:31 PM
To: H
Cc: Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>; Cheryl Mills <MillsCD@state.gov >; Jacob J Sullivan (SullivanJJ@state.gov)
<SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Subject: Sunday night reading

I can imagine the size of your briefing books, but here are two things I think you will want to see. First, reprinted
below, is a very powerful piece by two survivors of Srebrenica that was published in Turkey's "Today's Zaman."
Second, attached, is a longer piece published in the on line forum of the Harvard Journal of International Law
entitled A Strategy for Syria Under International Law: How to End the Asad Dictatorship While Restoring
Nonviolence to the Syrian Revolution." It has many very detailed recommendations for isolating Syria
diplomatically, bolstering the opposition, and increasing military pressure, while emphasizing non-violence. I
definitely think it is worth a read. The authors are Sadek Jalal al-Azm, emeritus Professor of Philosophy at the
University of Damascus and the recipient of numerous human rights awards; Ishac Diwan, director for Africa and
the Middle East at the growth lab of the Center for International Development at Kennedy School of Government,
Harvard; John J. Donohue, S.J. a scholar of both the classical and contemporary Middle East; Mansoor al-Jamri,
editor of the Bahraini independent daily Al Wasat and recipient of CPJ's International Press Freedom Award for
2011; Yang Jianli, a prominent Chinese dissident, founder of Initiatives for China and Harvard Fellow; Chibli
Mallat, a Lebanese lawyer and law professor; Jane Mansbridge , Adams Professor of Political Leadership and
Democratic Values at Harvard Kennedy School and President-elect of the American Political Science Association;
Sharhabeel al-Zaeem a leading Palestinian lawyer in Gaza. All are part of Right to Nonviolence, an international
NGO based in the Middle East, for which the Executive Director is Truth Hodges.

I think you might also think about giving a speech on the power of non-violent movements — to refocus attention
on the larger forces at issue in the Arab spring — support for non-violence is also growing among Palestinians.
All best,
AM



 The day after Horns
 by Emir Suljagic & Reuf Bajrovic*



   Mourners pray at a mass funeral on Dec. 24, 2011 for 44 people killed in twin suicide bombings in Damascus, Syria. (PHOTO AP, Bassem Tellawi)
6 March 2012 / ,


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795180 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795180 Date: 11/30/2015



Many Bosnians remember Turkey in the '90s as a society torn between the political elite's lack of will to act -- if
necessary, unilaterally -- to help Bosnia and Herzegovina and ordinary Turkish citizens' shame at their government's
unwillingness to intervene and aid a people on the brink of destruction.

One of the few to bridge that divide between the popular will and the political world was a new and young political
figure who, during his bid to become the next mayor of Istanbul in 1994, passionately, with tears in his eyes, told
people that if he was in power he would do everything he could to stop the killing of innocent Bosnians. The young
politician who swore to never let another Bosnia happen, Recep Tayyip Erdo§an, is now the prime minister of
Turkey and the most influential political figure in Turkey since Mustafa Kemal AtatOrk. A new Bosnia is taking place
on his watch, just over Turkey's southern border.


Unlike Bosnia, Syria is Turkey's immediate neighbor. Today's Turkey is also far more powerful and influential than it
was just one generation ago. It plays an important role on the global scene, with a booming economy and modern
armed forces that are unequaled in the region. Today there are tens of thousands of Syrian refugees in Turkey who,
like young Bosnian refugees 20 years ago, hope for external intervention to stop the killing in Syria. The Assad
regime's campaign to stamp out opposition seems to be turning into wholesale butchery on the scale of the Serb
ethnic cleansing in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which ended in genocide in Srebrenica in July 1995. If Turkey decides
to sit back and watch the mass murder of civilians on its borders today, then Mr. Erdogan will not have lived up to
his promises. As we well know, history knows of no court of appeals.


Bashar al-Assad's brutal suppression turned a peaceful and grassroots movement into an armed conflict in which
the regime is conducting a campaign of systematic terror. All the while, the regime is pitting Syria's ethnic
communities against one another, stoking fears of communal warfare, which will ultimately result in a protracted civil
war. The most important lesson learned from the Balkans in the '90s is that when faced with murderous
dictatorships, appeasement does not work. Today it is Horns; tomorrow it will be ldlib, Hama, and Deraa -- where, as
the wounded British journalist Paul Conroy noted, there are no cameras. The pattern is familiar: Encirclement of a
population center, cutting off its food and basic services and carrying out a campaign of indiscriminate violence, not
sparing women and children. Once overwhelmed by the armed forces, those left alive are rounded up, selected and
executed en masse in total isolation. Finally, those who have committed these atrocities remove or destroy all
evidence of their crimes. Baba Amr in Horns is currently undergoing this last phase. Numerous international actors,
including the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi PiIlay, have been forthright in calling these actions
crimes against humanity.


Such crimes are not brought to an end by diplomacy. It is time to act. The longer Turkey remains on the sidelines,
the higher the cost -- to both Syrians and Turks — further down the road. The consequences of Assad's carnage
cannot be contained -- they are already being felt in Turkey and Lebanon. This is not a humanitarian disaster; it is
politicide. There is a plan behind it, an intention to destroy anyone opposing the regime. People are being killed
because of who and what they are. Helicopters have been employed by Assad's forces. The establishment of no-fly
and no-drive zones, where those fleeing the violence could find refuge within Syria, coupled with arming the Free
Syrian Army -- particularly with antitank weapons -- would not only hasten the fall of Assad's regime and.allow



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795180 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795180 Date: 11/30/2015



Syrians to decide what kind of future they want for their country, but would save lives in the meantime. Turkey's
influence and capabilities confer responsibility.


In addition to stopping Assad's ability to commit crimes against humanity, there must be a reckoning before the
international or national judiciary for those that have already been perpetrated on his orders or under his
supervision.


There is probably a boy somewhere in Syria now, a teenager like both of us were 20 years ago, huddling in a dark
basement, hungry and paralyzed with fear, waiting for the fatal knock at the door before he is taken out to a football
stadium or school building with hundreds of others, to be "selected" -- made to watch others being killed and in the
end being killed himself. All his hopes and aspirations buried under the rubble, bulldozed together with the dreams
of an entire generation of Syrians, in the same manner our friends and family had been two decades ago on the
orders of Radovan Karadbe and Slobodan Milo§evio.


In the words of the exiled Soviet writer, Vasily Grossman, "Every epoch has its own capital city, a city that embodies
its will and soul," on which the "thoughts and passions of humanity are centered." Two decades ago it was Sarajevo
and Srebrenica; today it is Horns and ldlib.




*Emir Suljagic is a Srebrenica survivor and author. Reuf Bajrovic is a political consultant in Washington, D.C.




Anne-Marie Slaughter
Bert G. Kerstetter '66 University Professor of Politics and International Affairs
Princeton University
440 Robertson Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544

Assistant: Terry Murphy
Website: www.princeton.edui—slaughtr




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795180 Date: 11/30/2015
