      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797246 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                              Cheryl Mills
Sent:                              Wednesday, January 23, 2013 10:48 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fwd: Just now on Yahoo




cdm

Begin forwarded message:

        From: Roy Spence
        Date: January 23, 2013, 10:16:10 AM EST
        To: Cheryl Mills                        , John Podesta            Mr•Irarawif..••■•11~.



        Cc: Jim Kennedy                            , Maggie Williams
        Judy Trabulsi
        Subject: Just now on Yahoo

        Clinton's emotional Benghazi testimony
        Outgoing Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, testifying before Congress on the deadly Sept. 11
        2012 attack in Benghazi, Libya, choked up Wednesday as she assured lawmakers that the
        security of American diplomats was a "personal" issue for her.

        "For me, this is not just a matter of policy—it's personal," she told the Senate Foreign Relations
        Committee in one of her final acts as America's top diplomat.

         Clinton's voice broke as she recalled welcoming home the "flag-draped caskets" of U.S.
         Ambassador to Libya Chris Stevens and three other Americans killed in the terrorist strike at the
         consulate and putting her arms around bereaved family members.

           Clinton, whose department has drawn heavy fire over the insufficient security arrangements at
           the American compound in Benghazi, praised diplomatic security officials. "I literally trust them
           with my life," she said. And she denied personally being aware of numerous requests for more
           security in Benghazi. "I didn't see those requests," Clinton added.

           The secretary of state also said that American diplomats overseas cannot hide behind higher
           walls and more armed guards. "Our men and women who serve overseas understand that we
           accept a level of risk to protect the country we love," she said. "They represent the best traditions
           of a bold and generous nation. They cannot work in bunkers and do their jobs."

           She rebuked those who may advocate that the U.S. take a more limited role on the world stage at
           a time when the "Arab Spring" has sown chaos across North Africa and the Muslim world. "We
           cannot afford to retreat now," she said.

           "When America is absent, especially from unstable environments, there are consequences,"
           Clinton said. "Extremism takes root, our interests suffer, our security at home is threatened."

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797246 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797246 Date: 11/30/2015




  Clinton also appeared to confirm that those behind the attacks have not yet been captured.

  "We continue to hunt the terrorists responsible for the attacks in Benghazi and are determined to
  bring them to justice," she said.

  No one expected any bombshell revelations about the attack in Benghazi. But Republicans
  planned to link that terrorist strike to bloody conflicts across North Africa and in Syria to
  hammer President Barack Obama's handling of the war on terrorism.

  "They were spiking the ball on al-Qaida throughout the course of this entire campaign,"
  Republican Sen. Bob Corker of Tennessee, his party's senior member on the Senate Foreign
  Relations Committee, told Fox News on Tuesday.

  Recent events—including a deadly hostage crisis in Algeria and France's military intervention in
  Mali to battle al-Qaida-linked Islamist fighters there—raise the "big question of how this
  administration is dealing with extremists and militants," Corker said.

  (Obama's inaugural address on Monday went long on priorities like advancing gay rights,
  battling climate change and overhauling the nation's immigration laws. He made no mention of
  terrorism and did not name al-Qaida. But he frequently contended on the campaign trail that
  Osama bin Laden's organization had been "decimated" and was "on the run." Aides say "core"
  al-Qaida has suffered heavy losses and that Obama's aggressive expansion of America's drone
  war in places like Yemen shows he's mindful of the rise of dangerous offshoots.)

  Clinton, in one of her final acts as America's top diplomat, will go before the Senate Foreign
  Relations Committee at 9 a.m. and the House Foreign Affairs Committee at 2 p.m.

  She had been expected to testify in December, but suffered a concussion in a fall at her home
  while recovering from a stomach bug, then needed treatment for a blood clot near her brain. She
  had taken questions from lawmakers on the issue once before, but Republicans complained that
  she had not shared much information.

  Clinton appeared one day before Democratic Sen. John Kerry goes before the Senate Foreign
  Relations Committee he used to chair for a confirmation hearing to succeed her as secretary of
  state. Democratic Sen. Robert Menendez, Kerry's successor, will lead both hearings.

   Republican Sen. John McCain, who has frequently assailed the administration over the attack on
   the consulate in Benghazi and who recently joined the committee, will join in the questioning of
   Clinton and Kerry. Earlier this month, McCain released a list of questions that he planned to ask
   regarding Benghazi.

   The Sept. 11 attack raised new questions about Obama's handling of the "Arab Spring" uprisings
   that toppled authoritarian regimes in places like Egypt and Libya. It also triggered a months-long
   battle over how the administration handled repeated requests from Stevens for more security and
   then explained the tragedy to the American public.

   Most notably, U.N. Ambassador Susan Rice withdrew her name from consideration to be
   Clinton's successor in the face of Republican opposition. Rice went on major Sunday news
   shows one week after the attack in Benghazi and, relying on administration-approved talking
   points, described it as emerging from a protest against an Internet video that ridicules Islam.
   There was no such demonstration.

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797246 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797246 Date: 11/30/2015




  Some of the anger has fizzled, sapped by contentious congressional hearings and a scathing
  report commissioned by Clinton that faulted the State Department for its handling of repeated
  requests from Stevens for more security. That report also refuted media reports that the
  administration chose not to send in troops who might have been able to save Stevens and his
  colleagues. (Hillary Clinton herself took at least symbolic responsibility in October.)

  But Clinton is sure to face tough questions about the security failures in Benghazi, notably in the
  face of warnings from Stevens and others that Islamists were increasingly active in Libya. She
  will also likely be asked about the administration's changing public explanation of what
  happened.

  "It is important to learn all we can about what happened in Benghazi because at the end of the
  day, it could happen again. After all, al-Qaida and associated groups plan to attack over and over
  again, as we saw most recently in Algeria," House Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Ed
  Royce, R-Calif., said last week.

  "My intention is for this hearing to focus on why this attack was not better anticipated, what
  leadership failures at the State Department existed, and what management deficiencies need to be
  corrected in order to better secure our diplomatic facilities abroad and protect our diplomats
  serving in them," Royce said.

  Obama initially connected the attack with the Sept. 11, 2001, strikes rhetorically as "acts of
  terror," but the administration went on to link it to popular Muslim anger over an Internet video
  ridiculing Islam. Republicans accused the administration of misleading the public by playing
  down intelligence that it was a terrorist attack. The White House flatly denies deliberately
  misleading the public




  From: Cheryl Mills [mailto
  Sent: Tuesday, January 22, 2013 8:32 PM
  To: John Podesta
  Cc: Jim Kennedy; Maggie Williams; Roy Spence
  Subject: Re: Draft Opening for Wednesday

  Yep

  cdm

  On Jan   21, 2013, at 3:05 PM, John Podesta                                         wrote:

           One last point. By wednesday, treatment of Algeria might seem too thin. Might need to
           add a little more heft to that section.



           From: Cheryl Mills
           Sent: Monday, January 21, 2013 12:26:03 PM
           To: Jim Kennedy; Maggie Williams; Roy Spence; John Podesta
           Cc: Cheryl Mills
           Subject: Fwd: Draft Opening for Wednesday

           For your review comments noting below . . .

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797246 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797246 Date: 11/30/2015



                      Forwarded messaae
             From: Cheryl Mills <                                                                                                            B6
             Date: Mon, Jan 21, 2013 at 12:25 PM
             Subject: Draft Opening for Wednesday
             To: "Schwerin, Daniel B" <SchwerinDB(&,state.gov>
             Cc: "Sullivan, Jacob J" <SullivanJJ@state.gov>, Philippe Reines
             <reinesp@state.gov>, "Verma, Richard R" <vermarr@state.gov>, "Klevorick,
             Caitlin B" <KlevorickCB@state.gov>, "Johnson, Brock A"
             <johnsonba3@state.gov>


             Dan

             My comments.

             In case you have not yet heard - she really, really likes this draft and is quite
             happy with it.

             best.

             cdm

                      Forwarded message
             From: Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
             Date: Mon, Jan 21, 2013 at 11:59 AM
             Subject: Fw:
             To: cheryl.mills                                                                                                                B6




             From: Sullivan, Jacob J
             Sent: Monday, January 21, 2013 11:46 AM
             To: Mills, Cheryl D
             Subject:



             Dan will send most recent to everyone but I think this is it.




   This e-mail is intended only for the named person or entity to which it is addressed and contains valuable business information that is
   proprietary, privileged, confidential and/or otherwise protected from disclosure. If you received this email in error, any review, use,
   dissemination, distribution or copying of this email is strictly prohibited. Please notify us immediately of the error via email to
   disclaimeringuiriesAdsdm.com and please delete the email from your system, retaining no copies in any media. We appreciate your
   cooperation.
           gsdm.legal.disclaimer.03242011




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797246 Date: 11/30/2015
