      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796060 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL


From:                               Hanley, Monica R <HanleyMR@state.gov>
Sent:                               Monday, November 26, 2012 7:03 AM
To:
Subject:                            FOR AMR -- Amb Patterson readout



Below is Ambassador Patterson's readout of her call with Dr. Haddad.




I had a long talk on the phone with him about the new measures. He had conveyed to Andy Lentz this morning their
displeasure at our statement. (I received a letter from him about this but it arrived it after our conversation. I will
forward it to NEA) I went through the points conveyed by the Department. Re the statement, I observed that some of
the US press and much of the Egyptian press thought it was too weak-- claiming that Morsi had assumed Mubarak like
powers-- and had linked it unfortunately with the Secretary's successful trip here.

 He said they were not going to retract the decree but were trying to negotiate with the Supreme Judicial Council and
the members of the opposition who would talk to them. What apparently prompted this were reports that the
constitutional assembly and the upper house, which is still in session, were about to be abolished by the courts. It was a
blatant political act to sabotage the political process, he said I asked if the court abolished it, why couldn't Morsi use his
existing legislative powers to reappoint the same people? He said the shura council would pick up some of the
legislative role and in any case the constitution could be finished in less than the two months Morsi allowed them

After much back and forth, I said they needed to get out of this mess quickly given the stock market declines, the
international reaction, and most importantly, the likely continued domestic unrest with riots and demonstrations which
would drive off tourists and investors.

He was very familiar with the situation around our Embassy today and promised good security, while pointing out that
the rock throwing teenagers were definitely being paid by former regime supporters.

We said we would talk again soon.

###




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796060 Date: 11/30/2015
