     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795735 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                     B6


From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                             Saturday, September 22, 2012 8:28 PM
To:                               'millscd@state.gov'
Subject:                          Re: What you've done right.



Can you talk?


From: Mills, Cheryl D [mailto:MillsCD@state.gov]
Sent: Saturday, September 22, 2012 07:41 PM
To: H
Subject: Fw: What you've done right.

Remind me to tell you what jake said about his dinner w/ her last nite


From: Anne-Marie Slaughter
Sent: Saturday, September 22, 2012 07:33 PM
To: H <hdr22@clintonemail.com >
Cc: Abedin, Huma; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: What you've done right.

You've been very much in my thoughts all week. I know how deeply and personally you must feel the loss of lives on
your watch — not in the abstract but as husbands, fathers, dedicated public servants, people you knew and cared about.
But amid all the criticism, I think that what happened actually vindicates your policies and practice at the macroscopic
and microscopic levels. In terms of overall policy towards the Arab revolutions, although we have seen brutal attacks by
al Qaeda on our embassies often before — most notably in Kenya and Tanzania with far greater loss of life — we have
never seen locals from those countries demonstrating on our behalf in the streets, as we have seen in Libya all week
long. The hatred is familiar, and no worse now than before — indeed al Qaeda is much reduced. The support is brand
new. To have Libyans carrying placards saying "We are sorry America; this does not represent Islam," is exactly what we
hoped for when we supported the Libyan intervention. Many Libyan bloggers/tweeters have taken the same stance. And
to have elected Libyan and Tunisian governments publicly apologizing and denouncing the violence shows a very
different face of Islam — the Tunisian government is a Muslim Brotherhood government; even to have a Muslim
Brotherhood president in Egypt do anything but fan the flames would never have been predicted even two years ago.
We have seen many social media inspired riots over the past 3-4 years; think of the impact of the planned Koran
burning; the Danish cartoons; etc. That again is old news. What is new are the voices willing to denounce the violence. I
attach below a good piece by a former colonel who is a sophisticated thinker about these issues; it's a great overview of
various reactions to what has happened over this past week and also a diagnosis in the end that says we need more of
what we have been doing, not less.

Which raises the question of what we are doing and how we are doing; Chris Stevens was out there engaging in all the
ways that the U.S. must engage if we are to build new relationships not simply with the governments of these countries
but with the people — the people who are now protesting his killing in the streets. He knew the risks but chose to take
them, in exactly the ways so many of our diplomats and certainly our USAID workers have begged to do. It is noteworthy
that everyone says that he was one of our best. It is significant that the very best, the most dynamic, the most ambitious
members of the Foreign Service are the ones who embrace and practice your vision of diplomacy. That will be true for
recruiting as well; my very best students are willing to get out there and take risks working for NGOs and as aid workers;
indeed that is what they want as the price of being able to actually connect to the people on the ground. For them, the
kind of work that Chris was doing, reaching out Libyans in every way that he could, would make the foreign service much
more attractive, not less, with all the risks built in. Many of the younger diplomats who fit this mold are the civilian
counterparts to our soldiers, something you are well placed to see and understand. They serve their country in

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795735 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795735 Date: 11/30/2015




dangerous places and know that they cannot do the job that needs to be done without taking risks. We obviously do
everything we can to keep them safe, but not to the extent that they cannot do the job we need them to do. And if the
country saw our diplomats more in that vein, as young men and women prepared to take real risks for their country in
many parts of the world, they would have a very different image of diplomacy and the State Department. They are a
different breed than the older generation, and they uniformly chafe at being locked up in fortresses. The answer to this
tragedy cannot be that we should have insisted that he not go to Benghazi. That may be the view of DS, but I would bet
a great deal that it is not a view shared among younger diplomats or "our best," diplomats like Chris.

I didn't know Chris Stephens, but I suspect he would write you very much the same thing if he could. It is a change that
had to happen, and if the reaction to his killing among the Libyans is any guide, it is one that is bearing fruit. Perhaps in
your farewell speeches you can talk about the way we honor our troops and talk about Chris and Sean in ways that make
them emblems of a new generation of diplomats. Their loss is tragic and painful, but to me it makes a real difference to
see their deaths not as our failure to "keep them safe," but as a sacrifice in the service of a new way of engaging the
world, a way that over the long term will help make us all safer and more effective.

With sympathy,
AM




Keep Calm and Carry Forward
Christopher Holshek

Published on Huffpost, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/christopher-holshek/protest-middle-east- b 1902539.html

One thing I've learned over the years is that, whenever you're being hit with a series of events that would make you
think you have a crisis on your hands, it's important to take a step back, a deep breath, and try to think about what's
happening with the big picture and the long run in mind -- and wonder for starters whether this really is a crisis. The
violent riots that have been going on at U.S. embassies and other places in the "Arab Spring" countries in particular,
leading to the death so far of Ambassador Christopher Stevens and four other State Department personnel, are certainly
cause for alarm, but what's really going on here?

Some, such as Michael Koplow at Foreign Policy, suggest the riots reflect a "...fundamental disagreement between what
the United States views as a basic right and what many Muslims living in Arab states view as a basic right. Where
Americans prioritize freedom of speech as a value to be cherished and upheld no matter the circumstance, the Arab
world sees sanctity of religion as a value that cannot be violated in any instance. While this is not new, the explosion in
communications technology and the resulting dissemination of information, no matter how obscure or trivial, pushes
this divergence of worldviews to the forefront."

Others, like the Hoover Institution's Fouad Ajami, in a Washington Post op-ed, contend that Arab and Muslim petulance
-- and the violent expressions of offense -- are temper tantrums covering their own failure to reconcile the impact of
globalization:

The ambivalence toward modernity that torments Muslims is unlikely to abate. The temptations of the West have
alienated a younger generation from its elders. Men and women insist that they revere the faith as they seek to break
out of its restrictions. Freedom of speech, granting license and protection to the irreverent, is cherished, protected and
canonical in the Western tradition. Now Muslims who quarrel with offensive art are using their newfound freedoms to
lash out against it.
Among the more sanguine voices, the Center for Strategic and International Studies' Anthony Cordesman warns against
the temptation to frame it as a clash of civilizations -- Christianity versus Islam, the West versus the (Middle) East.
Radical Islamism is indeed a global insurgency, but it's not our hearts and minds they are trying to win:




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795735 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795735 Date: 11/30/2015




We in the United States and the West are marginal targets of opportunity in the struggle between Muslim extremists
and secular and moderate Islamic governments. The fact remains that Judaism, Christianity, and Islam share a common
core set of values, and the last thing we need is to ignore these common values and focus on anger and revenge in ways
that will prevent us from working with our natural allies in the Arab and Muslim world.

Robert Kaplan, when speaking about his new book, The Revenge of Geography, at the Center for a New American
Security the other week, noted that America's obsession with Al Qaeda and radicalism in the Middle East overlooks the
rise of a new bourgeoisie in Arab Spring countries, with middle-class values much closer to our own than those displayed
in the images on television or YouTube.

Cordesman and STRATFOR's George Friedman point out that radical Islamists are looking precisely to broaden and
expand a conflict within a religion and a regional culture to a polarized struggle between religions and cultures. "For the
Libyan jihadists," says Friedman, "tapping into anger over the video was a brilliant stroke. Having been in decline, they
reasserted themselves well beyond the boundaries of Libya. In Libya itself, they showed themselves as a force to be
reckoned with -- at least to the extent that they could organize a successful attack on the Americans."

The Arab Spring has unleashed all kinds of pent-up energies and issues, among them opportunities for the jihadists to
hijack the process of change before the moderates can find their voice and tone the cacophony of fanaticism. So, we
need not be surprised -- after all, extremist rhetoric grabbing far more than its share of the collective narrative should
not be all too foreign within our own shores, either.

No doubt all the above explanations have a share of the truth. Indeed, the criticisms of the Obama administration to
have failed to seized the day a bit more when the Arab Spring was breaking out have some validity, but as Cordesman
says: "It may be the duty of the opposition candidate to criticize and challenge, but not at the cost of America's strategic
interests, lasting relations with key nations in the Middle East, [and our] ...enduring strategic interests."

However, while we may have enduring strategic interests in regions like the Middle East, that doesn't mean we have to
have enduring approaches, especially when they have long proven counter to those enduring interests. As Koplow puts
it:

While the Obama administration has desperately tried to be on the right side of history when it comes to the Arab
Spring, years of American support for Arab dictators has left the United States with zero credibility. Decades of U.S.
missteps in the region cannot be undone in the span of a couple of years, particularly when Arab countries like Egypt
feel that the United States has nakedly used them to further American ambitions and interests. On top of the myriad of
historical resentments, the United States is viewed with deep suspicion for supporting democratic movements in some
places, such as Libya and Tunisia, but propping up the government in others, like in Bahrain. This places the United
States in a completely lose-lose situation, where it jeopardizes long-term strategic assumptions and relationships in
places like Egypt as it sides with protesters and parties calling for democracy yet gets no credit for it from publics that
view the United States as hypocritical -- or worse, as an enemy.
One thing we have not yet fully grasped is what we should have after the catastrophe in Iraq -- that our assumptions
about what happens after we intervene, especially with hard power, to unseat a tyrant have little factual basis: that
deposing a dictator will automatically bring about liberty and an improvement in the lives of his former victims; that
those who opposed him will themselves not act like he did; that they will coalesce into a stable government; that
national self-determination leads to democracy; and that this can all be done with a minimum of moral and material
commitment from the outsiders who, directly and indirectly, acted as agents of change.

The militarily-backed elimination of tyranny does not, willy-nilly, lead to a free society. As any golfer will tell you: it's not
the kinetic action of hitting the ball but the follow-through that determines whether you stay on the course. We
Americans didn't learn that very well in Iraq. Now, our European friends - with us leading from behind - have had their
moment of humility in Libya. And if we're all not careful, we'll do the same thing in Syria. Friedman is right: "...if you
wage war for moral ends, you are morally bound to manage the consequences."




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795735 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795735 Date: 11/30/2015



Any power or group of powers that decides to intervene on behalf regime change has essentially three options: one,
occupy the country until the transition is sustainable, as we did in Germany and Japan; two, enable a transitional
administration under international mandate; or, three, not much of anything coherent or serious. Obviously, the first is
rarely feasible or desirable. The third is pretty much what we have been doing, and we can see the results. Our only
option, then, is a more seriously supported international effort at state-building and fostering civil society.

No matter who wins in November, we need to change our whole approach to how we interact with the world, let alone
intervene, in places like the Middle East. We have to think bigger picture and longer term, and if we intervene, we have
to be prepared to make the commitment to the follow-through. We also have to find greater balance between soft and
hard power, emphasis diplomacy and development more than defense -- talk the talk a little less and walk the walk a lot
more, and understand that much of this process of change is not within our span of control, being careful not to
overestimate our real ability to shape things.

Because over there matters over here, this is all not just the job of the government -- the relationships between peoples
is becoming as important, if not more, over the long run than the relationships between states. Human security and not
just national security. Global citizenship means living our values more consistently. Beyond the democratic values of
tolerance and free speech, it means taking as much open offense to a video clip that goes out of its way to insult the
leading figure of a religion followed by two billion people as making the politically incorrect display of facial makeup of a
professional baseball player a "teachable moment" requiring disciplinary action. We have to be more vigilant about
exercising responsibilities as well as rights.

Our global safety and security doesn't begin and end in Washington. It begins -- and ends -- with us.




Anne-Marie Slaughter
Bert G. Kerstetter '66   University Professor of Politics and International Affairs
Princeton University
440 Robertson Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544

Assistant: Terry Murphy
Website: www.princeton.edu/—slaughtr




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795735 Date: 11/30/2015
