      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790358 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL


From:                               Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                               Saturday, May 26, 2012 3:28 PM
To:
Subject:                            Houla



The UN statement is below, following their visit to the village outside Horns. We are preparing a statement in your
name. We are discussing other responses.



Statement on behalf of the Secretary-General and the Joint Special Envoy for Syria



The Secretary-General and the Joint Special Envoy condemn in the strongest possible terms the killing, confirmed by
United Nations observers, of dozens of men, women and children and the wounding of hundreds more in
the village of El-Houleh, near Horns. Observers from the UN Supervision Mission in Syria have viewed the bodies of the
dead and confirmed from an examination of ordnance that artillery and tank shells were fired at a residential
neighbourhood.This appalling and brutal crime, involving indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force is a flagrant
violation of international law and of the commitments of the Syrian Government to cease the use of heavy weapons in
population centres and violence in all its forms. Those responsible for perpetrating this crime must be held to account.

The Secretary-General and the Joint Special Envoy extend their profound sympathies to the families of the victims and to
the wounded, and underscore their grave concern about the lack of protection for civilians in Syria.

The Secretary-General and the Joint Special Envoy demand that the Government of Syria immediately cease the use of
heavy weapons in population centres.

They reiterate that all violence in all its forms in Syria must cease.

The Joint Special Envoy is contacting the Syrian authorities to convey in the clearest terms the expectations of the
international community, and he will also do so during his forthcoming visit to Syria.

New York/Geneva

, 26 May 2012




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790358 Date: 11/30/2015
