       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791696 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                             B6



From:                               Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                               Tuesday, July 31, 2012 12:37 PM
To:
Subject:                            FW: Kishore Mahbubani--Is China Losing the Diplomatic Plot?




From: Patel, Nirav S
Sent: Tuesday, July 31, 2012 12:31 PM
To: Campbell, Kurt M; Yun, Joseph Y; Moy, Kin W; Ratner, Ely S; Carlson, Aubrey A; Marchant, Christian M; Andrews,
Brian J; Castro, Christian M; Sullivan, Jacob J; Evan Medeiros                      ); Willett, Colin
Subject: Kishore Mahbubani--Is China Losing the Diplomatic Plot?

Very interesting piece from a generally very critical strategic voice of US efforts:


"'China's victory proved to be Pyrrhic. It won the battle of the comminique, but it may have lost 20 years of
   .    .
painstakingly accumulated goodwill, the result of efforts such as the ASEAN-China free-trade agreement;
Signed in November 2002T  . More importantly, China's previous leaders had calculated that a strong and unified
ASEAN provided a valuable buffer against any possible US containment strategy. Now, by dividing ASEAN,
China has provided America with its best possible geopolitical opportunity in the region. If Deng Xiaoping
were alive, he would be deeply concerned."



Kishore Mahbubani
Kishore Mahbubani is Dean of the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy, National University of Singapore.
His most recent book is The New Asian Hemisphere: The Irresistible Shift of Global Power to the East.


Is China Losing the Diplomatic Plot?
26 July 2012

SINGAPORE — In 2016, China's share of the global economy will be larger than America's in purchasing-
price-parity terms. This is an earth-shaking development; in 1980, when the United States accounted for 25% of
world output, China's share of the global economy was only 2.2%. And yet, after 30 years of geopolitical
competence, the Chinese seem to be on the verge of losing it just when they need it most.

China's leaders would be naive and foolish to bank on their country's peaceful and quiet rise to, global
preeminence. At some point, America will awaken from its geopolitical slumber; there are already signs that it
has opened one eye.

But China has begun to make serious mistakes. After Japan acceded to Chinese pressure and released a captured
Chinese trawler in September 2010, China went overboard and demanded an.apology from Japan, rattling the
Japanese establishment.:


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791696 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791696 Date: 11/30/2015




Similarly, after North Korean shells killed innocent South Korean civilians in November 2010, China remained
essentially silent. In a carefully calibrated response, South Korea sent its ambassador to attend the Nobel Peace
Prize ceremony for the imprisoned Chinese human-rights activist Liu Xiaobo. in. December 2010.!

China has also ruffled many Indian feathers by arbitrarily denying visas to senior officialil. Chinese Premier
Wen Jiabao subsequently calmed the waters in meetings with Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, but such
unnecessary provocations left a residue of mistrust in India.

But all of these mistakes pale in comparison with what China did to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
in July. For the first time in 45 years, the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting (AMM) failed to agree to a joint'
communique, ostensibly because ASEAN's current chair, Cambodia, did not want the communiqué to refer to'
bilateral disputes in the South China Sea. But the whole world, including most ASEAN countries, perceived
Cambodia's stance as the result of enormous Chinese pressurei,

China's victory proved to be Pyrrhic. It won the battle of the cornminique, but it may have lost 20 years Of
painstakingly accumulated goodwill, the result of efforts such as the ASEAN-China free-trade agreement
'signed in November 2002. More importantly, China's previous leaders had calculated that a strong and unified
ASEAN provided a valuable buffer against any possible US containment strategy. Now, by dividing ASEAN,
China has provided America with its best possible geopolitical opportunity in the region. If Deng Xiaoping
Were alive, he would be deeply concerned.

It may be unfair to blame China's leaders for the ASEAN debacle. More likely than not, over-zealous junior
officials pushed a hard line on the South China Sea, whereas no Chinese leader, if given the choice, would have
opted to wreck the AMM Communiqué. But the fact that it happened reveals the scope of China's recent poor
!decision-making
r


The "nine-dotted line" that China has drawn over the South China Sea may prove to be nothing but a big_
geopolitical millstone around China's neck. It was unwise to attach the map in a note verbale responding to a'
joint submission by Vietnam and Malaysia to the United Nations Commission on the Limits of the Continental
Shelf in May 2009. This was the first time that China had included the map in an official communication to the
UN, and it caused great concern among some ASEAN members J,

The geopolitical opportunity implied by inclusion of the map has not been lost on-America, which is why thei
US somewhat unusually, has made another effort to ratify the Law of the Sea Convention. Having tabled the
nine-dotted line at the UN, China walked into a no-win situation, owing to the difficulty of defending the map
Under international law. Indeed, as the eminent historian Wang Gungwu has pointed out, the first maps to claim
the South China Sea were Japanese, and were inherited by Nationalist China.

Domestically, too, the nine-dotted line may cause problems for the government by presenting critics with a
useful weapon. Any hint of compromise will expose officials politically. In other words, a few rocks in the
South China Sea have put China between a rock and a hard place.

There is no doubt that China will have to find a way to compromise over the nine-dotted line. In private, if has
begun to do sq. Even though the line covers the waters northeast of the Indonesian-owned Natuna Islands, the
Chinese government has given Indonesia categorical assurances that China does not claim the Natuna Islands or
their Exclusive Economic Zone.

These private assurances calmed relations with Indonesia. So why not make similar overtures to other ASEAN
states?

The legacies of Deng and his predecessor, Mao Zedong, are very different. But the People's Republic's two
most imnortant leaders did agree in one area! both bent over backwards to make territorial cnnressinng to
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791696 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791696 Date: 11/30/2015




resolve border disputes. This explains why China was so generous to Russia, for example, in its border
settlements.

Mao and Deng could do this because both provided China with strong leadership. The challenge for the world
now is that China has become politically pluralistic: no leader is strong enough to make wise unilateral
concessions.

Nothing will happen in China until the leadership transition is completed in November.1The new administration
of Xi Jinping
      _       and Li Keqiang will need some time to settle in. But America is waking up) So, too, will the rest
of the world in 2016. The big question then will be: Is China as geopolitically competent as number one as it
was when it was number two?

This article is available online at:
http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/is-china-losing-the-diplomatic-plot

Copyright Project Syndicate - www.project-syndicate.org



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791696 Date: 11/30/2015
