     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794077 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                              B6


From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Thursday, February 9, 2012 1:59 PM
To:                                'Russorv@state.goy'
Subject                            Fw: FYI... FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: Strider "CPAC... high jacked..."



Pls print.


From: Burns Strider                                                                                                             B6
Sent: Thursday, February 09, 2012 11:10 AM
To: H
Subject: FYI... FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: Strider "CPAC... high jacked..."


"Leaders on the right have worked to wed social conservatives with Ayn Rand Tea Partiers hoping to restore a party in
disarray," said Burns Strider, President of the American Values Network. "These rightwing leaders want unity for their own
political goals; they want unity where there is none. They can preach, but they can't deliver. And, the result is a primary
nominating contest with shifting, restless voters who can't find what they want because it doesn't exist."

"Conservatives can be true to themselves and the teachings they claim leads and inspires them, such as caring for the
least and last, or they can follow Ayn Rand the Machiavellian atheist, but they can't serve both," said Strider. "CPAC
social conservatives have no one to follow because they have allowed their values to be high jacked by leaders more
interested in a party than a nation, in electoral victory than a strong moral reality..."

http://americanvaluesnetwork.org/press-releases/#2912


FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

Contact: Rachel Johnson,                                                                                                        B6

February 9, 2012

Tea Party Jesus, The One Leader CPAC Can Follow
AVN's Video Highlights Values Divide Among Extreme Rightwing Voters

Washington, DC — As conservatives today descend on Washington for the annual CPAC conference, the animated video
Tea Party Jesus' "Sermon on the Mali" created by the American Values Network (AVN), continues to draw widespread
attention as a jarring commentary on the true values guiding conservative leaders.

This conference of the extreme right comes on the heels of an eventful night in the race for the GOP Presidential
nomination where it was made clear that conservatives remain dissatisfied with the current field and continue to search for
a leader to rally behind.

AVN's video highlights many of the divisions leading to the current disarray within rightwing politics.

"Leaders on the right have worked to wed social conservatives with Ayn Rand Tea Paters hoping to restore a party in
disarray," said Burns Strider, President of the American Values Network. "These rightwing leaders want unity for their own
political goals; they want unity where there is none. They can preach, but they can't deliver. And, the result is a primary
nominating contest with shifting, restless voters who can't find what they want because it doesn't exist."

Featured by NPR, USA Today, Christianity Today, and the Washington Post, Tea Party Jesus (TeaPattyJesus.org)
reveals a reality that many at CPAC try to hide—the religious values informing their voting stand in contrast with the values
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794077 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794077 Date: 11/30/2015



of the Tea Party. Rather than argue why Scripture is incompatible with Tea Party values, the "Sermon on the Mar puts
the rhetoric of the Tea Party directly in Jesus' mouth and relies on the visceral reactions of viewers to make its point.

Many of CPAC's speakers this weekend, including keynote speaker Former Gov. Sarah Palin, are featured prominently in
the video as Tea Party Jesus' "disciples."

Mitt Romney is also portrayed in the video as a repeatedly shunned would-be-disciple. Last week, Gov. Romney made
headlines for his statement, "I'm not concerned about the very poor."

"Conservatives can be true to themselves and the teachings they claim leads and inspires them, such as caring for the
least and last, or they can follow Ayn Rand the Machiavellian atheist, but they can't serve both," said Strider. "CPAC
social conservatives have no one to follow because they have allowed their values to be high jacked by leaders more
interested in a party than a nation, in electoral victory than a strong moral reality. Tea Party Jesus is all they have."




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794077 Date: 11/30/2015
