      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790833 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                           Gordon, Philip H <GordonPH@state.gov>
Sent:                           Tuesday, June 5, 2012 9:58 AM
To:                             H
Subject:                        Fw: DECLARATION ON SYRIA




From: Feridun Sinirlio§lu [mailto
Sent: Tuesday, June 05, 2012 09:38 AM
To: Gordon, Philip H
Subject: Fw: DECLARATION ON SYRIA




     Original Message
From: MOZK Gulru
To: Feridun Sinirlio'lu
To: fsinirlioglu
Cc: Can Dizd
Cc: Nazmiye Basaran
Cc: MOZK Gulru
Subject: DECLARATION ON SYRIA
Sent: Jun 5, 2012 4:02 PM

DECLARATION ON SYRIA

(The Ministers of Foreign Affairs of ... (participating countries) ... and the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy met on 6 June 2012 in Istanbul at an ad hoc
consultation meeting on Syria. )

Taking stock of the latest developments on the ground in Syria, the Participants condemned the continuing
massacres perpetrated by the Regime and noted with regret that UN-Arab League Joint Special Envoy Annan's
six-point plan is not being implemented.

Emphasizing that the main responsibility for the urgent, comprehensive and immediate implementation of all
the elements of the Annan Plan rests with the Syrian Administration, they concluded that the Syrian
Administration has so far failed to fulfill its commitments under the Annan Plan as well as its obligations under
the UN Security Council resolutions 2042 and 2043 which endorsed the Annan Plan and demanded its full and
complete implementation.

In the face of the Syrian Administration's ongoing failure to abide by its commitments and obligations, and of
the threat that the situation in Syria poses for maintaining international peace and security, they called upon the
UN Security Council to assume its responsibilities and impose measures to ensure the full and unequivocal
implementation of the Annan Plan. In this regard, they invited the UN Security Council to immediately address
the issue of Syria and to adopt a new resolution under Chapter 7 of the UN Charter in order to demand from the
Syrian Administration to implement the Annan Plan within a certain timeframe.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790833 Date: 11/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790833 Date: 11/30/2015




In case the UN Security Council does not respond effectively to the alarming situation in Syria in accordance
with its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, the international
community, acting as a coalition of the willing, would be compelled to take collective measures to protect the
people of Syria.


Sent from my iPad
Sent by BlackBerry Internet Service from Turkcell




Bu e-posta mesaji ye ekinde bulunabilecek dosyalar yalniz mesajm alici hanesinde kayith lcullanici(lar) icindir. Mesajm alms'
degilseniz, liitfen hemen gondericiyi uyariniz. Mesaji dagitmaymiz, kopyalamaymiz, icerigini aciklamayiniz; cikti almaksizin siliniz.
Bu mesajda kayitli gori4 ye dtigInceler hicbir         TUrkiye Cumhuriyeti           Bakanligina atfedilemeyecegi gibi, Bakanlik
bakimindan baglaytci degildir. Virtis ye Usti' amach yazihmlarm bu mesajda yerlesmesinin engellenmesi amaciyla gerekli tam
onlemler alinmi$ olsa da, bu mesajin sisteminizde yaratabilecegi kayip ye zararlardan dolayi Bakanlik hukuken sorumluluk kabul
etmez.

Turk did politikasina         geligneler hakkinda bilgi almak icin www.mfa.gov.tr adresine gidebilir, twitter ve facebook sayfamizi
izleyebilir, seyahatleriniz kin www.goturkey.com sayfasini ziyaret edebilirsiniz.

This email and any files transmitted with it are intended solely for the use of the addressee(s). If you are not the intended recipient,
please notify the sender immediately, then delete it without printing, copying, distributing or disclosing its contents. Any view or
opinion expressed in this email does not necessarily represent those of the Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, or bind it in any way.
Although reasonable precautions are taken to ensure that no viruses or malware are present in this email, the Ministry can not accept
any legal responsibility for any loss or damage arising from its use.

Visit www.mfa.gov.tr for Turkish foreign policy news, tweets and our facebook link, and www.goturkey.com for travel ideas.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790833 Date: 11/30/2015
