       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770506 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                    B6



From:                              Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov >
Sent:                              Sunday, July 18, 2010 10:20 AM
To:
Subject                            Fw: MCH Announcement




     Original Message ---
From: Jennifer Klein
To: Abedin, Huma
Cc: 'Megan Rooney'                               Vogelstein, Rachel; Verveer, Melanne 5; Klein, Jennifer L
Sent: Sun Jul 18 10:00:10 2010
Subject: MCH Announcement

The maternal and child health deliverables are listed below. This a significant announcement, and it is ready to go. I will
also contact our USAID contact in Kabul, Randolphe Augustin, to make sure he is aware that you may need additional
information. Rachel and I are also here if you need anything.

1) Double the number of midwives by supporting the Ministry of Public Health's (MoPH) Community Midwifery
Education program and launch a new Community Nursing Education Program modeled on the midwifery initiative.

2) Support an advocacy campaign using religious leaders and other influentials to encourage women and their families
to access MCH services.

3) Extend the Ambassador's Small Grants to Support Gender Equality in Afghanistan (ASGP) program nationwide and
increase the ceiling amount to $38 million in order to contribute to the social, economic, and political development of
women throughout the country.

We understand that the Secretary also asked about USG efforts in Afghanistan to strengthen the health system more
generally. The midwifery program is just one important piece of this. Our MCH program stresses the importance of
building the capacity of the health system and to improve infrastructure.



Below is an excerpt from USAID's report to Congress on its MCH program that stresses this and we heard this repeatedly
from the field.

"The USAID strategy to support the MOH in rebuilding the health sector has been a balanced approach to expand
services through the BPHS, to strengthen human and systems capacities at central and provincial levels, and to improve
infrastructure. The main component of this strategy has been the rollout of the BPHS, delivered primarily through a
network of primary care facilities run by NG0s. USAID also supports improving quality of care; strengthening the
engagement of the private sector; building human, institutional, and infrastructure capacities at all levels; and scaling up
implementation of cutting-edge and proven clinical and community-based interventions. Additionally, USAID provides
contraceptives and essential drugs for primary health care and supports a program of social marketing of contraceptives
and health products linked with a BCC program. Ongoing infrastructure improvements include repair of existing facilities
and construction of one 50-bed maternity hospital, two 100-bed hospitals, two comprehensive health clinics, and three
midwife training centers for preservice and in-service training."




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770506 Date: 11/30/2015
