     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772058 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                         Neera Tanden <                     >                                            B6
Sent:                         Tuesday, September 7, 2010 11:15 PM
To:
Subject:                      Re: a few things



Hillary,

First, good luck on your speech tomorrow! I look forward to reading it. As light dims on the
domestic possibilities, it really does seem like there is a new dawn on the foreign policy and national
security challenges we have faced. I know it's your fortitude, among other strengths, that has helped
break that dawn. And thanks so much for planning to come to CAP; I hope we can schedule it
soon. Again, we like topics like a unified national security budget, China or START, but really
anything you'd like to make news on is great with us.

                                                I would love to see you and we could compare notes
on all the future comings and goings in the White House and Administration. Change is in the
air. Should I reach out to Lona or something? At the same, I totally understand how you are just a
little busy these days.

On whither the Democrats, well, that is a long email or even a memo. A few things - as it stands
now, we could well lose the Senate, not just the House. Feingold and Murray are having very serious
races; just a month ago, no one was worried about them. (Kristin Gillibrand is one lucky
person.) CAP is doing its own polling and focus groups on economic messages, so I'll have more to
report soon if you're interested. But in terms of advice, last April          and I went told the WH
folks to get a core economic contrast, and create a contrast with the R's for the seven months that
was then left til November. Relentlessly, every day, the president would have to have the same
message of where he was, and where they were. Not just say it, but offer new proof points on how
their policies would actually work weekly.talked directly to the potus about it, and they did try
for a little bit, but then it didn't really take Mold. And truthfully, they just stayed in the toplines. We
also said to show that he was working relentlessly on the jobs problem, he had to do economic
events almost every day. But they were focused on financial regulation (though they never tied that
to job security) and then the BP oil spill.... and now it's a little late. At bottom, I argued that the
President had to communicate that he was getting up a little earlier in the morning and working a
little harder at night to focus on bringing jobs back - not literally, but you get the idea. (fl
             told me once that the single event you did on the campaign that scared them the most
was bringing donuts to the shift change at 4 in the morning, because it crystallized your respect for
working people and communicated to people how hard you were willing to work for them. I know
Presidents can't do that, but.... ) But some of them thought the economy was better than it is, and
some of them just got distracted. I'm not sure that this would have closed a 10 point gap, but we
think it would have helped.

      also argued, separately from me, that the potus needed to detach from Congress after health
care. We wouldn't have gotten financial regulation done though, and the president wanted to get
that done. I thought they should take legislative success where they could, but it's certainly not
helped them politically.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772058 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772058 Date: 11/30/2015




Anyway, seems like I'm always sending overly long emails to your very straightforward questions -
my apologies. Again, good luck tomorrow, I hope we can find a date for a CAP speech soon, and I
would love to see you when you have time.

And thanks for being a role model for all of us

Neera




From: H <HDR22@clintonemail.com>
To: "ntanden
Sent: Tue, September 7, 2010 7:06:04 AM
Subject: Re: a few things

Neera--




 Second, I will make a speech at CAP and have told Jake we need to schedule before the end of the year. The reason for
going to CFR again is because it's an anniversary of the one I gave there last year, and it serves as a report on what
we've accomplished. So we should look for a subject and time as soon as possible.

 I confess I'm bewildered at how poorly the Dems are doing in driving any message and putting the Rs on the defensive.
Do you and CAP have any ideas as to how to change the dynamic--before it's too late? Losing the House woud be a
disaster in every way.

 And, thanks for your good wishes on the Middle East negotiations which need all the help they can get!

                                                                                             All the best--H

    Original Message
From: Neera Tanden <                          >
To: H
Sent: Sat Sep 04 12:57:53 2010
Subject: a few things

Hillary,

I've been meaning to write you about a few things, but thought it unwise to disturb before the Peace Talks. And may I say
congratulations on all your work leading up to this week and an incredibly successful start- I feel much more optimistic
knowing your role in guiding these efforts.

First, I think there will be a story in the Times ahead of the 6 month anniversary of the bill (they've been looking for a hook)
on how your ideas shaped the bill. The anniversary is 9/23 and there will be a slew of hopefully popular insurance
reforms being implemented as of that day, so there will be a fair amount of health care news. They've had a hard time
nailing down some elements (like the FEHBP), and so it's not totally fleshed out, but that's the plan as of now.

Second, I know you're going to CFR for a major speech this week. It would be great if you could come to CAP soon.
We're happy to have you for any topic you'd like to make news on. Geithner came recently to focus on the big middle
class tax cut fight we'll have in September, and that worked well. Our team is especially interested in the unified national
security budget, or START, but really anything you want to make news on would be great.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772058 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772058 Date: 11/30/2015




Again, though things are pretty depressing domestically, it's good to have see bright spots on the world front, and for that
we all owe you thanks.

Neera




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772058 Date: 11/30/2015
