      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797932 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                    B6


From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.corn>
Sent:                             Thursday, October 25, 2012 10:41 AM
To:                               'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                          Fw: Debate...



Pis print.


From: Burns Strider
Sent: Tuesday, October 23, 2012 09:16 AM- Eastern Standard Time
To: H
Subject: Debate...

I was surprised thatGov. Romney went into the debate playing prevent defense... Not attacking but practically
agreeing much of the time.!. Calm and even passive. President Obama, on the other hand was assertive, used
snarky one liners and called Romney on the carpet several times... It was a fascinating contrast in contrasts of
style and strategy.

I thought President Obama wholly owned the debate. I thought he dominated.

But, I also thought it was a reminder of how differently Republicans are working toward the win than we are... I
think they believe they have their ducks in a row and are setup to win... That they have communicated
appropriately and have adjusted the intensity and have now a turnout model to succeed on... Believing a share
of the final few undecideds will join them... So, it's about turnout.

We know its about turnout, too, but are also messaging to the undecideds. Our gameplan is still one of
persuasion and we are still needing to raise the intensity level... Romney attempted not to help us last night raise
the intensity... We have supporters from last election who are still unlikely voters this time around.

So... Game on! Frankly, we seem to have a stronger ground ops if you compare early voting. That bodes well
for us in the final push.

Here's some debate reaction:


JOE SCARBOROUGH, writing on POLITICO, "Mitt Romney wins debate season": "Obama won on
points last night. But that victory may not have been enough to undo the damage done to the president by this
year's debate season. ... [T]here is no question that Barack Obama outclassed Mr. Romney on the topic of
foreign policy. The Republican nominee was nervous, his answers were formulaic and Romney seemed to be
reciting scripts rather than debating foreign policy. That became even more evident when the tone shifted to
domestic policy and the confidence Mitt Romney showed in Denver came shining through.

"Still, Romney did enough things right to keep the momentum going his way. The former Massachusetts
governor's tone was nearly perfect and he abandoned the hard neoconservative line that had concerned more
traditional conservatives like myself. Call it flip flopping if you like. I actually believe that realist approach fits
Romney better and will be his governing philosophy if he ever becomes commander-in-chief. It's hard to
imagine a man so driven by data being swept up in a Wilsonian worldview. Obama showed superior
knowledge to his challenger on almost every question raised involving foreign policy. But I found his tone, at
times, to be jarring for a sitting commander in chief."http://politi.co/X7e5Ko
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797932 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797932 Date: 11/30/2015




--Mika Brzezinski, on "Morning Joe," from Boca: "Mitt Romney got through it, but it looked painful at
times. ... The President took him down a notch a few times.''

--John Heilemann: "I actually thought that this was the best of Obama's three debates."

--Mark Halperin: "I don't think there's any doubt President Obama won IN THE ROOM."

THE HEADLINES: WashPost 2-col. lead, "Obama has edge in faceoff over foreign affairs: ROMNEY
SEEMS CAUTIOUS IN FINAL DEBATE -- Candidates keep circling back to domestic issues" ... N.Y. Times,
"Obama and Romney Spar on Foreign Policy in Final Bout" ... WSJ Al, "Rivals Duel in Final Face-Off" ...
USA Today lead story, "Rivals duel over global leadership: Obama goes on attack; Romney defends vision ...
Romney takes softer tone" ... N.Y. Post cover (beside wood): "Obama scores hollow debate victory" ... N.Y.
Daily News (atop wood): "GOTCHA, MITT!"

ONLINE: HuffPost, "CHIEF IN COMMAND" ... Daily Beast: "OBAMA ON OFFENSE ... SULLIVAN:
OBAMA CLAWED HIS WAY BACK"

PRESIDENT OBAMA, in the debate's most memorable line: "Governor Romney maybe hasn't spent
enough time looking at how our military works. You mentioned the Navy, for example, and that we have fewer
ships than we did in 1916. Well, Governor, we also have fewer horses and bayonets -- (laughter) -- because the
nature of our military's changed. We have these things called aircraft carriers where planes land on them. We
have these ships that go underwater, nuclear submarines. And so the question is not a game of Battleship where
we're counting ships. It's: What are our capabilities." ...

BOB SCHIEFFER, moderator: "What if the prime minister of Israel called you on the phone and said: 'Our
bombers are on the way. We're going to bomb Iran.' What do you say?"

MITT ROMENEY: "Bob, let's not go into hypotheticals of that nature. Our relationship with Israel, my
relationship with the prime minister of Israel is such that we would not get a call saying our bombers are on the
way or their fighters are on the way. This is the kind of thing that would have been discussed and thoroughly
evaluated well before that kind of action."




Burns Strider




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797932 Date: 11/30/2015
