    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793227 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                             Sunday, January 1, 2012 11:51 AM
To:                               'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject                           Fw: op-ed you might be interested in looking at



Pls print and hold for me.

    Original Message
From: Sullivan, Jacob J [mailto:Sullivan.11@state.gov]
Sent: Tuesday, December 27, 2011 06:17 PM
To: H
Subject: Fw: op-ed you might be interested in looking at

Interesting piece



    Original Message ---
From: Gordon, David [mailto
Sent: Tuesday, December 27, 2011 05:11 PM
To: Harris, Jennifer M; Rediker, Douglas A (DRediker           <DRediker            >; Sullivan, Jacobi; Kamel, Ayham
<Kamel
Subject: op-ed you might be interested in looking at




December 27, 2011
An Upbeat View of America's 'Bad' Year



By IAN BREMMER AND DAVID F. GORDON




Among global big thinkers, never a bashful crowd, the notion of a United States in decline has become conventional
wisdom. In late 2011, this narrative has crescendoed, with experts arguing that China has surpassed the United States
economically, Niall Ferguson declaring that we are at "the end of 500 years of Western predominance" and The National
Interest proclaiming "the end of the American era." Even the National Intelligence Council's coming Global Trends 2030
study reportedly assumes an America in decline.

As 2011 draws to a close, the U.S. military's exit from Iraq and challenges in Afghanistan along with American
vulnerability to the European crisis provide further confirmation of the decline narrative.

We agree with some of these views. The United States has neither the willingness nor the capability to provide the kind
of global leadership that it has provided in the past several decades, and other countries are increasingly less willing to
follow America's lead.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793227 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793227 Date: 11/30/2015




But the conventional wisdom obscures as much as it reveals. Specifically, the declinists overlook the inconvenient truth
that global power is relative. And comparing America's year to that of our present and potential adversaries paints an
interesting picture: 2011 was not the year when the United States fell off the wagon. Instead, a look back at the past 12
months suggests that U.S. power is more resilient than the narrative of inevitable decline portrays.

Take Al Qaeda, our most consistent adversary (by their definition and ours) since the 9/11 attacks. Despite some severe
missteps, we have in 10 years degraded Al Qaeda's capabilities to the point that they are having difficulty mounting
attacks against significant targets. In 2011, the United States killed Al Qaeda's most effective propagandist, Anwar al-
Awlaki; its operating chief, Atiyah Abd al-Rahman; and of course its founder, chief executive and spiritual leader, Osama
bin Laden. Moreover, the Arab Spring undercut the notion that political change in the Middle East requires the violent
jihad that Bin Laden spent his career espousing.

The fight against extremist Islam is an impossible one in which to declare success. Yet the fact remains that while Al
Qaeda began the War on Terror with a horrific assault on the foremost symbols of U.S. economic and military power, it
leaves 2011 effectively leaderless, rudderless and reduced to boasting about kidnapping defenseless U.S. aid workers.

Iran's leaders also exit 2011 in worse shape than they entered it. Early in the year, they viewed the demise of Middle
Eastern potentates as accelerating their rise to regional dominance. Turkish anger over the Mavi Marmara incident
continued to draw Ankara closer to Tehran. Saudi anger at the perceived lack of U.S. support for Egypt's Hosni Mubarak
seemed to threaten a permanent rupture in the U.S. relationship with a key ally, and Iran assumed that it would be the
beneficiary of declining American influence in the Arab World.

But the Arab Spring has unfolded very differently. Iran's closest, most vital, and in some ways only Arab ally, Syria's
Bashar al-Assad, ends the year leading an embattled, isolated regime facing a combination of civil war and economic
sanctions that his government is unlikely to survive. Iran's relationship with Turkey has deteriorated sharply, and, along
with Saudi Arabia, Ankara has in fact drawn closer to the United States. Indeed, the nascent U.S.-Turkey-Saudi troika is
one of the most important but least noticed trends of the past few months.

Combined with another year without nuclear weapons - the program apparently thwarted significantly by covert
operations - and a tightening vise of economic sanctions, these events have left Iran's leaders disoriented. After years of
growing consensus, Iran's elites are now increasingly fragmented and at one another's throats.

Moreover, Tehran spent the past few months engaged in a stunning series of blunders: plotting with Mexican drug
dealers to assassinate the Saudi ambassador to the United States and allowing regime supporters to storm the British
Embassy in Tehran, the combination of which has re-energized global efforts to squeeze Iran financially. The assumption
that Iran is the emerging regional power has shattered.

China, which most of the declinists identify as America's greatest future rival, has likewise had a difficult 2011. With U.S.
willingness to lead receding, the international spotlight has fallen on Beijing. And on every issue -the euro zone crisis,
climate change and rebalancing the global economy - China has declined to take the lead, to criticism and dismay at
home and abroad.

Beijing has failed to reconcile rising domestic nationalism with assuaging its neighbors' increasing alarm over Chinese
economic sustainability and strategic hegemony. China's miscalculations in Northeast and Southeast Asia have allowed
the United States to reassert traditional alliances in the region (with Japan and South Korea), establish new beachheads
(placing a permanent U.S. Marine Corps presence in Australia), and create a process and institutions (the Trans-Pacific
Partnership) for a balanced Asia-Pacific regional architecture, rather than one dominated by the Middle Kingdom.

Compared to this, 2011 has not been a bad year for America. It is a stretch to call the Iraq war a victory, but the
endgame in the Afghan quagmire is slowly coming into focus. And for all our fiscal problems, global funding has to flow
somewhere, and our capital markets are still unparalleled. China won't internationalize the renminbi, the euro is fragile
and gold is not a country. As a result, the dollar remains the world's reserve currency, and U.S. Treasury bills the global
financial safe haven.

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793227 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793227 Date: 11/30/2015




This will inevitably change in the long term, but not for quite some time.

The unipolar moment is over. But for 2011 at least, the world order has remained the United Sates and the rest.

Ian Bremmer is president of Eurasia Group and author of "The End of the Free Market: Who Wins the War Between
States and Corporations?" David F. Gordon, former director of policy planning at the State Department, is head of
research at Eurasia Group.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793227 Date: 11/30/2015
