      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791024 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Thursday, June 7, 2012 8:03 PM
To:
Subject:                         FW: unfortunately now its news




From: Josh Rogin [mailtc
Sent: Thursday, June 07, 2012 07:38 PM
To: Smith, Dana S (PA); Toner, Mark C
Subject: unfortunately now its news

after that free beacon story, all hell broke loose. we determined that if senators are changing their views on
mcgurk over this, thats the point where it becomes reportable


McGurk Iraq nomination faces Senate scrutiny due
to sex allegations
Posted By Josh Rogin                        hursday, June 7, 2012 - 7:27 PM
Share


The nomination of Brett McGurk to be the next U.S. ambassador to Iraq is now facing increased opposition in
the Senate due to allegations he had an affair with a reporter in Baghdad in 2008 while working as a top White
House advisor and may have been videotaped while engaged in a sex act on the roof of Saddam Hussein's
Republican Palace with a different woman.

McGurk, who served as a senior National Security Council official and the lead negotiator of the U.S.-Iraq
Status of Forces Agreement in 2008, allegedly held an extended affair with Gina Chon, a Wall Street Journal
reporter, that began four years ago in Iraq, according to intimate and occasionally graphic e-mails exposed on
the Cryptome website earlier this week. The Washington Free Beacon reported today that McGurk was married
to another woman at the time and is married to Chon now.

The leaked e-mails, which could not be independently verified and were published on the Flikr site of an
anonymous user named Diplojoke, show McGurk pursuing and then canoodling with Chon, a Wall Street
Journal reporter who was also in Baghdad at the time.

McGurk and Chon did not respond to requests for comment. The State Department declined to comment.

Over in the Senate, one leading lawmaker is taking the allegations seriously. The Cable has confirmed that Sen.
James Inhofe (R-OK), the second ranking Republican on the Senate Armed Services Committee, cancelled a
scheduled meeting with McGurk this week when he heard about the e-mails and an allegation that McGurk was

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791024 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791024 Date: 11/30/2015




caught on video engaged in a sex act on the roof of Baghdad's Republican Palace, as alluded to by State
Department whistleblower Peter Van Buren on his blog.

Inhofe's spokesman told The Cable that the senator won't proceed on the McGurk nomination until both
allegations are cleared up.

"The senator always prefers to meet with nominees personally before giving his support. In regards to this
nominee, Senator Inhofe has heard some concerning issues, and until those issues are cleared up, he will not
meet with Mr. McGurk," Inhofe's spokesman Jared Young told The Cable.

Inhofe hasn't placed a formal hold on the McGurk nomination yet, but he is considering it.

Multiple sources told The Cable the State Department has investigated the allegation about McGurk's activity
on top of the palace but was unable to find any evidence of that incident. It's unclear whether State is
investigating the circumstances surrounding McGurk's affair with Chon.

Neither of these incidencts were mentioned at McGurk's confirmation hearing Wednesday. The Senate Foreign
Relations Committee now must approve his nomination, but no vote has yet been scheduled.

Inhofe's objection would be only one of the several potential holds McGurk could face on his path to the
nomination.

As The Cable reported in March, Senate Armed Services Committee ranking Republican John McCain (R-AZ)
has reservations about McGurk taking on the Baghdad post over concerns that McGurk has never led an
embassy and or any large organization and because McGurk was a key part of the failed SOFA negotiations to
extend the U.S. troop presence in Iraq beyond 2011.

There are also concerns on Capitol Hill that McGurk may be too close to Prime Minister Nonni al-Maliki,
impairing his ability to work with all segments of Iraq's political society. When he was nominated, Waheed Al
Sammarraie, the D.C. representative of the office of former Iraqi Prime Minister Ayad Allawi, the leader of
the opposition, wrote a letter to Congress that said, "I would like to inform you that Aliraqia Bloc and the liberal
trend will not deal with new assigned ambassador to Iraq Mr. Brett Mcgurk for his loyalty and bounds with the
Islamic party."




Josh Rogin
Staff Writer - The Cable
Foreign Policy Magazine
http://thecable foreignpolicy.com
                - Mobile
iosh.rogin(
This message and any related attachments are hereby designated as confidential communications.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791024 Date: 11/30/2015
