     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790214 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Sunday, May 20, 2012 12:40 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw:



Worth a read

    Original Message
From: Moy, Kin W
Sent: Sunday, May 20, 2012 12:30 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacobi; Campbell, Kurt M; Nuland, Victoria J; Koh, Harold Hongju
Subject:



I left Chen about two hours ago. Before I call it a night, I just wanted to leave you with a couple of lasting impressions:

First, at the time I left him, he was emotionally spent. It was clear he was overwhelmed by the enormity of the day, the
hasty race to the airport, the arrival in Newark, and the NYU stand-up in front of a throng of about 150 journalists and
rowdy supporters. I did not go up to his apartment until about 45 minutes after the conclusion of his remarks because
the press were conducting interviews with Chris Smith, et.al., and had blocked the doorway. But when I did, I found him
sitting alone on a chair in the middle of the room. When I approached, he seemed pleased with how the day went, but
when I asked him if he was ready for his new life,

Second, I really wonder how this relationship with the PR expert will work out. I realize that time was short in the van,
but Matt was unable to build much of a rapport. I think he made a couple of errors by first proposing to issue an arrival
statement for Chen that didn't sound very Chinese at all (I had forwarded this earlier to the group). I spoke to Chen a lot
in the van and reiterated that he should not feel pressure to accept anything that didn't feel right to him. The decision
was all his. He told me and Jerry (we were flanking him in the middle seat) that he had been thinking a lot about issuing
a statement and then proposed the three points that he eventually made to journalists. It made references to the
embassy and State Department, the cooperation between the US and China on the discussions that eventually brought
him to the US, and the media's help to keep his case alive. Not sure how the points came out eventually because I stayed
in the van to keep out of camera range, but much of it seemed to track with the earlier discussion in the van, where it
was clear he wanted to make a nuanced point about the Central Government.

The second problem arose when Matt indicated there would be book and movie deals down the road.




Finally, I think he sincerely believes what we did for him was extraordinary. He seemed to brighten when I told him Kurt
and Harold would find some time soon to visit him in NYC. He also appeared genuinely moved when Maureen and
Graham told him they would be heading back to Beijing tomorrow. I honestly can't say what his narrative about us will
be in the future, but on this day, neither he nor his wife could say anything but a heartfelt thanks.

When I've worked on other dissident cases, I've always departed the scene with some regret. You always wonder what
will become of them once those with agendas begin knocking on their doors. This case was a little different because CGC
has his family with him to provide support and he has up to this point not foreclosed the possibility of returning to
China.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790214 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790214 Date: 11/30/2015




My current plan is to see Chen and his family early tomorrow morning to say farewell. Graham and Maureen will come
with me. I will note that a DRL officer will stay a couple of more days to make sure he and his family are settling in and
they don't need anymore. I will also note that other State Department friends will visit soon. That should bring a smile to
his face.

Many thanks to everyone who worked so hard to make this is a reality. I can't even imagine the effort it took to turn off
the Congressional visit to the airport (still, out of precaution, I was trying up to the last moment to remember the
Chinese translation for Assistant Director of the Port Authority). Thanks also to Caitlin who was a lifesaver at the end of
the day. While I think it's still too premature to take a victory lap, I believe we can now safely hand over the baton to
NYU. Good night...km




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790214 Date: 11/30/2015
