     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793816 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                          Sidney Blumenthal
Sent:                          Wednesday, November 14, 2012 6:15 PM
To:
Subject:                       H: NYT News Alert, just posted. Sent to me by NYT editor. Agent politically motivated.
                               Sid




hap: //www.nytimes.com/ 2012/11/ is/us/frederick-humphries-fbi-agent-in-petraeus-case.html
November 14, 2012


Veteran F.B.I. Agent Helped Start Petraeus
E-Mail Inquiry
By MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT, SCOTT SHANE and ALAIN DELAQUERIERE


DOVER, Fla. — The F.B.I. agent who helped start the investigation that led to the resignation of David
H. Petraeus as C.I.A. director is a "hard-charging" veteran counterterrorism investigator who used his
command of French in investigating the foiled "millennium" terrorist plot in 1999, colleagues said on
Wednesday.
The agent, Frederick W. Humphries II, 47, took the initial complaint from Jill Kelley, the Tampa, Fla.,
hostess who was socially active in military circles there, about e-mails she found disturbing that
accused her of inappropriately flirtatious behavior toward Mr. Petraeus. The subsequent cyberstalking
investigation uncovered an extramarital affair between Mr. Petraeus and Paula Broadwell, his
biographer, who agents determined had sent the anonymous e-mails. It also ensnared Gen. John R.
Allen, who now commands troops in Afghanistan, after the investigation discovered that he had sent
"inappropriate communication" to Ms. Kelley.
Colleagues and news reports described the role of Mr. Humphries, in just his third year at the F.B.I.,
in building the case against Ahmed Ressam, who was detained as he tried to enter the United States
from Canada in 1999 with a plan to set off a bomb at Los Angeles International Airport.
In May 2010, after he had moved to the Tampa field office, Mr. Humphries was attacked outside the
gate of MacDill Air Force. Base by a disturbed knife-wielding man. He fatally shot the man, and the
shooting was later ruled to be an appropriate use of force, according to bureau records and colleagues.
Two former law enforcement colleagues said Mr. Humphries was a solid agent with experience in
counterterrorism, conservative political views and a reputation for aggressiveness.
"Fred is a passionate kind of guy," said one former colleague. "He's kind of an obsessive type. If he
locked his teeth onto something, he'd be a bulldog."
That description would appear to fit his involvement in the current investigation.
Mr. Humphries passed on Ms. Kelley's complaint to the cybersquad in the Tampa field office but was
not assigned to the case. He was later admonished by supervisors who thought he was trying to insert
himself improperly into the investigation.
Convinced that the case was being stalled for political reasons, Mr. Humphries in late October
contacted Representative Dave Reichert, a Republican from Washington State, where the F.B.I. agent
had worked previously, to inform him of the case. Mr. Reichert put him in touch with the House
 majority leader, Eric Cantor, who passed the message to the F.B.I. director, Robert S. Mueller III.
 Lawrence Berger, the general counsel for the Federal Law Enforcement Officers Association, who
spoke with Mr. Humphries, said that Mr. Humphries only received the information from Ms. Kelley
 and never played a role in the investigation.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793816 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793816 Date: 11/30/2015




Mr. Berger said that Mr. Humphries and his wife had been "social friends with Ms. Kelley and her
husband prior to the day she referred the matter to him."
"They always socialized and corresponded," he said.
Mr. Berger took issue with news media reports that have said his client sent shirtless pictures of
himself to Ms. Kelley.
"That picture was sent years before Ms. Kelley contacted him about this, and it was sent as part of a
larger context of what I would call social relations in which the families would exchange numerous
photos of each other," Mr. Berger said.
The photo was sent as a "joke" and was of Mr. Humphries "posing with a couple of dummies." Mr.
Berger said the picture was not sexual in nature.
In regard to his client speaking with Mr. Cantor, Mr. Berger declined to address the issue, saying only
that his client "had followed F.B.I. protocols."
"No one tries to become a whistle-blower," he said. "Consistent with F.B.I. policy, he referred it to the
proper component."
A law enforcement official said that disclosing a confidential investigation even to members of
Congress could violate F.B.I. rules. But the official said Mr. Humphries's conduct was under review
and that he had not been suspended or punished in any way.
On Tuesday afternoon, a man standing in the driveway of Mr. Humphries's home who appeared to be
him said, in response to questions from a reporter for The New York Times, that his first name was
not Fred. The man then walked into the house, closed the front door and did not respond to the door
bell's being rung several times.
Michael S. Schmidt reported from Dover, Scott Shane from Washington, and Alain Delaqueriere from
New York. Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793816 Date: 11/30/2015
