UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772376 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                               RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                               B6



NIK:oTIATINc,
A It AB -1S RA ELI                      "This study reasserts America's crucial role in the Middle East peace
                                        process and provides a solid framework from which American
                                        policymakers and mediators can work to facilitate a comprehensive Arab-
                                        Israeli peace settlement."
                                                —Senator George J. Mitchell, Special Envoy for Middle East
                                        Peace, offering advance praise for Negotiating Arab-Israeli Peace (United
AmnIIGon 1..culcsor,h1s,
                                        States Institute of Peace Press: 2008)
fl tho Mici,110 roll;




                  Daniel C. ituitm
                  Scott B. Laser)*




                                                 "LESSONS LEARNED":
                                     THE SEPTEMBER 2010 RESUMPTION OF PEACE TALKS

  1. Arab-Israeli peace is a vital American national interest.
  The administration has done an excellent job framing the issue, explaining why it is important
  for our national security, and affirming the interconnectedness of this conflict with other
  problems in the region. For the most part, the administration has followed the priority set forth
  by the president, though on the question of Syria and prospects for Syrian-Israeli peace, progress
  on engagement - including return a U.S. ambassador - has fallen short of expectations.

  2. U.S. policy must be made in Washington.
  The early push for a settlements freeze demonstrated a strong measure of independence and
  signaled that Washington would not allow its policy to become too dependent on Israeli interests
  and perspectives. But in recent months, there have been troubling signs. Although the "proximity
  talks" were championed by Washington, and the Palestinians reportedly put offers and ideas on
  the table (as we had asked), the administration then appeared to abandon that format in favor of
  Netanyahu's preference for direct negotiations. If the switch occurred only because it suited
  Israel's interest, this would be a mistake.

  3. The United States must not only exploit openings but also actively encourage, seek out,
  and create opportunities for peacemaking.
  Since the first 18 months were devoted to "process" and monitoring "behaviors," the true test for
  the administration now is how to turn the procedural opening of direct talks into a substantive
  breakthrough. In a sense, this summer's proximity talks were a trial run. But Washington did not
  act as expected, that is, it appears the administration did not require Israel to lay out its positions,
  as Palestinians reportedly had done. Now is the time to get beyond procedural questions and do
  more than ensure compliance with commitments. The U.S. should use the direct talks as a
  vehicle for putting forward novel and dramatic ideas - as terms of reference, parameters or
  bridging proposals - that can break what is likely to become a diplomatic stalemate.

   4. Move beyond incrementalism to endgame solutions.
   Beginning with the Washington summit, it will be up to the United States to ensure that the
   negotiations focus on strong terms of reference or negotiating parameters on the core issues –
   this cannot be left to the parties. The challenge is to move the debate to the end-game and then
   channel the parties toward agreed outcomes and tradeoffs. It would be a huge mistake to fall



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772376 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772376 Date: 11/30/2015




 back on the tired mantra that "the U.S. cannot want peace more than the parties," or that "it is up
 to the parties to reach a negotiated settlement." They have proven in the past that they can only
 go so far in face-to-face talks.

 One of the keys to shifting the debate to the end-game is to engage Arab states more intensively.
 Asking for steps to back up Abbas and the PA is important, but equally important is
 choreographing how Arab states will respond to Israeli measures with gestures of their own---not
 to ask them for up-front actions, but to entice them to take reciprocal actions and to sustain our
 engagement even in the face of hesitancy or recalcitrance. We should also be talking with
 regional actors about the broader questions of a new regional architecture for economic and
 security cooperation, as was done after Madrid, but has long since petered out.

 5. Ensure compliance through monitoring.
 The administration deserves credit for tenaciously monitoring the actions of the parties and
 trying to hold their feet to the fire—whether on settlements, actions in Jerusalem, incitement,
 security cooperation or other issues. But an even greater challenge may be looming after the
 Washington summit, when the partial settlement freeze must be renewed. Also, domestic
 pressure will build on both sides to take steps that undermine trust. It is vital for the
 administration to think through additional scenarios and the consequences we can bring to bear
 when behaviors fall short of what is required.

 6. Use presidential assets, but wisely.
 The administration has done an excellent job managing the president's role up to now. President
 Obama has not been over-exposed, and neither has he been absent. But with renewed talks
 comes the likelihood that the focus will soon turn to the core issues—Jerusalem, borders,
 refugees, etc.—and when it does, the president will not only need to demonstrate his resolve and
 his support for the Secretary and the Special Envoy, but he will likely need to get personally
 involved in brokering compromises on the thorniest questions.

  7. Build a diverse, experienced team. A dysfunctional process should not be tolerated.
  The record so far has been mixed. American diplomats in the field are apparently being used to
  communicate with Palestinians, but not with Israel. Moreover, Israel has continued its old habit
  of "shopping" for favorable channels, in this case outside the Special Envoy's direct chain. This
  should not be tolerated.

  The Special Envoy has a team with strong skills and diverse experience. But there is a perception
  that White House political advisers have become too involved at critical moments. At a
  minimum, it does not make sense for political advisers to take the lead in communicating the
  administration's messages and views to the parties or the public.

  Senator Mitchell brings prestige and experience to the task, but there is a sense that the "team" is
  too cloistered and that the Envoy himself is averse to addressing the U.S. and regional media—
  where much of the discourse is dominated by the parties and their respective advocates.

  Finally, it does not appear the administration has activated a "back-room" operation, as our study
  proposed, to think through every possible angle for addressing the core issues. All too often,
                                                   2



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772376 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772376 Date: 11/30/2015




 when administrations have reached the moment when it was possible to put forward bridging
 proposals, they hadn't done their homework. The U.S. was caught unprepared and opportunities
 were missed.

 8. Accrue and use domestic capital.
 The administration has deftly built a strong, bipartisan coalition to support its peacemaking
 efforts. In a highly charged, increasingly partisan political environment the administration has
 done well in its outreach to various constituencies here in the U.S.—and especially with the
 Congress. For example, on the settlements question, President Obama has more latitude than any
 president in 20 years.

 9. Better a policy without an envoy, than an envoy without a policy.
 The appointment of Senator Mitchell put the administration on solid footing from day one. It was
 a smart choice, and struck a good balance between stature and experience. His appointment also
 signaled that the president and the secretary wanted to take bold action, but that patience and
 determination would also be hallmarks of our policy.

 Still, it has taken a long time to develop a sustainable strategy, with U.S. policy appearing to be
 stuck for long periods on procedural or tactical matters. The best use of an envoy is to promote a
 strong policy.

 10. Use diplomatic tools judiciously. Assurances must be used carefully, and should not be
 allowed to hamstring our policy.
 If these negotiations progress, it is inevitable that Israel will demand security and other
 assurances from Washington, some of which may be beyond the scope of our ability to provide.
 Equally, Palestinians are likely to ask for compensation for limitations on their sovereignty, and
 these may go beyond what we or our partners are capable of providing. In our role as broker and
 guarantor, it will be vital that we not allow assurances to one party to undermine what is
 promised to the other party or to contradict what is included in an agreement.



                                             Ambassador Daniel Kurtzer & Scott Lasensky, Ph.D.
                                    August 2010 -




                                                  3



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772376 Date: 11/30/2015
