        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794715 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                  RELEASE IN
                                                                                                  FULL



From:                            H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                            Saturday, June 9, 2012 1:03 PM
To:                              'bam@mikulski.senate.gov'
Subject                          Re: Greetings from Barb



Thanks for the kind words about our Ambassadors and your insightful comments about what we're facing. To be
continued Monday night....


From: Mikulski, BAM (Mikulski) [mailto:BAM@Mikulski.senate.goy]
Sent: Wednesday, June 06, 2012 04:05 PM
To: I-1
Subject: Greetings from Barb

Dear Hillary,

As I follow your travels around the globe, I wanted to let you know about my recent CODEL to the Middle
East. Tomorrow I will email you about two legislative issues that are so important to me — compensation for the
families of Nairobi bombing victims, and visa waiver.

I just got back from a CODEL to Israel and Egypt. Your ambassadors, Ann Patterson and Dan Shapiro and their staffs are
terrific. They provided world-class support and expertise throughout our trip. Our country is truly lucky to have these
people working on our behalf. The Israelis had very positive things to say about the inclusion and consultation on Iran
and were particularly complimentary about the Under Secretary for Political Affairs...

Broadly speaking, our meetings with the Israelis still had a strong sense of urgency about Iran, but with somewhat less
tension than when I was there in January. This time they put the onus more on the United States, however, especially in
the midst of the P5+1 talks. The Sinai was also front and center this time, and I share the Israelis' deep concern that we
work together, with Egypt, to help stabilize what is essentially a lawless zone of human smuggling, criminal gangs and
extremist elements. I hope to work with you and your Department more on the Sinai issue in the future.
Egypt's future remains up for grabs. The elections leave Egyptians to make a Solomonic decision — a choice between a
figure of the old regime and an untested Islamist candidate. The United States will have to prepare to manage a new
phase of what promises to be an ambivalent, complex relationship at best. The economy will be the vital issue
regardless of who is in power — and the economy will make or break them. I hope we can find ways to leverage
economic issues with Egypt and work to creatively reshape our security relationship amidst our own fiscal
problems. Again, as a SSCI and Foreign Ops Appropriations member, I look forward to helping you achieve those goals.

I wish you safe travels. It definitely makes me sleep better at night knowing that you are leading America's foreign
policy. I look forward to seeing you at your party for Sue next week.

Barb




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794715 Date: 11/30/2015
