      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796706 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL


From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Wednesday, September 26, 2012 1:11 PM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: Egypt cancels regional Syria talks because of Turkey's absence (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker@state.gov [mailto:OpsNewsTicker@state.gov]
Sent: Wednesday, September 26, 2012 01:05 PM
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Subject: Egypt cancels regional Syria talks because of Turkey's absence (Reuters)

UNITED NATIONS (Reuters) - Egypt's Islamist President Mohamed Mursi has canceled a meeting of four
regional powers on the Syria crisis because of the absence of Turkey's prime minister from this week's U.N.
General Assembly, according to Egypt's presidential spokesman.

    The quartet of Egypt, Iran, Turkey and Saudi Arabia arose from an initiative by Egypt, whose new president
is looking to make his mark with what he has described as a balanced foreign policy.

   "There was supposed to be (a) meeting this week, but due to the absence of the Turkish prime minister it's
now canceled," presidential spokesman Yasser Ali told reporters late on Tuesday, referring to Turkey's Tayyip
Erdogan.

   Saudi Arabia stayed away from the quartet's last meeting, which Cairo hosted on Sept. 17. Saudi Arabia's
decision was seen by diplomats and Western officials as a reaction to the presence of Shi'ite Muslim Iran, the
major rival of the Sunni Muslim kingdom.

  Iran is the only state in the quartet that is an ally to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and has accused Saudi
Arabia and Turkey of helping the rebels who are fighting to topple him.

  "We believe that through negotiations and not military intervention the situation in Syria can be resolved.
The president (Mursi) believes that progress can made through the quartet committee," Ali added.

   Activists say that 27,000 people have been killed in Syria's uprising, which began as peaceful
demonstrations for reform 18 months ago but turned into an armed insurgency fighting to topple Assad, with
sectarian overtones that could drag in regional powers.




News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796706 Date: 11/30/2015
