     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793415 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                             Thursday, December 6, 2012 7:48 AM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Situation in Belfast
Attachments:                      06DecLocalNewsStories.docx.docx.docx; 06DecNationalNewsarticles.docx.docx.docx




From: Burton, Gregory S (Belfast)
Sent: Thursday, December 06, 2012 07:04 AM
To: Abedin, Huma
Cc: Susman, Louis B; Stephenson, Barbara J; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Doherty, Kathleen A; Noyes, Julieta Valls
Subject: Situation in Belfast

Huma: Ambassador Susman told me he had heard from and asked me to prepare and send this analysis to
you. There is a broader demand from our colleagues on the press side and in Washington for this analysis. If
you are comfortable with it, I would re-package it and send it to a broader distribution. What follows is a brief
description of another night of limited violence in Northern Ireland -- this time not in Belfast, but not far away
in outlying towns. I have talked to the First Minister's political advisor and to an Assistant Chief Constable in
the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI). Also attached are a set of links to local and national media on
this story.

The Trigger:
The small centrist, non-sectarian Alliance Party holds the balance of power in the Belfast City Council when
unionist and nationalist parties are split along sectarian lines. Sinn Fein and SDLP wanted the Union Jack
removed from City Hall and proposed a bill in November toward that end. Alliance proposed a compromise
bill that would allow the flying of the Union Jack on 17 days (similar or identical to the policy regarding the
Union Jack at the Assembly Building at Stormont). The bill did not gain any unionist support, but with the
Alliance support it carried the day. The protests were immediate and the protesters were carrying leaflets that
excoriated the Alliance Party's "betrayal" of unionism.

What Happened Overnight:
After the initial outbreak of violence at City Hall, the action turned to outlying towns. Four police officers were
injured during trouble linked to Belfast City Council's decision to stop flying the union flag every day. About
1,500 people gathered in Carrickfergus (Smiles outside Belfast) to protest over the flag decision. Most of these
were not violent, but again there was a core group bent on destructive behavior. An Alliance Party office where
Alliance MLA Stewart Dickson has a constituency office was ransacked and set ablaze during the trouble. The
home of a couple who are both Alliance Party councilors in Bangor, County Down, was also attacked. A paint
bomb was thrown at Michael and Christine Bower's home, smashing a front window close to where their
daughter normally plays. North Down Alliance MLA Stephen Farry, Minister For Department of Employment
and Learning, said there was an attempted arson attack on his constituency office in Bangor, which was
disrupted by a passing PSNI patrol.

Reaction:
Alliance are saying the two main unionist parties have to bear responsibilities and that this is an "outright attack
on democracy." Stewart Dickson, an Alliance MLA whose offices were attacked, has suggested that the
Secretary should visit the scene of the attack in Carrickfergus. Early statements by some unionist political
leaders voiced anger over the flag vote, but most statements, and particularly those issued since the outbreak of

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793415 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793415 Date: 11/30/2015




violence, have condemned the violence. Mike Nesbitt, UUP, talked about unionism needing brains not
brawn. The First Minister has called for restraint. Sammy Wilson, a DUP stalwart and Minister of Finance,
said the people involved in the violence did a disservice to the flag they were supposedly trying to
protect. However, when Alliance leader David Ford effectively accused Wilson of hypocrisy, Wilson asserted
that Alliance should have known that opening this Pandora's box would lead to something like this and if they
didn't they were out of touch. After last night's renewed violence, all responsible voices are united in
condemning the violence and calling for calm.

PSNI View:
Assistant Chief Constable Finlay (protect) told me that these protests/attacks are not taking place through the
normal unionist political channels, but are being organized through social media. Finlay said that the organizers
are seeking to organize a larger demonstration at or near City Hall on Saturday. There are also indications that
there may be similar incidents tonight in East Belfast and Glen Gormley. This could also happen on Friday
evening, but such events are not likely until 18:00 or later -- the hours of darkness. Finlay noted that the venues
for the visit would be secured and swept tonight but added that there will be a larger police presence. He also
noted that the PSNI are monitoring social media traffic closely. Finlay strongly stated that there was no
threat whatsoever to the Secretary or for disruption at the venues of her visit.

View from the First Minister's Office:
I spoke to the political advisor to the First Minister, Richard Bullick (protect). Bullick suggested that there is
involvement in this from the Progressive Unionist Party, which he asserted would be seeking to flame the
embers of its fading political status. (It was originally an attempt to replicate on the loyalist side the
relationship between Sinn Fein and the IRA). He also suggested that the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) a
paramilitary grouping within Loyalism was involved. He did not feel like he could make a prediction about
violence tonight. He noted that while the Alliance Party is the immediate target, this also represents an effort to
stoke fears of working class unionists and to try to move them onto the fringes of unionist politics. He said the
First Minister and other DUP leaders would continue to condemn the violence. He added that he did not think
the First Minister would support the call from the Alliance Party for an extraordinary session of the Legislative
Assembly because that could only take place on Friday, the day the Secretary will be in Belfast. The Assembly
is in session on Monday.

The Secretary's Speech:
Separately, I will make some recommendations for how to adjust the Secretary's remarks to take these
developments into account.

Possible Media Line:
I join Northern Ireland's political leaders, who have rightly condemned these attacks upon the police, Belfast
City Council staff, and the offices and homes of Alliance Party members. The violent actions of this small
minority of people offer nothing for Northern Ireland's future.

If pressed: While I will not have time to travel to Carrickfergus, I reiterate that attacks such as the one that took
place there on the offices of Alliance Party Member Stewart Dickson have no place in a democracy.




SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793415 Date: 11/30/2015
