     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796377 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                    RELEASE IN
                                                                                    FULL



From:                           Reines, Philippe I <reinesp@state.gov>
Sent:                           Friday, October 19, 2012 4:22 PM
To:
Subject:                        "Reines praised Waldman"


You must have seen a version before being updated with my comment tacked on to the end.


Writer Complains About Clinton Aides
By Kevin Robillard
Politico
October 19, 2012 03:02 PM EDT

The author of a Hillary Clinton profile in Marie Claire magazine on Friday accused "over-protective
bulldogs" on the Secretary of State's staff of flipping out in a flap over the interpretation of comments
Clinton made in an interview about "whining" and women's work-family balance.

"Now I'm pissed," novelist Ayelet Waldman, author of the magazine piece, wrote on Twitter. "I wrote a
very laudatory piece about Hillary Clinton which absolutely accurately quotes her. It gets picked up and
her over-protective bulldogs go insane. We were absolutely talking about women and work life balance
when she made the whining comment."

Waldman's profile of Clinton quoted the former first lady discussing a widely read Atlantic magazine story
by ex-State Department aide Anne-Marie Slaughter entitled "Why Women Still Can't Have It All in which
Slaughter wrote about quitting her State job to raise her two teenage boys.

In the Marie Claire interview, Clinton says: "Some women are not comfortable working at the pace and
intensity you have to work at in these jobs." Later in the discussion, Clinton said she "can't stand
whining."

The State Department disputed the context of Clinton's remarks on whining, and released a partial
transcript of the Marie Claire interview showing the comment came after Waldman mentioned her
daughter was reading "The Catcher In The Rye," and thought Holden Caulfield was unnecessarily unhappy.

"With all due respect to JD Salinger, it's clear as day from the transcript that the only person being called
a whiner is his fictional character Holden Caulfield," Clinton spokesman Phillippe Reines had said in a
statement. "It's outlandish and misleading for Marie Clare to imply anything else from sympathizing with
reporter's daughter Sophie."

Waldman disagreed, and then directed aim at Reines.

"Clinton did not say Slaughter herself was a whiner," Waldman wrote on Twitter. "I never said she did. But
neither were we engaged in a literary discussion abt Salinger. Clinton's whiner comment came up in the
context of work life balance. She said lots of great stuff, that included. Maybe Reines and the rest might
ponder the comments I did NOT publish. He should think very hard before attacking my credibility. I
protected Reines and other staff members because I respected their off-the-record rants. Something I
can't help regretting right now."

In a statement, Reines praised Waldman, and directed blame for the dust-up toward Marie
Claire's public relations staff, which highlighted Clinton's quotes in an out-of-context manner.

"Ayelet was fun to work with and believe me we share her frustration with what's happened,"
he said. "Marie Claire put us all in a jam - especially Ayelet who put months of hard work into
this piece. It didn't need to be jacked by their PR people to make a splash. It would absolutely
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796377 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796377 Date: 11/30/2015




have stood on its own, probably garnered just as much attention. Just the right kind of
attention. They didn't do her any more favors than us. Hopefully that won't detract from the
attention her piece deserves."


This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796377 Date: 11/30/2015
