UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792129 Date: 11/30/2015

                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL


 SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

 SUBJECT: Guidance for the August 30 UNSC Ministerial on Syria

 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, UNSC, SY, JO, UT, LE, IZ

 Sensitive

 1.(U) This is an action request. USUN is authorized to draw from elements in paragraph two at
 the August 30 UNSC ministerial on Syria.

 2. (SBU) BEGIN ELEMENTS:

 Thank you, Foreign Minister Fabius, for convening this important meeting. We gather at a
 somber hour—less than a week after some of the bloodiest days since the Syrian regime began
 its crackdown almost 18 months ago. The United States is outraged by the summary executions
 and shelling that killed hundreds of Syrians in Daraya late last week and by the aerial attacks on
 hospitals, bakeries, and breadlines in Aleppo. For a year and a half, this regime has waged a
 vicious, unrelenting campaign of terror and bloodshed against its suffering people. Bashar al-
 Asad and those who still stand by him are now responsible for the deaths of more than 20,000
 Syrians and the wounding of tens of thousands more. They have forced hundreds of thousands
 of civilians to flee for their lives.

 Despite the appalling environment on the ground and the clear obstruction by the Syrian
 government, we are working with others to minimize the agony of the Syrian people. The
 United Nations, international organizations, the United States, many countries around the world,
 and Syrian and other humanitarian organizations are rushing vital aid to hundreds of thousands
 of civilians in urgent need. We commend the humanitarian workers who are risking their own
 lives to save others, and we grieve for those who have made the ultimate sacrifice. All parties,
 especially the Syrian government, must allow safe, full, and unfettered access for humanitarian
 workers so they can save lives that today hang in the balance.

 The United States strongly supports the full and immediate implementation of the Syria
 Humanitarian Response Plan, which was agreed by OCHA and the Government of Syria. Less
 than half of the $180 million needed to address humanitarian needs within Syria has been •
 provided. The UN's Revised Syria Regional Response Plan, which assists neighboring countries
 hosting refugees, is underfunded as well. My government is pursuing every avenue to provide
 humanitarian relief to those affected by the violence in Syria. Just this year, the United States has
 provided nearly $82 million to the UN and other relief agencies for the Syria humanitarian crisis.
 Our aid has fed the hungry and bound up the wounds of Asad's victims. We are helping protect
 internally displaced people and refugees, working to save children from malnutrition and disease,
 and helping ensure adequate water, sanitation, and hygiene. Our assistance is also enabling
 humanitarian coordination and logistics support to relief agencies.

 We are deeply grateful to fellow member states that have already made important donations, and
 we urge all members to increase their contributions to meet the shortfalls. We also urge Member
 States to coordinate closely with the UN to avoid creating parallel humanitarian response
 systems. We appreciate especially the generosity of Turkey, Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq, and other
 countries that have opened their borders to civilians fleeing violence and persecution, and we
                             SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792129 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792129 Date: 11/30/2015




 SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

 stand ready to continue to provide support as needed. We call on all countries to facilitate safe
 passage for those seeking to flee. The United States is deeply concerned about the spillover of
 Syria's violence to its neighbors, especially Lebanon, where the Lebanese government and
 security forces are working to manage outbreaks of violence.

 But this is not, at root, a humanitarian crisis. It is a political crisis caused by the cruelty and
 callousness of the Asad regime. No amount of humanitarian assistance will end the bloodshed
 and suffering. That day will come only once Asad has departed and a peaceful, Syrian-led
 transition to democracy has begun. This remains our goal—and should be the goal of all nations
 of good will. We welcome the appointment of Joint Special Representative Brahimi and fully
 support his efforts to end the violence and pave the way for a political transition.

 In parallel, the United States and our partners will continue to work with the Syrian opposition
 and engage all segments of society to help the Syrian people achieve a government that
 represents all of its citizens, promotes their human rights, respects the rule of law, and responds
 to its people's aspirations. We are proud to help train civil society activists and to provide
 Syrians with equipment that lets them communicate securely with one another, to reach out to
 the outside world, and to document the regime's atrocities. We encourage the opposition's
 efforts to unite the population behind a common transition plan that offers a viable and safe
 future for all Syrians. We will continue to expand and intensify these efforts and we will not rest
 until the Syrian people are free to realize their aspirations to govern themselves and live without
 fear.

 Even as the conflict rages, we condemn in the strongest terms unlawful killings by any side. We
 cannot and will not turn away from atrocities and systematic violations of international law.
 Those responsible for massacres of civilians will be held accountable. We welcome pledges by
 Free Syrian Army leaders that forbid their soldiers from harming civilians, mistreating prisoners,
 or killing captured combatants, and we will watch to see that these admirable promises are
 implemented. We also reiterate our demand that the Syrian Government refrain from using or
 transferring any chemical or biological weapons. It is incumbent upon the Syrian Government to
 ensure the safety and security of all such weapons and stockpiles.

 Mr. President, we have heard today about the suffering of the innocent and the cruelty of the
 guilty. My country was founded on the belief that governments derive their just powers from the
 consent of the governed. The Asad regime has manifestly lost whatever consent, if any, it ever
 had. The question is not whether it will fall; the question is when, and at what price.

 The primary responsibility for ending the carnage rests with Asad and the clique around him. But
 the rest of the international community, and especially our fellow Council members, have
 responsibilities of their own. Unfortunately, a few members of the Security Council continue to
 prevent this body from responding effectively. This is reprehensible. Yet, even at this tragically
 late hour, it does not have to remain this way. The Syrian people fully understand which
 countries have rallied to their legitimate cause and which countries have protected a doomed and
 desperate regime. It may not be too late to chart a wiser course—one that limits the harm to
 regional security, staves off the risk of civil strife, and produces a new, responsible Syrian
 government that will defend all of its citizens. Indeed, one day not far away, Asad will lose his


                             SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFI JD
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792129 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792129 Date: 11/30/2015




 SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIhD

 bloody grip on the Syrian people and this Council will have to step up to help the Syrian people
 heal the wounds of war and rebuild their battered country.

 END ELEMENTS.




                            SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792129 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792129 Date: 11/30/2015




 SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

 Approved:            Acting Assistant Secretary Dean Pittman

 Drafter:             IO/UNP: Sarah Debbink, x-7-2641 or 202-957-2262

 Cleared:              IO/FO:       Raffi Gregorian
                       IO/UNP:      Tom Duffy
                       IO/UNP:      Reece Smyth                 ok
                       IO/HRH:      Elizabeth Campbell          ok
                       IO/HRH:      Wes Reisser                 ok
                       IO/PSC:      Arsalan Malik               ok
                       IO/PRF:      Maria Germano               ok
                       USUN/W:      S Lasensky/E Pelofsky       ok
                       USUN:        Curtis Ried                 ok
                       P:           Shawn Gray                  ok
                       D(B):        Luis Mendez                 ok
                       D(N):        Dan Holtsnider              ok
                       S(P):        Jeremy Shapiro              ok
                       NEA/ELA:     Dan Schneiderman            ok
                      'NEA/lPA:     Dave Soheir                 ok
                       NEA/ELA:     Jim Murphy                  ok
                       EUR/WE:      Chris McHone                ok
                       SEMEP:       Maher Bitar                 info
                       NS 5:        Stephen Pomper
                       DRL:         Arsalan Suleman             ok
                       PRM:         Jennifer Williams           ok
                       L:           Todd Buchwald               ok




                           SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792129 Date: 11/30/2015
