      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794454 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Friday, September 14, 2012 5:59 AM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Pretty powerful piece on standing up for diplomats



Fyi

    Original Message
From: Klevorick, Caitlin B
Sent: Friday, September 14, 2012 04:18 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Kennedy, Patrick F
Subject: Pretty powerful piece on standing up for diplomats

OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
In Libya and Elsewhere, Our Diplomats Deserve Better

By PRUDENCE BUSHNELL
Published: September 14, 2012
Falls Church, Va.
THERE is a black wall in a State Department lobby inscribed with the names of those who died while serving overseas.
Every time I passed that wall after Al Qaeda blew up two American Embassies in East Africa in 1998, I thought of the 12
American and 32 Kenyan friends and colleagues who died on my watch as ambassador. I thought of my own journey
that day down flights of stairs in the building next door to the embassy, after having been knocked out by the blast, of
the people who risked their lives to save others, and of how we carried on under horrendous circumstances.
Now every time I pass the black marble wall, I will think of Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens and his colleagues who
died after an attack on our consulate in Benghazi, Libya, this week.
Diplomats don't often make headlines until something horrible happens. Even then, it is policy and politics that get the
attention. We had barely learned of the attack before talking heads began to expound on Middle East policies and the
words administration officials used, or should have used, to uphold our national dignity. Where were the conversations
about the diplomats who were actually carrying out those policies in faraway, often dangerous places, the people who
take care of us despite the hardship and risk? Imagine what it must have been like trying to escape the raging fire in the
 Benghazi consulate or enduring hours of assault in the nearby annex waiting for relief from the Libyan government.
 Diplomacy is a dangerous profession. You cannot exert influence by whispering in diplomatic code to your government
counterparts behind closed doors. You do not spread American values - especially in places where passions are high,
governments fragile and guns plentiful - by remote control from Washington. You have to get out from behind the walls
and engage with people. We know this can put us in harm's way; our people in the Benghazi consulate knew it. And they
did their jobs anyway.
That is because, hokey as it sounds, the people who represent us overseas really do believe they can make a difference.
They confront violent behavior and strong passions with American leadership, smart power and peaceful means.
 We must make that work safer. The reasons for violence change with time and place but the human effects are the
 same. For two years before we were blown up in Nairobi, Kenya, my team and I fought ("nagged" was the word State
 Department colleagues used) to have security threats and vulnerabilities addressed. We were too close to the street, an
 easy target. Washington's assessment was that things were O.K. Anyway, I was told, there was no money for a more
 secure embassy. What was Washington's assessment of our consulate in Benghazi? We may not like the image of
 American diplomats working out of fortified boxes, but we cannot let them work in buildings that can be overrun by
 attackers. This is a lesson our government still hasn't learned since 1979 in Tehran.
 If the Benghazi tragedy traces the same journey we made from the rubble in Nairobi, heartfelt pronouncements will be
 made; the dead will be given due homage and then they will be buried. The press will alight on other stories. A
 Congressionally mandated accountability review board will determine what happened and what needs to be done to

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794454 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794454 Date: 11/30/2015




avoid such tragedies in the future. Easy fixes - changes to emergency action plans, minor security upgrades - will be
made; expensive and hard ones will not.
The Foreign Service is short on people, and those people are rushed into the field short on training. We build concrete
fortresses when we have to, but we don't invest in the mobile communications and security technology that would
protect diplomats when they leave the embassy, as they must. What kinds of technology, systems, training and
deployment do we need to get results through diplomacy in the 21st century? These are the difficult questions that will
remain unanswered, while diplomats disappear from public view once again. Until the next time someone dies - then we
see the same sorry response all over again.
But we can give meaning to this tragedy. What if President Obama and Mitt Romney exercised true leadership by
explaining to Americans, including the families and friends of those who died in Benghazi, what diplomacy is all about?
Why using words and deeds for peace is as important as using weapons. Why we value our diplomats and what we will
do to make their jobs easier, if we cannot guarantee their absolute security.
It is a stretch, I know. Far easier to add some more concrete, declare our responsibilities to diplomats complete and
move back to the fun stuff of making and debating policy, most of it domestic. The black wall will continue to
accumulate names, diplomats will continue to represent our country on the cheap and nothing much will change. Like
that scenario? If not, start demanding leadership. That is what Chris Stevens and his team were providing. Let's think
about them and reciprocate.
Prudence Bushnell is a former United States ambassador to Kenya and Guatemala




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794454 Date: 11/30/2015
