      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797933 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                   B6




From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                             Thursday, October 25, 2012 10:46 AM
To:                               'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                          Fw:



Pis print.

    Original Message ---
From: Verveer, Melanne S [mailto:VerveerMS@state.gov]
Sent: Saturday, October 20, 2012 11:20 AM Eastern Standard Time
To: H
Subject:

Guatemala has made more progress than I anticipated --- not that they don't have enormous challenges still to confront.
It has one of the worst records of femicide and violence against women anywhere in the world exacerbated by the
vestiges of the civil war, gang and narco power struggles, impunity and machismo. However, the combination of a strong
female vp who has the confidence of the president, an extraordinary female AG held over from the previous
administration (at the urging of the international community) and an impressive group of women, including the
president, on the Supreme Ct have joined forces to attack the rampant violence and especially femicide and gbv. What
they have achieved is heartening -- from implementing and enforcing the laws, establishing specialized courts --
including a new 24 hour court for gbv --, prosecuting large numbers of cases and giving hope to so many women that
they can now get justice in Guatemala (which is exactly what many survivors told me). The AG acknowledged that their
efforts in prosecuting GBV, war crimes and big corruption cases would not be possible w/o all the help from US --- for a
range of needs covering ballistics, forensics, legal cooperation and so much more. They confront herculean challenges
but if they can keep going, despite all the obstacles, they will give Guatemala a new image and,the people there a better
 life.

I was thinking that with the International Day to mark VAW at the end of Nov and Human Rights Day on Dec 10, maybe
you can mark these days with a State Dept event and honor the Guatemalan women officials who have demonstrated
great courage and commitment to protecting human rights and prosecuting perpetrators of violence.
It would give them invaluable support and validate their efforts. Besides, they all told me, in separate meetings --- what
an inspiration you are to them.
I was also thinking -- in light of human rights day -- that as you prepare to leave State, you could once again stress
"women's rights as human rights" at this time when violence against women from Malala's plight to the beheading in
Aghanistan to attacks on women's rights in Arab spring countries seems like a global epidemic.

When I showed up for my first meeting which was with the VP, I was told the President wanted to join the meeting. He
wanted to relate what they were doing on GBV, trafficking, women's economic empowerment, etc. It too was a hopeful
sign.

Vital Voices has a vibrant chapter in Guatemala which is doing great work with indigenous women in design, training and
markets to grow their incomes. They are finally getting good attention from the business leaders. I also saw Annabella
De Leon (who is in the VV play "Seven." She is no longer in Congress because the VP asked her to take on the job of
recorder of properties which has its share of corruption, so annabella's working with prosecutors in that arena and
continuing her battle against corruption. I also went to Norma Cruz's center for survivors of GBV. It is a remarkable
place. Your giving her the IWOC award has validated her leadership in significant ways and she remains very grateful.
Needless to say, the message from all of these women was "Please tell Hillary she keeps us going."




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797933 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797933 Date: 11/30/2015




Also, I learned that former president Arzu who was in power during your 1998 trip is now mayor of Giatemala City,
which has some of the cleanest streets I've seen anywhere!




I know you're going to Haiti on Monday. You may remember that years ago when you went to Haiti, you met with a
group of Haitian women who told you that after your speech at the VV conference in Uruguay, they decided to form a
new NGO "women in democracy." Well, they are still going strong - one of the most effective groups in Haiti and
strongly connected to W. I understand they have a place in the exhibition hall you will tour. Hopefully, you can give
them an extra minute or two.

Sorry this is so long but I'm leaving Guatemala realistic but buoyed, thanks to some great women who got law degrees
and now find themselves in positions where they can make a huge difference.

I saw CVC on BBC this morning from Nigeria. She did well and spoke lovingly about her mom.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797933 Date: 11/30/2015
