     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795391 Date: 11/30/2015

                                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                                   B6




From:                                 H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                                 Thursday, March 22, 2012 8:20 AM
To:                                   'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject                               Fw: Pat Summitt



Pis put on call list.


From: Barnett, Robert [mailto                                                                                                                B6
Sent: Wednesday, March 21, 2012 04:56 PM
To: H
Subject: Pat Summit

Below is the NYT article with the latest status report. Pat's assistant, Katie Wynn, is at                She can schedule a
call with your office around tournament practice schedules. Pat's cell is                  They play Saturday for the Elite 8.
If they win, they play Monday for the Final Four. Thank you for doing this. I know it will mean a lot to her.



From: Turner, Kelly
To: Barnett, Robert
Sent: Wed Mar 21 10:15:27 2012
Subject: Summitt NYT Story

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/16/sportsincaabasketbal1/pat-summitts-health-gives-tournament-different -feel-for-
ladv-vols.html? r=1&scp=2&sq=pat%20summitt&st=cse


The Usual High Expectations Mingle With Uncertainty
By JERTO. LONGMAN

KNOXVILLE, Tenn. — Pat Summitt plays games and puzzles on her iPad to help her remain alert. Her sense of humor remains acute,
along with her ambition to win a ninth national championship. But anyone who has been around her can sense inevitable changes seven
months after Summitt revealed that she had symptoms of early onset Alzheimer's disease.

Once she was so fiery that she pounded her hands on the court and had to have her rings re-rounded. As was evident at practice
Wednesday, she now appears quieter, more subdued.

As Tennessee prepares to open the N.C.AA. women's tournament Saturday against Tennessee-Martin, Summitt's alma mater, her
coaching role has diminished. A basketball coach is not unlike an air-traffic controller who must track the movements of io players on
the court at once. Summitt can no longer do this, her assistants said. So she prefers to instruct one player at a time, while her longtime
assistant Holly Warlick has in effect become head coach.

The usual postseason excitement at Tennessee is tinged with the somber possibility that Summitt's next defeat might be her last, that
her unsurpassed career might end prematurely at age 59, cut short by the inexorable progress of dementia. Nothing has been decided,
and there are indications she may want to return. There is also a feeling that this tournament might be more about departure than
arrival.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795391 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795391 Date: 11/30/2015




"It's heartbreaking," said Alberta Auguste, a guard on Tennessee's last championship team, in 2008, who has joined former and current
players in making a memory book of letters and photographs for Summitt. "Something like that happens to someone you love, it rips
your heart out. You just try to be there for her."


While Summitt remains vital to her team, she has begun to withdraw, insulated by university officials. A great storyteller, open with the
news media, Summitt routinely invited cameras into the locker room to record speeches that could be inspiring and blistering. Now, she
speaks to reporters once a week, but declines one-on-one interviews and live on-air interviews, except for a postgame radio show.
Warlick handles the postgame news conferences.


Sometimes, Summitt does not enter the huddle during timeouts; when she does, she typically defers to Warlick. Summitt also engages
referees less frequently, although her rare eruptions draw a loudly appreciative and nostalgic response from Tennessee fans. University
officials have expressed some frustration with television coverage, saying that cameras seem to linger on moments of apparent
detachment.


Last month, a prized Tennessee recruit for 2013 said that she was having second thoughts, citing uncertainty about Summitt's coaching
future. The local newspaper had written about Summitt's possible successors, as if her departure were inevitable.


Typically resolute, Summitt has said that she would not hold a pity party for herself. She wears a wristband that says "Fierce Courage"
and still possesses her trademark wit. Sometimes at meals, one of her assistants will ask if she picked up the check. Summitt will reply,
"Don't ask me, I've got memory problems."


And even after eight national titles and 1,095 victories over 38 seasons, more wins than any male or female college basketball coach,
defeat continues to sting. "Losing is worse than dementia," Maria Cornelius, a local sportswriter, said Summitt told her.


Since announcing her condition, Summitt has sought to raise both awareness about Alzheimer's and money toward an eventual cure.
She has put a recognizable face on an illness that affects 5.4 million Americans and has perhaps helped remove some of its stigma.
Public support for her has been widespread. In December, when the Lady Vols played in New York, a woman approached Summitt in
Macy's and said, "Can I give you a hug?"


Debby Jennings, who has been a spokeswoman for Summitt for 35 years, said that Summitt had indicated a desire to coach next season.
"Basketball has always been her true north," Jennings said.


At practice Wednesday, Summitt was noncommittal. "I haven't even made any decision about that," she said. "I'm just trying to win a
championship."


When pressed about returning, she added: "I haven't suggested that," and "I love the game. Whether I'm here at U.T., I may or may not
coach. It is what it is. I just want to get another championship for this group."


Later, after a well-wisher expressed hope for Summitt's return, she laughed and said, "I hope they let me come back"


Tennessee officials have said they want to do what is best for Summitt and the university. Dave Hart, Tennessee's athletic director,
called Summitt the embodiment of her sport but said the university's attention was focused on the N.CA.A. tournament.


"We haven't delved into anything else," Hart said.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795391 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795391 Date: 11/30/2015




When the pairings were announced Monday night, Baylor Coach Kim Mulkey seemed wistful that her top-ranked Bears (34-0) were
seeded first in the Des Moines Region and that Tennessee (24-8) was seeded second. A former point guard, Mulkey played for Summitt
in the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics. With its 6-foot-8 center Brittney Griner, Baylor has dominated the Lady Vols. Two years ago, Baylor
ended Tennessee's season in a regional matchup. Now, more than a season may hang in the balance.


"I didn't want to see Pat Summitt again," Mulkey said in an interview on ESPN. "I have so much respect for her and the program."


Nothing about this season has been normal for Tennessee. The Lady Vols have played inconsistently, delivering a blowout victory over
Kentucky, a fellow No. 2 seed in the N.CAA. tournament, and winning the Southeastern Conference tournament for the 16th time. But
Tennessee also experienced embarrassing defeats against the top seeds Stanford and Notre Dame. Failure to reach the Final Four for a
fourth consecutive season would bring the longest drought of Summitt's peerless career.


Sometimes, Tennessee's players have underachieved. Sometimes, the complicated coaching arrangement has led to awkward
communication on the bench. At one point, several seniors approached Summitt and asked that her muted voice become more
familiarly insistent.


"When you hear that voice echoing around the floor, it's amazing," the senior star Glory Johnson said. "It's something you miss, but it
comes out once in a while. It makes you go harder."


While Warlick and her fellow assistant coaches Mickie DeMoss and Dean Lockwood have assumed added responsibility, they are
working under one-year contracts with little job security. Warlick, a former Tennessee player who has been an assistant to Summitt for
27 years, said her most difficult challenge had been to avoid giving the impression of a palace coup.


"It's been really hard for me to get up and openly coach a team on the sideline with Pat sitting there," Warlick said. "I don't want the
perception to be that I'm taking over and I'm doing this in front of Pat."


On Sunday, John Adams, the sports editor for The Knoxville News Sentinel, wrote: "You know the program won't continue as is. It
would be too much to ask" of Summitt and her staff "to go through another season like this one."


Adams suggested that Warlick be named head coach for next season. This would allow Summitt to remain with the team in some
manner as long as her health permitted.


Tennessee "will have to make a head-coaching change," Adams wrote. "But it can keep the staff and coach together. Summitt deserves
that much."


On Wednesday, Warlick said she would be willing to continue the current arrangement another season, saying, "I'm all about being
loyal." Asked if she thought Summitt would return, Warlick said, "My expectation is she'll be here, but it's her decision and I'll support
her Rio percent."


Meanwhile, Summitt and her Lady Vols are six victories from another championship.


"It's hard seeing her go through this," Johnson said. "We want to be successful for her. If that's not enough motivation, I don't know
what is. If we win, I'd put her on my back and do a victory lap."

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795391 Date: 11/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795391 Date: 11/30/2015




NOTICE:

This message is intended for the use of the individual or entity
to which it is addressed and may contain information that is privileged,
confidential and exempt from disclosure under applicable law. If the reader
of this message is not the intended recipient or the employee or agent
responsible for delivering this message to the intended recipient, you are
hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution or copying of this
communication is strictly prohibited. If you have received this communication
in error, please notify us immediately by reply or by telephone
(call us collect at (202) 434-5000) and immediately delete this message
and all its attachments.




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795391 Date: 11/30/2015
