UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792954 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL
 Draft Op Ed

 Keep Nobel-Prize Winning Bank Independent

 With so many banks making headlines, it is easy to overlook the news about Bangladesh's Nobel Peace
 Prize-winning Grameen Bank. This bank does not need a bailout. Quite the contrary, it is prospering as it
  continues to provide life-changing microloans to millions of desperately poor people. These very
 borrowers also run the bank, because they are the majority owners. But the Bangladeshi government is
 now on the verge of taking over this international symbol of equal economic opportunity. We must urge
  them to reconsider.

  If Grameen Bank's borrowers lose control, the bank's most important feature - the user as owner - will
  be lost. This is a model that needs to be duplicated, not changed. With 30 years of experience in
  Bangladesh and around the world, Grameen delivers exceptional repayment rates (97%) while vastly
  improving the lives of its members. Loans are given only to start or expand businesses, and the mostly
  female members join as groups of five who provide mutual support and accountability. The bank
  currently has 8.3 million borrowers. It is also a life-line to millions of Bangladeshi's during national
  disasters and a potent force for peace and for the improvement of the status of women. It has also
  supported education, community hygiene initiatives, affordable healthcare and better nutrition.

  The "Grameen Method" has been successfully replicated across the world and in 2006 Grameen Bank's
  very poor women owners shared the Nobel Peace Prize with its founder and then Managing Director
  Professor Muhammad Yunus for their work eliminating poverty. Yunus and some of the borrowers
  accepted the Peace Prize together. The impact of Grameen has been felt all over the globe. According
  to one report, in 2010 137.5 million very poor families had microloans. Assuming an average of five
  persons per family, these loans affected more than 687 million people — more than the combined
  populations of the European Union and Russia.

  But Grameen's signature process is that it is governed by the very poor it seeks to help. The idea that
  poor people can run their own Bank, let alone help raise themselves from abject poverty, has been
  revolutionary. If it takes control of the bank, the Bangladeshi government will be sending a powerful
  message about its view of the poor's abilities. This could also create a negative image of the country's
  internal affairs and economic environment.

  Bangladesh's Grameen Bank is 97% owned by its borrowers, who elect 9 members of the 12 member
  board of directors. The government of Bangladesh controls just 3% of the board and appoints 3
  directors, including the non-executive chairman of the Bank. This governance structure has worked well
  for almost 30 years, as evidenced the bank's continued growth. More importantly, this arrangement has
  protected and served the rights and interests of its member owners since the bank's founding.

  The recent changes threaten to take the bank out of the borrowers' control. In May 2011, the central
  bank of Bangladesh made Muhammad Yunus step down as chief executive of Grameen Bank. He has led
  the bank since he founded it. Early this month, Bangladesh's cabinet passed a proposal that allows the




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792954 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792954 Date: 11/30/2015




 government-appointed chairman to select Grameen Bank's new managing director. That choice should
  be made by the entire borrower-dominated board.

  What are the reasons for this takeover, what will be lost, and how can it be prevented? To the world at
 large, Grameen Bank is more than just another financial institution. It is a symbol of humankind's ability
 to rise above our circumstances. The world is watching carefully. As Bangladesh stakes its place in the
  international economy, it is vital to consider the international implications of Grameen Bank's ownership
  structure. A government takeover of the bank would be a symbolic blow to poor people all around the
  world and especially women. It would further slow foreign direct investment in Bangladesh.

  Instead, Bangladesh has a unique opportunity to reaffirm it is one of the world's leading innovators in
  economic development. Show that in Bangladesh, even the poor have the right to manage their own
  institutions, especially one that affords them economic sufficiency even during times of great need. The
  Grameen bank should continue to be a unique competitive advantage for Bangladesh, attracting global
  attention and investment. The country needs to let it keep thriving independently to reap the rewards.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792954 Date: 11/30/2015
