      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793935 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL



From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Friday, September 7, 2012 2:31 PM
To:
Subject:                         FW: Family Life According to the Brotherhood




From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Friday, September 07, 2012 2:07 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Family Life According to the Brotherhood

   c New pork runes


September 4, 2012



Family Life According to the Brotherhood
By MONA EL-NAGGAR


CAIRO — Women are erratic and emotional, and they make good wives and mothers — but never leaders or
rulers. That, at least, is what Osama Abou Salama, a professor of botany at Cairo University and a member of
the Muslim Brotherhood, told young men and women during a recent premarital counseling class.

What was striking, though, was the absence of any reaction. None of the 30 people in the class so much as
winced.

"A woman," Mr. Abou Salama said, "takes pleasure in being a follower and finds ease in obeying a husband
who loves her."

Since the Brotherhood rose to power and one of its former leaders was elected president, much of the
uncertainty over its social agenda has centered on its plans for women. Will the Brotherhood try to impose a
conservative dress code? Will it try to bar women from certain fields of work? Will its leaders promote
segregation at schools?

But in a country where a vast majority of women already cover their hair and voluntarily separate from men in
coed environments, for most people — women included — those questions are largely academic.

Mr. Abou Salama's class makes that case. "Can you, as a woman, take a decision and handle the consequences
of your decision?" he asked.

A number of women shook their heads even before Mr. Abou Salama provided his answer: "No. But men can.
And God created us this way because a ship cannot have more than one captain."



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793935 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793935 Date: 11/30/2015




More than any other political group in Egypt, the Brotherhood is fluent in the dialect of the masses. By
upholding patriarchal and traditional values about a woman's place in society, it garners popular support, builds
political capital and reinforces social conservatism.

"The woman is the symbol of a moral platform through which easy gains can be made," said Hania Sholkamy,
an anthropologist and an associate professor at the Social Research Center at the American University in Cairo.
"Those who deprive women of their rights, limit their freedom or place them in a subordinate position believe
that the political cost of doing so is very low."

The lectures of Mr. Abou Salama, who has raised three daughters, are part of a four-week workshop called
"Bride and Groom Against Satan" and sponsored by Family House, a charity financed by the Brotherhood. It is
one of several Brotherhood efforts that have grown since the revolution, reflecting, as much as promoting, the
religious values that define a large segment of society. Among its many activities, Family House offers financial
support to struggling households, provides a matchmaking service and sponsors mass weddings for low-income
couples.

"This is part of the reformist methodology of the Muslim Brotherhood," said Walaa Abdel Halim, the Family
House coordinator who organizes the youth counseling workshop. "Shaping a righteous individual leads to
shaping a righteous family, and by shaping a righteous family, you get a righteous society that can choose a
righteous leader."

Those broader efforts at shaping a conservative religious society, played out over decades by the Brotherhood,
were seen as partly responsible for helping elect Mohamed Morsi president in June. At the time, Mr. Morsi,
who resigned from the Brotherhood after taking office, gave assurances that he would protect the rights of
women and include them in decision making. Less than three months into his presidency, though, Mr. Morsi has
not fulfilled a campaign promise to appoint a woman as a vice president. Instead, he named a team of 21 senior
aides and advisers last week that included three women.

One of those three, Omaima Kamel, a medical professor at Cairo University and a member of the Brotherhood
since 1981, makes it clear that she is not about to press society to change attitudes about women.

"Let's face it, if your work took you away from your fundamental duties at home and if your success came at
the cost of your family life and the stability of your children, then you are the one who stands to lose," she said
by telephone. "A woman can work as much as she wants, but within the framework of our religious
restrictions."

Many analysts and critics of the Brotherhood see that kind of philosophy, one that gives women independence
so long as they maintain their traditional obligations, as effectively constraining women to established gender
roles.

"There is an absence of a well-defined vision, so they use words like 'religious restrictions,' "said Ibrahim el-
Houdaiby, a researcher of Islamic movements and a former member of the Brotherhood. "O.K., sure, so what
exactly are those restrictions, so we can know them and figure out how to deal with them? As long as we don't
define what those limits are, then we can expand them to the point where women, practically speaking, cannot
work."

In Mr. Morsi's political program, called "The Renaissance," there is an emphasis on a woman's "authentic role
as wife, mother and purveyor of generations." The program then makes recommendations to safeguard family
life; foremost among them are premarital classes for youths.

Free from the restrictions of the government of Hosni Mubarak, which outlawed the Brotherhood, the
movement's social outreach programs have mushroomed since Mr. Morsi's election. In less than a year, Family
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793935 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793935 Date: 11/30/2015




House expanded from a single office to 18 branches around Egypt and is developing a plan to encourage all
couples to attend.

At the group's headquarters, in the densely populated Cairo neighborhood of Nasr City, Mr. Abou Salama
walked into a spacious room where the front seats were for men and the back seats were for women. He
lectured on qualities to seek in a partner, getting acquainted under parental supervision, dealing with in-laws
and consummating marriage. In his social paradigm, understanding that the woman was created to be an
obedient wife and mother and that the man was created to fend for his family holds the secret to a happy
marriage.

"I want you to be the flower that attracts a bee to make honey, not the trash that attracts flies and dirt," Mr.
Abou Salama said as the women listened intently.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793935 Date: 11/30/2015
