      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772793 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Sunday, June 17, 2012 8:13 PM
To:
Subject:                          FW: Egyptian Presidential Election Sitrep - June 17, 2400



Latest from Egypt below.


From: Dibble, Elizabeth L
Sent: Sunday, June 17, 2012 8:02 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J; S_SpecialAssistants
Subject: Fw: Egyptian Presidential Election Sitrep - June 17, 2400




From: Caudill, Mark A
Sent: Sunday, June 17, 2012 07:50 PM
To: Egyptian Election Reports
Subject: FW: Egyptian Presidential Election Sitrep - June 17, 2400

FYI


SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: SMART Core
Sent: Monday, June 18, 2012 1:38 AM
To: Caudill, Mark A



                                                   UNCLASSIFIED
                                                          SBU




MRN:                           12 CAIRO 1208
Date/DTG:                      Jun 17, 2012 / 172335Z JUN 12
From:                          AMEMBASSY CAIRO
Action:                        WASHDC, SECSTATE IMMEDIATE
E.O.:                          13526
 TAGS:                         PGOV, PREL, KPAO, KDEM, KMPI, EG
 Captions:                     SENSITIVE, SI PDIS

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772793 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772793 Date: 11/30/2015




Reference:                  A) 12 CAIRO 1206
                            B) 12 CAIRO 1204
                            C) 12 CAIRO 1190
                            D) 12 CAIRO 1188
Subject:                    Egyptian Presidential Election Sitrep - June 17, 2400


1.(SBU) Summary: As the polls closed in day two of Egypt's presidential elections the Supreme Council of
the Armed Forces (SCAF) announced that it had issued a supplement to the March 2011 Constitutional
Declaration. The new language will be officially released on June 18, but a leaked copy is circulating in the
media. The reported "Supplemental Declaration" indicates the SCAF will relinquish executive power and adds
language giving the president, with SCAF approval, the right to declare war. It preserves SCAF control over its
own affairs and indicates the SCAF will maintain legislative powers until a new parliament is
elected. Contrary to expectations, it preserves the current composition of the Constituent Assembly, but adds
that should there be conflict the SCAF may unilaterally name a new Assembly and gives the Supreme
Constitutional Court (SCC) the power to arbitrate differences. The amended Declaration requires a new
constitution be drafted within three months of its formation and that a referendum endorsing the new
constitution take place one month before a new round of parliamentary elections.

2. (SBU) Summary Continued: Voting on the second and final day of Egypt's presidential elections has
concluded and polls closed peacefully at 2200. Turnout on day two generally appeared higher after sunset,
however Presidential Election Commission (PEC) members estimated turnout peaked at 40-50
percent. According to election "witness" accounts the counting process was underway as soon as the polls
closed. The counting process continues to proceed without incident. There were reports of some violations on
day two. However, it does not appear that any are likely to affect the outcome. Official results are now
expected Thursday, June 21. Both campaigns have told the media they believe their candidate is in the
lead. As of this submission, only 2.5 million or so votes out of 20 million have been counted, with Morsy in
the lead. End Summary.

Supplemental Constitutional Declaration Issued

3. (SBU) On June 17 the SCAF announced it had issued a supplemental Constitutional Declaration. The
document, now unofficially posted on the Youm 7 website, includes six new articles that clarify key aspects of
the transition. It is expected to be formally published in the Official Gazette on June 18. We so far have been
unable to verify key elements. The Declaration does not significantly amend the powers of the new president,
giving him the almost all executive powers currently accorded to the SCAF under Article 56 of the
Constitutional Declaration of March 2011. Among these are initiating legislation, approving public policies
and the budget, calling the parliament into session and ending such sessions, issuing and vetoing laws,
appointing and relieving ministers, and pardoning or reducing criminal penalties. However it notes that the
SCAF, in its current formation, will manage all military affairs, including military appointments and its budget,
until a new constitution is drafted.

4. (SBU) The new civilian president has also been given the right to declare war, upon SCAF approval, and
adds language allowing the president to call on the SCAF in case of "internal disturbance" to protect vital state
institutions. The amended Declaration clarifies that the SCAF will retain all legislative powers until a new
parliament is elected. According to the provisions posted online, Egypt's new president will swear his oath of
office in front of the Supreme Constitutional Court (SCC) and not the People's Assembly as originally drafted.

5. (SBU) The document circulated by the media also provides that the current Constituent Assembly, as elected
by the now dissolved People's Assembly, will stay in place as long it is able to function. If not, the amended
Declaration allows the SCAF to compose a new Assembly within a week that will be representative of all
currents in society. It also requires that the Assembly draft a new constitution within three months (half the

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772793 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772793 Date: 11/30/2015




time set out in the original declaration) starting from date of its composition. A constitutional referendum will
take place within 15 days of the constitution's completion and parliamentary elections one month after a public
referendum approving the constitution.

6. (SBU) The Declaration also gives the SCC the authority to resolve differences raised during the constitution
drafting process. Specifically, it allows that if the new president, the SCAF or one-fifth of the members of the
Assembly believe any draft article in the constitution runs contrary to the revolution or its aims, the interests of
the country, or constitutional principles set out in previous constitutions, either of the three have the right to
request the Assembly "review" the article. If after 15 days there is no consensus, the SCC will review the
article and issue its ruling within seven days. The new language in the declaration notes that any decision
taken by the SCC on those articles is binding on all parties.

Sunset Sees Numbers Increase

7. (SBU) Although voter turnout remained highly variable depending on the polling station, larger numbers of
Egyptians were seen heading to the polls after sunset offered some relief from the day's sweltering heat, with
polling stations remaining open until 10:00pm. Government public-service announcements ran throughout the
day to persuade citizens to exercise their franchise. Local media reported relatively few voters seemed
enthusiastic about the choice between Morsy and Shafik but that most nevertheless were confident in the
process and the importance of making their voices heard. "All is good and safe," a plainclothes police officer
told a visiting Embassy team at a countryside polling station near Alexandria.

8. (SBU) Overall, however, voter turnout for the run-off appears to have been low. PEC Vice President Maher
Al Beheiry told Al Jazeera Al Mubashara that 40 percent of eligible voters participated. Observers Without
Borders, echoing reports from Egyptian civil society organizations participating in the Egyptian Coalition for
Election Observation (ECEO, led by Hafez Abu Seada of the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights),
estimated that turnout had reached 42 percent by 1800. Workers at several polling stations in downtown Cairo
estimated that perhaps 50 percent of voters had cast their ballots by closing time. Voters in Manial, a Cairo
district where Morsy is popular, told an Embassy team that turnout there reached 60 percent.

Peaceful Closures and Counting Underway

9. (SBU) There have been no reported incidents of violence or other problems associated with the closing of
the polls at 2200. Counting procedures began at individual polling stations immediately after they closed. Poll
workers, in the presence of security personnel and accredited "witnesses," opened the ballot boxes and began
manual tabulation of the paper ballots.

10.(SBU) According to National Council of Human Rights Secretary General Mahmoud Karem, once the
contents of a box are tabulated, a report is prepared and signed by the senior judge of the polling place and
witnessed by another poll worker (often another judge) and the senior security forces officer present (usually
an Army officer). Karem said the reports are bundled with the ballots and placed back into the ballot boxes,
which are re-sealed and sent to the central tabulation site in each district. There the reports are added together
with those from other polling stations to arrive at a final district-wide tally, which then is transmitted to the
PEC. The ballots themselves remain under guard at each district's central tabulation site in case a recount is
required.

11. (SBU) According to Embassy officers accompanying Ambassador Patterson and Representative David
Dreier at polling places, the vote-counting process is proceeding apace, despite each paper ballot being
painstakingly smoothed flat before being handed to poll workers for verification. Security at each site is
heavy. In one polling station in the Abdeen neighborhood of Cairo, the number of invalidated ballots was


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772793 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772793 Date: 11/30/2015




high, with some voters having scrawled insults instead of checking either box. Abdeen voters endorsed failed
candidate Hamdeen Sabahi in round one of the elections.

Some Violations

12.(SBU) Earlier today, PEC Chairman Farouk Sultan told the independent daily "Al Youm Saba" that pre-
marked ballots (for Morsy) had been discovered in Beni Suef, Fayoum and Qena. The ECEO has documented
incidents of pre-marked ballots (for Morsy) surfacing in Sharkeya and Fayoum, vote-buying (for Morsy) in
Minya and Gharbeya, and group transport in Cairo and Damietta (for Morsy voters) as well as in Minya (for
Shafik voters). Freedom and Justice Party youths with laptop computers with Morsy's picture as the
screensaver were reported by the Egyptian Mission for Monitoring the Presidential Election (another civil
society coalition) offering to help voters find their polling stations. The independent daily "Al Masrawy"
reported that a Ministry of Interior is close to arresting the persons responsible for importing the "disappearing
ink" pens.

 13.(SBU) There has been little violence today. According to the One World Foundation (a youth leadership
'NGO), a gunman opened fire near a polling station in Rafah, North Sinai, prompting officials to close it for
 several hours. There were no reported injuries and the gunman remains at-large. Government-affiliated daily
 "Al Abram," reported that several polling stations near Bir al-Abd in North Sinai were closed after clashes
 between Morsy and Shafik supporters in which one person was injured. A police officer was shot and
 wounded outside a polling station in Sharqeya, according to an "Al Abram" text alert, no additional details
 have been reported and it is not clear whether the incident is election related.

PEC Press Conference

14. (SBU) During a press conference at 2000, PEC Secretary General Hatem Bagato reviewed some of the
violations that have been reported to the PEC "situation room." He said the most serious issue occurred in the
Mashiet Nasser nieghnorhood of Cairo on the morning of June 17, where several people were caught with a
laptop computer and CDs containing "information about military training in preparation for aggressive attacks
and violence" in case of a Shafik victory. Bagato added that the individuals possessed iron rods, electric-shock
devices, voter lists, and 10 cell phones when they were arrested.

U.S. "Witnesses" Welcomed--Mostly

13.(SBU) Ambassador Patterson and Representative David Dreier continued to be welcomed by voters at
polling stations in and around Cairo. Local media commented favorably on the U.S. effort to witness the
election, noting especially Representative Dreier's use of Arabic terms and his saying "long live Egypt" at a
polling center in Cairo's Qasr El Nil district.

14.(SBU) The Embassy teams that fanned out across Egypt to witness the elections were also well received,
even where voters struggled to muster enthusiasm for either presidential candidate. However, at a polling
center in the poor Dar El Salaam neighborhood of Cairo, a judge expressed suspicion about the visiting
Embassy team's interest in Egypt's elections and opined that "America hates Arabs."

Youth Activists Nervous About a Close Race

15.(SBU) Two youth activists, each of whom led a revolutionary group that participated in the 2011
revolution, told us they believed the race for president is close. They echoed others who called the election an
impossible choice. While one decided to boycott, the other said he voted for Morsy. Both expressed
trepidation concerning the outcome no matter who wins. They feared a Shafik victory would produce a strong


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772793 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772793 Date: 11/30/2015




reaction from the Muslim Brotherhood (MB) or frustrated youth followed by a crackdown from security
services.

16.(SBU) The activists believed a Morsy win would result in a "political battle" between the new president
and the "deep state," adding that the security services might provoke violence to justify a crackdown. The two
told us that they and other activists have been meeting with the MB during the past four days in order to reach
consensus on how to move forward after the election.

Early Results

17.(SBU) Early Egyptian media reports depicted a seesaw battle with neither candidate appearing to have a
decisive lead. Morsy reportedly had the lead in Matrouh, Fayoum, Sohag, Minya, Beni Suef, Suez and
Ismailia. Shafik was said to be ahead in Sharqeya, Qalyoubeya, Dakahleya and Luxor. At the time of this
submission, slightly more than 2.5 million votes have been counted (out of approximately 20 million) and
Morsy is in the lead. Population centers of Cairo and Giza have not reported in yet.


Signature:                  Patterson


Drafted By:                 CAIRO:Caudill, Mark A
Cleared By:                 ECPO:Cutrona, Aimee
Approved By:                Exec:Patterson, Anne W
Released By:                CAIRO:Caudill, Mark A
Info:                        SECDEF WASHINGTON DC ROUTINE; NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON
                             DC ROUTINE; HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL ROUTINE; ARAB LEAGUE
                             COLLECTIVE ROUTINE; ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE ROUTINE


Action Post:
Dissemination Rule:          Released Copy




                                               UNCLASSIFIED
                                                   SBU




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772793 Date: 11/30/2015
