     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792643 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                      RELEASE IN PART B6


From:                          Sidney Blumenthal <sbwhoeop                                                           B6
Sent:                          Sunday, October 14, 2012 12:25 AM
To:
Subject:                       H: last debate memo... Sid




                                     CONFIDENTIAL


                                             October 13, 2012



For: Ron Klain
From: Sidney Blumenthal
Re: Who is the turnaround artist?


   1. Romney's insistence that the economy is in steep decline as a result of Obama's policies is more than
      central to his political argument—it is at the heart of his identity in this campaign. Romney's
      background as a private equity turnaround specialist merges in his sensibility with his deeply held
      Mormon belief of himself as the chosen son of his faith to be a redeemer of the country. He must be the
      turnaround man.
   2. Romney's thinking is utterly schematic. He debates as though making a Power-Point presentation
      without the slides. This, too, derives from his very particular business background.
   3. Romney's argument, method and even identity are all bound up in his key point—that he is the
      turnaround man—and can be crushed by refuting it. Obama should assert that the economy is now in
      turnaround, cite the 7.8 unemployment and other relevant statistics, observe that Romney has admitted
      he was "completely wrong" on the 47 percent, underscore that Romney is "completely wrong" on the
      true state of the economy, that he has the data "completely wrong," is operating from false premises, and
      that his approach would hurt people and hurt the economy. Obama is the turnaround artist; Romney
      would be the underminer of the turnaround. He's got the turnaround, just as he admitted on the 47
      percent, "completely wrong."
   4. Who says so? Why none other than the Financial Times and the Brookings Institution in their Global
      Index, which reported last week that the US is "the brightest spot in the world economy." This
      nonpartisan, independent expert source should be cited to: establish that the economy is in turnaround as
      a result of Obama's policies and that Romney's entire case is factually challenged, based on faulty
      assumptions and misleading data.
   5. Romney's closing Power-Point slide is that Obama's economic policies are making the US like Europe,
      even Greece. But, once again, he has it "completely wrong." The Financial Times/Brookings Global
      Index reports that it is Obama's policies that are working and that precisely the sort of austerity policies
      imposed in Europe—which are in fact like those advocated by Romney!—are counter-productive.
      Romney is the one pushing the bad austerity medicine from Europe that would poison the recovery and
       end the turnaround. Let's keep turning it around, not go back!
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792643 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792643 Date: 11/30/2015




http://www.nationalmemo.com/global-index-praises-us-as-sole-bright-spot-in-sluggish-world-economy/

Economy
Global Index Praises U.S. As 'Sole Bright Spot' In Sluggish World Economy
October 8th, 2012 11:30 pm Joe Conason
Unemployment is still too high, income is still too low, and the recovery is still too slow – but the United States
is faring considerably better than other developed nations against the threat of a renewed recession and remains
"the brightest spot in the world economy," according to the latest indicators tracked by the Financial Times and
the Brookings Institution. Known as TIGER, or Tracking Indices for the Global Economic Recovery, the
comprehensive data report compiled by the London-based business daily and the centrist Washington think
tank provides a factual context for the U.S. presidential debate.
Favorable comparison with other nations, in a faltering world economy, may reinforce President Obama's
argument that his policies are working despite jobs statistics that remain deeply troubling. Moreover, criticism
of Obama by Republican Mitt Romney may well be regarded as less credible if the U.S. economy is in fact
performing better than every other developed country — especially those pursuing the austerity policies
advocated by Romney and his running mate, Rep. Paul Ryan.
Combining measurements of real economic activity, financial data, and surveys of business and consumer
confidence, the TIGER index employs advanced statistical methodology to illustrate the simultaneous
movements of indicators that tend to be measured very differently in various countries. According to the
Financial Times, which featured the latest report on its Monday front page under the headline "US defies threat
of global recession":
The TIGER index shows momentum in the global economy dissipating despite action by the Federal Reserve,
European Central Bank, Bank of Japan and Bank of England to boost the recovery. Only in the US – on the
brink of the presidential election – has economic momentum remained reasonably robust.
"The global economic recovery is on the ropes, battered by political conflicts within and across countries, lack
of decisive policy actions, and governments' inability to tackle deep-seated problems such as unsustainable
public finances that are stifling growth," said Eswar Prasad, a Brookings senior fellow and creator of the
TIGER index. "The US economy remains the sole bright spot, with economic activity, employment and
financial markets all showing unexpected although still modest strength."
Worldwide demand remains too feeble to promote a strong and steady global recovery, despite continuing
efforts by the central banks in the U.S., Europe, and Asia — and the TIGER data compiled from the Group of
20 nations shows worrisome deterioration. It was released on the eve of the annual meetings of the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund in Tokyo, where finance ministers and central bankers will discuss how to
stimulate growth and forestall another recession. The Financial Times also quoted leaked IMF data indicating
that global growth projections for this year will be revised downward, from 3.4 percent to 3.3 percent, and for
next year from 3.9 percent to 3.6 percent.
The Brookings website includes an interactive world map of TIGER indices here and a full analysis of the data
here.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792643 Date: 11/30/2015
