      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792134 Date: 11/30/2015

                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL




From:                               Reines, Philippe I <reinesp@state.gov>
Sent:                               Sunday, August 5, 2012 2:08 PM
To:
Cc:                                 Hanley, Monica R; Shapiro, Andrew J
Subject:                            Nicole Wilett


With all the hubbub I forgot to mention that Nicole Wilett - who was a State Dept PMF in your DC Senate office working
for Andrew - is now stationed here working for Don Gips. She previously did time on the NSS, and in AF. She got
married a couple weeks ago, the announcement is below. I included the link so you can see what she looks like. She's
brunette, long straight hair, pretty, wearing high black boots. I'm sure we'll be seeing her in the next couple of days and
I'll point her out to you. but FYI in case you see her or she comes up to you tonight.



http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/22/fashion/weddings/nicole-wilett-colin-thomas-jensen-weddings.html

Nicole Wilett, Colin Thomas-Jensen

Nicole Ann Wilett and Colin Stuart Thomas-Jensen were married Saturday in West Tisbury, Mass., on Martha's Vineyard.
The Rev. Judith E. Meyer, a Unitarian-Universalist minister, officiated at Nip n Tuck Farm.

The bride, 34, will use the surname Wilett-Jensen. She is the senior adviser and chief of staff at the United States
Embassy in Pretoria, South Africa. From 2010 until January, she was a director for African affairs at the White House,
where she was a member of the national security staff. She graduated from Syracuse and received a master's degree in
public and international affairs from Indiana University.

She is the daughter of Felicity A. Nussbaum of Santa Monica, Calif., and J. Rene Wilett of Syracuse. The bride's father is a
psychologist in private practice in Syracuse. Her mother is a distinguished professor of English at the University of
California, Los Angeles.

The groom, 37, is a special adviser to Princeton Lyman, President Obama's envoy for Sudan and South Sudan. Mr.
Thomas-Jensen is working from the embassy in Pretoria. He graduated from Pomona College in. Claremont, Calif., and
received a master's in African studies from the University of London.

He is the son of Sheila L. Thomas and John W. Jensen of Vadnais Heights, Minn. The groom's mother is a family therapist
in private practice in St. Paul. His father is a software-design training specialist in the information technology division of
the 3M Corporation in Maplewood, Minn.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792134 Date: 11/30/2015
