      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794303 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                          RELEASE IN
                                                                                                          PART B6



From:                              PIR
Sent:                              Wednesday, September 12, 2012 7:29 AM                                            B6
To:
Subject:                           STATEMENT



Statement on the Death of American Personnel in Benghazi, Libya

It is with profound sadness that I share the news of the death of four American personnel in Benghazi, Libya yesterday.
Among them were United States Ambassador to Libya Chris Stevens and Foreign Service Information Management
Officer, Sean Smith. We are still making next of kin notifications for the other two individuals. Our hearts go out to all
their families and colleagues.

A 21 year veteran of the Foreign Service, Ambassador Stevens died last night from injuries he sustained in the attack on
our office in Benghazi.
I had the privilege of swearing in Chris for his post in Libya only a few months ago. He spoke eloquently about his
passion for service, for diplomacy and for the Libyan people. This assignment was only the latest in his more than two
decades of dedication to advancing closer ties with the people of the Middle East and North Africa which began as a
Peace Corps Volunteer in Morocco. As the conflict in Libya unfolded, Chris was one of the first Americans on the ground
in Benghazi. He risked his own life to lend the Libyan people a helping hand to build the foundation for a new, free
nation. He spent every day since helping to finish the work that he started. Chris was committed to advancing America's
values and interests, even when that meant putting himself in danger.

Sean was a husband and a father of two, who joined the Department ten
years ago. Like Chris, Sean was one of our best. All the Americans
we lost in yesterday's attacks made the ultimate sacrifice. We condemn this vicious and violent attack that took their
lives, which they had committed to helping the Libyan people reach for a better future.

America's diplomats and development experts stand on the front lines every day for our country. We are honored by
the service of each and every one of them.

###




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794303 Date: 11/30/2015
