      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL
                  DESIGNING for IMPACT
  CLINTON         2012 CGI ANNUAL MEETING
  GLOBAL
  INITIATIVE      SEPTEMBER 2.3-25, 2012 * NEW YORK CITY                                                                            PROGRAM SCHEDULE




Saturday, September 22
 REGISTRATION      12:00 PM -9:00 PM • Hudson Market
Registration




Sunday, September 23
                                                                                                                                                ..■•■•■■••■WIIIIMMI■O




8:00 AM -9:00 PM • Hudson Market
Registration



 OPENING PLENARY SESSION         12:00 PM -1:30 PM • Metropolitan Ballroom
Designing for Impact
In a world of seven billion people, the demand on natural and man-made resources is greater than ever before. Yet we also have more human capital than ever before. The
power and ingenuity of seven billion individuals, when collectively applied to our greatest challenges, can foster a healthier, more prosperous, and more sustainable planet. •
How can we utilize our abundance of global capacity to invent better tools, build effective interventions, change behaviors, and work creatively and collaboratively to design a
future worth pursuing? • How are we designing our individual lives, our environments, and the global systems we employ in order to have impact on the challenges at hand? •
How can we better design our world to create more opportunity and more equality?

Participants:
President Bill Clinton, Founding Chairman, Clinton Global Initiative; 42nd President of the United States
Tim Brown, Chief Executive Officer, IDEO
Jim Yong Kim, President, World Bank Group
Salva Kiir Mayardit, President of the Republic of South Sudan
Kiran Sethi, Founder and Director, The Riverside School, Ahmedabad-India



 BREAKOUVSESSIONS? 2:00 PM - 3:30 PM • New York East Sign-up required

How can we provide reliable and safe energy to those in need?
Design Lab
1.6 billion people around the world live without power or electric light, 70 percent of whom are women and children. Each year, nearly two million people die prematurely of
illnesses caused by indoor air pollution from solid fuel use in households. Access to reliable 'and safe energy is therefore key to both health and economic development, with
impacts ranging from providing children with a light-source for nighttime studying to limiting deforestation. Innovations in products, technologies, business models, and
financing, with a particular focus on integrating women in the production and delivery process, are showing promise in providing safe and reliable access to energy to these
1.6 billion.

Moderator:

Heather Fleming) Founder and CEO' Catapult Design

Participants:
James E. Rogers, Chairman, President and CEO, Duke Energy Corporation
Kandeh Yumkella, Director General, United Nations Industrial Development Organization


2:00 PM -3:30 PM • New York                 Sign-up required
                        West

Influencing Behavior and Attitudes
Commitment Workshop
The ability to influence behavior can determine an initiative's success or failure. Relevant messaging, communications, and educational tools that change basic habits and
attittides can multiply the reach and impact of a project. CGI members will examine what strategies and tactics are most effective for promoting real, lasting behavioral
change, while exploring how these tools can be designed into projects from the outset.

Participants:
Mallika Butt, President and CEO, Breakthrough
Molly Melching, Founder and Executive Director, Tostan

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015




   ,
 SMALL GROUP DISCUSSIONS.         2:00 PM -3:30 PM
Financial Inclusion for Youth
Great strides have been made to improve the health, education, and social welfare of young people around the world. Ensuring that these efforts result in long-term
improvements in opportunity and economic well-being demands an increased emphasis on financial inclusion. Improving financial literacy and increasing financial access will
empower young people to make fiscally responsible choices and expand their financial assets and capability. This session will place special emphasis on financial inclusion
for young women and will serve as a launching pad for ongoing collaboration and commitment development around this topic.


2:00 PM -3:30 PM
Making a Business Case for Land Rights
Land rights are essential for economic growth and market development. For individuals, access to land ownership is one of the greatest predictors of movement out of
poverty; and for businesses, property rights enable more secure investment in developing or emerging markets as well as ensure stronger local markets. Many economists
believe that institutions such as property rights are why the Global North has developed much faster than the South, as these rights incentivize investment and inclusion,
which leads to overall economic growth. In this session, Tim Hanstad, President and CEO of Landesa and a representative from a leading corporation will discuss and
debate the value of land rights to core business practices, including how they engender market-oriented development, enable local investment, lower risk, support local
market development.


2:00 PM -3:30 PM
The Global Health Workforce
The current global shortage of 4.3 million healthcare workers has left vast populations without access to quality care. While the burden of non-communicable diseases
continues to rise, many still lack access to vaccinations, lifesaving drugs for infectious diseases, and primary care. Investment in quality training and improved health systems
would support and retain a robust workforce to effectively address this global challenge. Participants in this session will explore scalable, cross-sector solutions to address
the current health workforce crisis.


2:00 PM -3:30 PM
Women Peacebuilders: Transforming the Security Paradigm
The participation of women in peace processes transforms their potential impact. Research has proven that women's experiences with building networks across communities
and divisions allow them to be uniquely attuned to the needs of others. Governments around the world are focusing more and more on leveraging women's potential as
agents of change; but good intentions are not enough to transform the security paradigm. It has been over 11 years since the adoption of UNSCR 1325, and women in
conflict-affected countries have seen little change. This session will explore how women use their strengths to prevent and resolve deadly conflicts and stabilize post-war
chaos. Participants will discuss solutions and work toward identifying the partnerships necessary to deliver meaningful results, while also focusing on the necessity of the
private sector as a key partner in this issue.


     ,
 BREP,OU'T SESSIONS       4:00 PM -5:30 PM • New York East Sign-up required
How can we advance women-owned businesses in the developing world?
Design Lab
In emerging economies, small and medium enterprises (SMEs) make up roughly two thirds of the GDP, comprise 85 percent of employment in the combined formal and
informal sectors, and are responsible for most of the job creation. Across the world, women-owned enterprises grow at a greater rate than those owned by men. Supporting
women-owned businesses to compete in the global market has multiple benefits; however, these businesses struggle against numerous barriers to growth in developing
countries, including limited access to markets, the global supply chain, finance, and skills development.

Participants:
Gayle Tzemach Lemmon, Author, Journalist, and Deputy Director of the Women and Foreign Policy Program, Council on Foreign Relations
Luis A. Moreno, President, Inter-American Development Bank


4:00 PM - 5:30 PM • New York               Sign-up required
                        West

Integrating Social and Environmental Value into Core Business
 Commitment Workshop
Companies and society both benefit when businesses account for social and environmental value in addition to financial returns. Organizations that nurture small suppliers,
restore local ecosystems, and build new relationships are reaping the rewards of higher quality, lower costs, and reduced risks. In this session, CGI members will share key
lessons from their experiences with designing business practices and partnerships that create jobs, protect the environment, and promote social equity.

Participants:
Antony Jenkins, Chief Executive, Barclays PLC
Mindy Lubber, President and CEO, Ceres


4:00 PM -5:30 PM • Empire West Sign-up required
Leading by Design: Celebrity Change Agents
Broadcast Conversation
In this session, leading celebrities will discuss opportunity and obligation, and will elaborate on how they use their voices to raise awareness and mobilize consumers to
actively participate in addressing our shared challenges.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015




        4..
         1W       4.`•[
1SMALL GROUP'DISCUSSIONSt 4:00 PM -5:30 PM

Democratic Republic of the Congo: Highlighting Action
Despite the significant challenges that exist, the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) has been the source of multiple successful and innovative projects that are
working to improve the daily lives of people and communities across the country. In 2011, CGI members came together to bring increased attention to the DRC and to
highlight opportunities where commitments could bring about positive change. From education to healthcare, members have made commitments that are addressing local
needs and working towards meaningful impact. This session will showcase a diverse set of new DRC commitments, and will provide members an opportunity to connect and
share their stories of both challenges and successes in the region.


4:00 PM -5:30 PM
Designing for Consumers at the Base of the Pyramid
This session will investigate best practices in designing and innovating products for the poorest consumers. Whether it is in relation to insecticide-treated bed-nets, medical
devices, water and sanitation solutions, pharmaceuticals, vaccines, family planning commodities, cook stoves, talking books, or mobile devices, participants in this session
will discuss a variety of 'how' questions that address this topic, including how we can ensure that the end user is engaged in the design and innovation process, how we can
make high-quality products sustainable and affordable in developing countries, how we can realize the potential of emerging marketing while also creating social good, and
how packaging, education, and marketing techniques can work to increase appropriate use of these products.


4:00 PM -5:30 PM

Sustainable Tourism
The tourism industry is a multi-billion dollar enterprise, providing six percent of jobs and accounting for 30 percent of service exports globally. The industry's impact is
especially strong in developing countries, where such service exports total 45 percent. Because tourism is one of the world's fastest and largest growing industries, it is
necessary to ensure that the benefits of tourism are reaped locally and that safe environmental practices are employed. Sustainable tourism aims to be sustainable in three
major ways: economically, through the inclusion of local communities in management and planning; culturally, through the preservation of cultural assets; and
environmentally, through the conservation of local ecosystems and the deployment of green technologies. This session will explore ways that the hotel and tourism industries
can play a significant role in this sustainability movement, looking specifically at job creation, workforce development, and the preservation of local ecosystems.



                     7:15 PM -9:00 PM Sign-up required

Africa at the Turning Point
Hosted by Barclays
After decades of being plagued by civil strife, crippling poverty, and poor governance, the nations of sub-Saharan Africa are undergoing a remarkable transformation. Africa's
economies are amongst the fastest growing in the world as foreign investment pours into a variety of sectors—including banking, telecom, and infrastructure—and the continent's
leaders undertake sweeping economic reforms. At the same time, Africa's democratic institutions have been substantially strengthened by multiparty elections and the
emergence of vibrant civil society organizations and energetic press corps. This topic dinner features a leading panel of experts who will discuss the critical changes that
have taken place and help identify the business opportunities the continent holds, as well as give an outlook on the challenges that lie ahead.


7:15 PM -9:00 PM Sign-up required
Boosting Green Entrepreneurship
Hosted by United Postcode Lotteries
This dinner is hosted by the United Postcode Lotteries: fundraisers for good causes through a unique lottery system in the Netherlands, Sweden, and Great Britain. The
Postcode Lotteries are currently organizing the sixth edition of the international competition 'Postcode Lottery Green Challenge,' during which sustainable entrepreneurs from
all over the world compete with their creative and innovative CO2-reducing business plans. Three finalists will present their ideas. The winner will receive E 500,000 to help
bring his or her sustainable business plan to market. Two runners-up will win E100,000 each. During this topic dinner, former winner Eben Bayer will talk about his
revolutionary bio-materials company.


7:15 PM -9:00 PM Sign-up required
Grand Challenges, Energy and Innovation: New Approaches for Breakthrough Results
Hosted by Duke Energy
A conversation with leading experts hosted and moderated by Jim Rogers, Chairman, President and CEO of Duke Energy.


7:15 PM -9:00 PM Sign-up required
Half the Sky: Turning Oppression into Opportunity for Women Worldwide
Hosted by Goldman Sachs 10,000 Women
Please join us for a discussion on the women's economic empowerment movement moderated by Tina Brown, editor-in-chief of Newsweek and the Daily Beast, and a
preview of selections from the upcoming PBS documentary inspired by the book by Nicholas Kristof and Sheryl WuDunn. This topic dinner will convene leaders from
government, media, and grassroots organizations to address women's critical role within the global economy and discuss opportunities to unleash their full potential. How can
educational tools and financial resources expand to support women's economic inclusion and entrepreneurial promise? Speakers will discuss partnerships, policies, and
initiatives supporting women's contributions to sustainable economic growth and security.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015




7:15 PM -9:00 PM Sign-up required

Leadership Matters: Crisis or Success, How Leaders Make a Difference
Hosted by Ambassador Glenna Angelopoulos
At the last CGI Annual Meeting, Secretary Clinton called this The Age of Participation: and with this participation has come shifts in power and leadership that have been felt
across the globe. In the last few years alone, we have seen many established leaders unseated as new voices have emerged. This topic dinner will look at how leaders and
leadership are changing in a world that is increasingly interconnected and participatory. Harvard's Professor Graham Allison will join Ambassador Angelopoulos and leaders
from the business, government, and nonprofit sectors to discuss what it takes to lead today, assessing lessons learned and exploring how action and inspiration can be
nurtured in the leaders of tomorrow.


7:15 PM - 9:00 PM Sign-up required

Reimagining College Affordability and Financial Aid: How Can We Help More Students Earn Degrees?
Hosted by Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
Student loan debt has reached historic levels and is now the largest source of American debt — surpassing credit cards and auto loans. At the same time, a significant
structural shortfall is pushing the Federal Pell Grant program towards a fiscal cliff. This combination is alarming. Given that the federal financial aid programs currently
support over 15 million postsecondary students in the U.S. annually by providing nearly $170 billion in grants, loans, and work-study, new thinking is required around college
affordability and financial aid in order to significantly improve student outcomes — in achieving both access and success. How can we reengineer affordability strategies and
financial aid — government, private, and institutional — to incentivize and complement current efforts to get more students in, and through, degree programs? With a problem of
this scale, incremental policy changes will not be enough. Which innovative and creative ideas should be explored in order to reimagine aid design and delivery? This topic
dinner will explore these questions and more in the area of college affordability and financial aid.


7:15 PM - 9:00 PM Sign-up required

The Future of Social Investment Through the Eyes of Leading Humanitarian Groups
Hosted by Procter and Gamble
Public-private partnerships (PPPs) are well recognized as critical to providing the synergy needed to address the world's biggest issues. While PPPs have grown in their
importance, this is occurring in a challenging business environment that has resulted in a necessity for productivity gains among the private sector. Every dollar invested now
by the private sector must show some broader shareholder benefit, thereby resulting in a move from strict philanthropy by the private sector to social investments designed to
address poverty while helping meet long-term business goals. This topic dinner will include a panel discussion among some of the top global humanitarian leaders. The
panelists will share their views on the role of collaboration with the private sector, including win-win solutions to addressing poverty and building market share for the private
sector as well as the role of branding, innovation, and digital technology.


7:15 PM - 9:00 PM Sign-up required
Tomorrow's Leaders, Today: The Role of Youth in Changing Our World
Hosted by Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina           •
Whether leading education reform, advocating for health policies, or actively changing the communities in which they live, today's youth are having an increasingly stronger
and more proactive voice in addressing some of the most complex issues faced not just by their generation, but by us all. Join us for a thought-provoking conversation on
youth empowerment as we present a diverse and inspiring look at the role of youth as drivers of social change.


7:15 PM - 9:00 PM Sign-up required
Women in the Economy: What We've Learned and Where We're Headed
Hosted by ExxonMobil
Over the past decade, there has been a great deal of progress towards improving economic opportunities for women. What have we learned and how do we keep the
momentum going? This topic dinner will feature groundbreaking research that is helping to identify effective interventions, ranging from technology to market-based
approaches. Join several of the world's influential leaders to discuss achievements to date, challenges that still need to be addressed, and approaches for building on the
momentum.




Monday, September 24


 REGIStRATiON      8:00 AM -9:00 PM • Hudson Market

Registration



 PLENARY SESSION       9:00 AM -10:00 AM • Metropolitan Ballroom

Women and the Built Environment: Designing for Opportunity
Women play a key role in designing more productive, inclusive built environments. Studies show that involving women greatly improves outcomes across a wide variety of
issues, ranging from public health to environmental conservation. Yet current urban planning efforts often overlook the value that women can bring to their communities. •
How can women be empowered with the decision-making and management responsibilities needed to design environments that work better for everyone? • How can more
inclusive design approaches unlock access to key services, expand economic opportunities, and reduce inequality?

Participants:
Salma Samar Damluji, Chief Architect, Daw'an Mud Brick Architecture Foundation
Nicholas D. Kristof, Columnist, The New York Times




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015




                 0
                      10:30 AM - 11:30 AM • Empire West Sign-up required

Leading by Design: Business with Integrity
Broadcast Conversation
In this session, the world's top business leaders will discuss current affairs and how the business community is helping to foster solutions to today's most pressing issues.


10:30 AM -11:30 AM • New York                  Sign-up required
                     West
Strategic Philanthropy: How To Think Bigger and Do Better
Philanthropic actors have historically focused on addressing problems and giving grants in line with the organization's size. With limited resources, philanthropists usually
restrict their programs by addressing large problems in defined geographic areas or focusing on small problems that can be solved globally. Only the biggest philanthropic
actors—often in consortium—have strived to tackle the largest problems on a global scale. No matter their resources, philanthropists' aim should always seek to maximize their
impact. This session will explore creative ways for established and new philanthropists to think bigger and do better, be it through providing seed grants to social enterprises
or building partnerships with corporations.

Participants:
Jacqueline Novogratz, Founder and CEO, Acumen Fund
Sally Osberg, President and CEO, The Skoll Foundation



 PLENARY SESSION        12:00 PM -1:00 PM • Metropolitan Ballroom

The Early Years: An Irresistible Investment Opportunity
Starting children on the right path has one of the highest returns of any social investment, with early childhood development programs returning as much as $18 for every
dollar invested. High quality early childhood education programs develop the foundation for critical workforce skills that boost economic growth and reduce long-term social
costs. Furthermore, ensuring essential nutrition during the first 1,000 days of life can increase a country's GDP by two to three percent. • How can health, care and education
programs be designed as integrated, holistic systems for early childhood development? • What are the most effective interventions, and how can they be scaled up? • How can
corporations and governments design programs that empower parents, teachers, and community health workers to provide the care and life skills children need to thrive?

Participants:
Joyce Banda, President of the Republic of Malawi
Carolyn S. Miles, President and CEO, Save the Children
Jayaseelan Naidoo, Chairman, The Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition (GAIN)



 BREAKOUT SESSIONS         1:30 PM - 3:00 PM • New York                 Sign-up required
                                               West
Financing for Impact and Scale
Commitment Workshop
In a world of tight capital and lending constraints, creative approaches to financing are more important than ever in transforming ideas into life-changing initiatives. New deal
structures are giving life to innovative business models and scaling up successful pilot projects. This session will explore how the CGI community is harnessing the power of
capital markets to maximize its impact.

Participants:
Seth Berkley, Chief Executive Officer, GAVI Alliance
Elizabeth Littlefield, President and CEO, Overseas Private Investment Corporation
Stephan Ouaknine, Chairman, Managing Partner and CEO, Inelys Ventures Inc.


1:30 PM -3:00 PM • New York East Sign-up required
How can we design healthier urban environments that help prevent chronic diseases?
Design Lab
Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) are chronic diseases that include cardiovascular diseases, cancers, chronic respiratory diseases, and diabetes and account for 60
percent of worldwide deaths. Eighty percent of these deaths are in low- and middle-income countries, with an estimated economic cost of $500 billion a year for Africa alone.
When compared with the use of medication and surgery, preventing common risk factors, such as unhealthy diets or alcohol, is more cost effective in limiting disease burden.
NCDs are far more prevalent in urban settings and the situation will only worsen with rapid urbanization in emerging economies. Therefore, it is essential to reduce the risk
factors of NCDs by designing healthier urban environments—be it through better design of buildings and outdoor spaces or through public incentive and community-based
programs.

Moderator:

John Cary, Founder, Editor and Curator' Public Interest Design

Participants:
Robert Ivy, Executive Vice President and CEO, American Institute of Architects
Johanna Ralston, Chief Executive Officer, World Heart Federation




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015




1:30 PM -3:00 PM • Empire West Sign-up required
 Learning from Giants: China, India, and Brazil
 Broadcast Conversation
The rise of China, India, and Brazil offers compelling lessons and opportunities for the world. New business models and local ingenuity are opening markets and expanding
economic opportunity, while reducing poverty. The environmental consequences of rapid growth are driving demand for green technologies and sustainable business
practices. How are companies in these countries working with business partners, governments, and NGOs to promote economic growth, while simultaneously investing in
local communities and protecting the environment? What are the biggest challenges that confront each of these global giants? During this session, business leaders will
share lessons from their experience with advancing sustainable development in some of the world's biggest markets.



 SMALL GROUP DISCUSSIONS'         1:30 PM -3:00 PM
 Designing an Entrepreneurial Ecosystem
In the coming years, companies, schools, and policymakers will be centrally focused on job creation for the global youth population. This population is capable of producing
massive economic expansion, but their potential is at risk of being lost due to a lack of sufficient opportunity. In order to foster this job growth, learning and business
environments must be created in which young entrepreneurs are able to easily start new businesses and spread their innovative thinking worldwide. In this session,
participants will: discuss the essential role played by entrepreneurship education in shaping skills and attitudes, explore the elements needed to foster entrepreneurship
(including financing for SMEs, the involvement of equity investors, and an entrepreneurial culture), share ways that knowledge and networks can help generate the next
generation of global innovators, and contribute to maximizing CGI's platform for supporting these objectives in 2013.


1:30 PM -3:00 PM
Empowering Girls Through Education
When looking to reduce global poverty and improve long-term economic outcomes, there are very few investments better than the investment in girls' education. Improving
access to quality education provides a strong foundation for personal development and empowerment, which leads to a plethora of benefits, including improvements in
health and increased national economic growth. Building upon earlier discussions on this topic, this session will discuss past progress, examine how to build productive
partnerships, and facilitate cross-sectoral collaborations in order to ensure that efforts in this space result in a successful and healthy transition to an empowered and
productive adulthood for all girls.


1:30 PM -3:00 PM
Resilience through the Arts
Around the world it has been proven that engagement with the arts can transform lives and address issues of violence and conflict. For instance, in at-risk communities,
youth are often encouraged to participate in arts programs. In post-conflict settings, victims of war are similarly encouraged to express themselves through creative means as
a coping mechanism for their traumatic experiences. Beyond this, the arts can also provide a livelihood and present the opportunity for individuals to share their culture and
identity with a wider audience. This session will explore the diverse commitments in the CGI portfolio that utilize the arts as a tool for change, as well as explore the link
between the arts, cultural identity, and resilience.



 BREAKOUT
   ,   , SESSIONS',       3:30 PM -5:00 PM • New York                 Sign-up required
                                                   West

Haiti: Lessons for the Future
Commitment Workshop
Since 2009, under the leadership of Denis O'Brien and CGI's Haiti Action Network, CGI members have devoted considerable resources to Haiti, most significantly following
the 2010 earthquake. The challenges members face and the lessons learned from their work can help improve ongoing projects in Haiti, as well as inform future efforts when
responding to natural disasters around the globe. This session will provide a unique opportunity for the Haiti Action Network and the broader CGI community to explore
commitments in various stages of success. Participants will engage in a candid discussion about the challenges of working in a complex setting such as Haiti.

Participants:
David Crane, President and CEO, NRG Energy, Inc.
Duquesne Fednard, Chief Executive Officer, D & E Green Enterprises, Inc.
Anne H. Hastings, Chief Executive Officer, Fonkoze Financial Services
Sasha Kramer, Co-founder and Executive Director, Sustainable Organic Integrated Livelihoods (SOIL)
Denis O'Brien, Chairman and Founder, Digicel Group


3:30 PM -5:00 PM • New York East Sign-up required
How can We ensure more children benefit from early childhood education?
Design Lab
Continuing the discussion from the Plenary Session, The Early Years: An Irresistible Investment Opportunity," early childhood education has many benefits, yet it has often
been neglected relative to primary school education. Children attending pre-school are not only more likely to complete primary and secondary schools, they will also earn
more throughout their life and drive up their country's GDP. Pre-schooling also serves to reduce inequalities and is associated with better childhood health and nutrition and a
mother's ability to earn a living. For a business, organized day care centers help ensure improved employee productivity, attendance, and satisfaction. Only 46 percent of pre-
primary age children across the world are enrolled in education, a figure that drops to 13 percent for the least developed countries and varies vastly by income level.

Participants:
Randa Grob-Zakhary, Chief Executive Officer, LEGO Foundation




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015




r7S11,t4 EL'GROU PlntrUTSTOTA      3:30 PM - 5:00 PM
               11166,,Is 7.2

Safe and Sustainable Transportation
Transportation systems around the world have often grown in unplanned, uncoordinated, and unsustainable ways. A critical pillar of economic development and wellbeing,
mobility solutions must be designed for efficiency, resilience, and safety in both developed and developing contexts. Participants in this session will explore mobility solutions
from the angles of infrastructure design, new and alternative vehicles, road safety, and accessibility.


3:30 PM -5:00 PM

Strengthening the Field of Impact Investing
Tremendous strides have been made in the field of impact investing over the past few years, including the development of methods for measuring social and environmental
impact, the creation of promising marketplaces to source deals, and the engagement of governments in productive partnerships. Yet, for the impact investing industry to
reach its true potential — a 2009 Monitor Institute report estimates $500 billion of capital will be unlocked in the next decade — product innovation to help convert mainstream
investors from interest to participation is key. In this session, participants will engage in discussions about the particular investment funds, vehicles, and instruments they
view as transformational, and will investigate ways to utilize the CGI platform for accelerating innovative product development and adoption.


3:30 PM -5:00 PM

Trafficking and Slavery
Human trafficking and slavery is one of the worst human rights abuses in history. By definition, human trafficking and slavery is a crime that involves the exploitation of a
person for the purposes of compelled labor or commercial sex through the use of force, fraud, or coercion. Today, millions of people suffer under this basic denial of human
rights. CGI's diverse and dedicated community brings years of experience and a wide variety of approaches and skills to addressing this issue. This discussion will be an
opportunity to review the specific resources and focus areas of each CGI member involved in this issue in an effort to identify partnership opportunities and potential areas of
collaboration. Participants will also plan the agenda for 2013 as it pertains to this issue, including a discussion on how to create opportunities to include others from the CGI
community in this conversation.


3:30 PM -5:00 PM

Waste: Global Issues, Local Perspectives
The combination of growing populations, GDP growth, and increasing consumption patterns is exacerbating the problem of global waste. Plastic waste, waste paper, and e-
waste exports to developing countries have increased significantly, affecting the environment and the health and livelihoods of millions of the world's poorest persons. By
2025, the annual amount of waste created will have raised by an estimated 44 percent from 2005 levels, increasing greenhouse gas emissions, ocean pollution, and the
number of landfills worldwide. However, efforts to use waste as a resource to be recycled are also increasing. This session will examine the challenges of waste
management in terms of seeing waste as a secondary raw material, and will highlight how companies, governments, and nonprofits are finding innovative solutions and
opportunities in the reuse of the waste stream. Participants will focus on both global and U.S. domestic waste supply chains, and will kick-off the 2013 discussion of waste at
CGI.



                W.5f I
            .'■',        6:00 PM -8:00 PM

At the Chef's Table: A Pre-Show Tasting Event
As a prelude to the Clinton Global Citizens Awards, guests will be invited to dine on inspired cuisine from some of New York's best restaurants. Curated by a selection of the
city's finest chefs, this event will feature tasting menus from their own restaurants, as well as dishes prepared by recommended leading chefs who have shaped the New York
culinary scene. Curating chefs include Marcus Samuelsson of Red Rooster, Michael White of Marea, Scott Contant of Scarpetta, and Masaharu Morimoto of Morimoto.



i2.116P<Ma_CIYALI             9P
                               ,Vil 8:00 PM -10:00 PM • Metropolitan Ballroom
Clinton Global Citizen Awards
The Clinton Global Citizen Awards recognize extraordinary individuals who have demonstrated visionary leadership in solving pressing global challenges. The evening's
program will include special appearances by individuals who, through their work, embrace the mission of an integrated, shared world.




Tuesday, September 25

                   7:30 AM -8:30 AM
Track Breakfast
Kick-start the final day of the 2012 Annual Meeting and network with other CGI members that share similar topical interests. CGI Track Managers and Account Executives
will be in attendance to provide information on year-round engagement opportunities for CGI members and member organizations.



                         8:00 AM -3:30   PM • Hudson Market
 Registration




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015




 PLENARY SESSION        9:00 AM -10:00 AM • Metropolitan Ballroom
 The Future of Food
The current food system is not sustainable. Agriculture accounts for 70 percent of the world's use of increasingly scarce water supplies, and deforestation for food production
generates more greenhouse gases than all forms of transportation combined. Despite these associated environmental and social costs, one-third of the food generated for
human consumption continues to be lost or wasted. With global demand expected to double in the next 25 to 50 years, current modes of production and patterns of
consumption must change to ensure global food security. • How can the global food system be redesigned to yield more, healthier food, while reducing our ecological
footprint? • How can greater access to markets, new approaches to distribution, and local sourcing bolster food quality and workers' livelihoods, while reducing waste and
improving resilience to extreme conditions?

Participants:
Jason Clay, Senior Vice President of Market Transformation, World Wildlife Fund
Clarence Otis, Jr., Chairman and CEO, Darden Restaurants, Inc.
Judith Rodin, President, The Rockefeller Foundation
Irene Rosenfeld, Chairman and CEO, Kraft Foods Incorporated



                       10:30 AM - 11:30 AM • New York EastNVest Sign-up required
The Case for Optimism in the 21st Century
There is a prosperous future that awaits us, yet a shift in mindset is required for it to be realized. While the recent financial crisis has prompted reassessments of our
economic models, it should not overshadow the fact that enormous progress has been achieved in the past few decades. There is a strong case to be made for optimism,
given the eradication of diseases and the drastic improvements made in life expectancy, infant mortality, and economic development. These achievements should be
celebrated and should serve as a reminder that individuals and nations can mobilize resources to rise above complex and systemic challenges. This session will make an
informed case for why CGI members should be optimistic about exciting societal and technological advancements, and will explore how these advancements will lead to an
expanding world of possibilities for generations to come.

Participants:
Luis A. Minas , President, The Ford Foundation



 PLENARY SESSION        12:00 PM -1:00 PM • Metropolitan Ballroom
Working Capital: Creating Value for Business and Society
Even as corporations and financial institutions serve as economic drivers, they are too often perceived to be prospering at the expense of the societies and environments in
which they work. Global polls indicate that banks and financial services are currently experiencing historically low public trust, while simultaneously less than half of citizens
believe their governments will do what is right As countries and companies seek economic recovery, there is an opportunity to redefine the role of capitalist models as
providers of social and environmental good. • How can our capital systems create new markets to serve the under-served? • How can governments find a balance between
protecting consumers and encouraging competitiveness and market growth?

Participants:
Lynn Stout, Distinguished Professor of Corporate and Business Law, Cornell University Law School
Jochen Zeitz, CEO of the Sport & Lifestyle Division and Chief Sustainability Officer, PPR; Chairman, PUMA



'BREAKOUT SESSIONS.;       1:30 PM - 3:00 PM • New York East Sign-up required
How can we protect the poorest from debilitating shocks, such as unforeseen illness or crop failure?
Design Lab
Living on less than two dollars a day, 2.7 billion people are barely able to make ends meet on a daily basis. When the crop fails that year, when a family member falls sick
and needs hospitalization or medicine, or when a hurricane destroys the family home, there rarely is any safety net provided by the govemment to address these unforeseen
challenges. When extended family cannot provide assistance, the result can be a level of indebtedness that drives the family into extreme poverty. Putting in place
preventative measures to mitigate the impact of shocks is essential to providing hope and lifting individuals and communities out of the poverty cycle.

Participants:
Sir Fazle Hasan Abed, Founder and Chairperson, BRAC
Walter A. Bell, Chairman of the Board, Swiss Re America Holding Corp


1:30 PM -3:00 PM • New York                 Sign-up required
                        West

Integrating Women into Global Supply Chains
Commitment Workshop
Well designed supply chains are powerful tools for creating economic and social value. By focusing on girls and women, organizations can build a high quality pool of skilled
workers and managers who can play leading roles in their communities and help expand local markets. CGI members will share their experiences with designing inclusive
supply chains that improve livelihoods and create new business opportunities through the strategic engagement of girls and women.

Participants:
Leslie Dach, Executive Vice President, Corporate Affairs, Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.
Reema Nanavaty, Director, Economic and Rural Development, Self Employed Women's Association (SEWA)

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015




1:30 PM -3:00 PM 0 Empire West Sign-up required

Leading by Design: Governing Our Global Community
Broadcast Conversation
In this session, world leaders will discuss significant global issues and will highlight some of the collaborative and inclusive approaches that exist for solving them.



        GROUP DISCUSSIONS          1:30 PM -3:00 PM

Barriers to Broadband Access
Access to broadband internet creates channels of information and participation between communities and the global marketplace of ideas, information, systems, goods, and
services. Those who are currently not reached by this vast resource are denied access to educational resources, economic opportunity, and channels of influence, as well as
basic communications infrastructure. In addition, the business case for access to broadband is clear—it creates connections to new customers, enables efficient and productive
business operations, creates new business and entrepreneurship opportunities, and, in the long-term, creates communities of potential employees and consumers in
developing and emerging markets. This cross cutting endeavor requires broad participation from the CGI community, and has the potential to benefit all equally. Please join
key corporations, NG0s, social enterprises, and government officials for a purposeful discussion of current efforts underway, opportunities for collaboration, and the business
case for expanding access.


1:30 PM -3:00 PM
Employee Engagement: Internal Champions for Shared Value
An engaged workforce can increase a company's ability to improve its overall financial performance and employee retention, as well as inspire and motivate employees to
help drive business evolution towards increased positive social impact. However, a 2011 Gallup poll shows that approximately 70 percent of American workers are not fully
engaged in their workplace, leading to productivity loss and increased turnover. This small group discussion will look at what CGI members are doing in the space of
employee engagement, and participants will share their feedback on what CGI's role in this conversation should look like in 2013 and beyond.


1:30 PM -3:00 PM

Resilient Cities
Building resiliency to climate change in urban settings is a key challenge that municipalities all over the globe are currently facing. Rising sea levels, droughts, and increased
frequency of storms are only a few of the effects of climate change that cities must now address when constructing and maintaining their built structures. This challenge calls
for insurance and reinsurance companies, investors, the construction industry, and global leaders to work together to tackle this reality. Participants in this session will learn
about ongoing efforts to mitigate the impact of climate change on urban built environments, and will work collaboratively to identify future solutions to this challenge. This
session will look at how various actors can participate in the development of communications, transportation, power, water, and food systems that mitigate risk and foster
resilient communities, while also discussing how we can protect vulnerable populations from the devastating effects of man-made and natural disasters.

1:30 PM -3:00 PM
Uncovering the Multiplier Effect of Investing in Women
CGI acknowledges the extensive impact that investing in women has on the building of thriving and resilient communities. Similarly, foundations and philanthropists are
seeking to streamline programmatic approaches, strengthen grant-making strategies, and uncover the larger community impact of investments in women. This session will
examine how robust monitoring and evaluation activities are increasingly recognized as key drivers in reaching these objectives, and participants will explore ways in which
the CGI platform can support efforts in this area.



 CLOSING PLENARY SESSION          3:30 PM - 5:00 PM • Metropolitan Ballroom

Closing Plenary

Participants:
President Bill Clinton, Founding Chairman, Clinton Global Initiative; 42nd President of the United States




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793925 Date: 11/30/2015
