     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791363 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL


From:                           Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                           Thursday, July 19, 2012 3:14 PM
To:
Subject:                        FW: Anthony Weiner: 'Nothing Huma can't do'




From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Thursday, July 19, 2012 2:54 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Anthony Weiner: 'Nothing Huma can't do'




POLITICO
Anthony Weiner: 'Nothing Huma can't do'
By: Jonathan Allen
July 19, 2012 10:18 AM EDT
The Huma Abedin fan club is growing — fast.

 There's John McCain, Lindsey Graham and Ed Rollins, Republicans who leapt to the
 defense of Hillary Clinton's top State Department confidante when Rep. Michele
 Bachmann (R-Minn.) suggested that she just might be a traitor.

 There's a Facebook group of folks who "stand with Huma."

 (PHOTOS: Huma Abedin)

 And there are countless women and men around the country who thought she handled
 her husband Anthony Weiner's Twitter malfunction with all the grace and elegance that he
 lacked.

 Abedin's finding out an enduring truth of Washington politics: Yesterday's victim is
 tomorrow's hero.

 Some Democrats are whispering that it might be Abedin, not Weiner, who has a future in
 elective politics.

 "There's nothing Huma can't do," Weiner said in an email Thursday morning.

 State Department spokesman Philippe Reines said he'd give "points for creativity" on the
 question of whether she might run for office when she's done at State.

 Few outside of the political world had heard of Abedin before Weiner tweeted a lewd
 photo of his crotch, lied to the country about his online interactions with a series of


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791363 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791363 Date: 11/30/2015




women, and finally resigned his House seat under pressure from Democratic leaders
following his confession.

(PHOTOS: 8 times Weiner lied about lewd pics)

But her political stature had been on the rise for years. Now a deputy chief of staff at the
State Department, Abedin began working for the Clintons in 1996, served as Hillary
Clinton's body woman during the 2008 presidential primary and is as close to the
secretary of State — both metaphorically and physically — as anyone. Her big public
coming-out moment: A 2007 Vogue profile that portrayed her as Clinton's protege.

"Abedin has the energy of a woman in her 20s, the confidence of a woman in her 30s, the
experience of a woman in her 40s, and the grace of a woman in her 50s," Hillary Clinton
told Vogue. "She is timeless, her combination of poise, kindness, and intelligence are
matchless."

In 2010, the same year she married Weiner, Time listed her as a civic leader under 40 to
watch.

Adding to the intrigue surrounding the newlywed power couple: Abedin was pregnant with
the couple's first child when the scandal broke a little more than a year ago.

Combined, that was enough for Abedin to develop a bit of a cult following among liberal
women, particularly Hillary Clinton fans. She stayed with her man, but she didn't stand by
him — at least not literally.

Abedin proved loyal but independent, parting from so many political wives who have
appeared onstage as their husbands delivered tearful televised apologies in what has
become a modern cleansing ritual for unfaithful officials who hope their constituents will
forgive them.

Forbes magazine gushed last June that she was "anything but the 'good wife."

Instead, she has continued to steadily build her own profile over the past year — and tried
to reshape her husband's reputation at the same time.

"It took a lot of work to get to where we are today, but I want people to know we're a
normal family," she told People magazine for a feature running in this week's issue.
"Anthony has spent every day since [the scandal] trying to be the best dad and husband
he can be. ... I'm proud to be married to him."

There was no shortage of outrage over Weiner's spectacular flame-out, even within her
own tight circles. Hillary and Bill Clinton, who see Abedin as an extension of their family,
were said to be furious about the scandal. She has been a fixture in Hillary-land since the
tail end of Bill Clinton's presidency.

Another torrent of outrage flowed this week after Bachmann and four colleagues
demanded the State Department's inspector general open an investigation into whether
foreign policy decisions are being made as the result of an "influence operations" by the
Muslim Brotherhood. In the letter, the lawmakers accused members of her family,


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791363 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791363 Date: 11/30/2015




including her dead father, of having ties to the Muslim Brotherhood and noted that Abedin
has "routine access" to Clinton and influence in the policy process.

Similar letters were sent to inspectors general at the departments of Defense, Justice,
Homeland Security and the Office of the Director of National Intelligence.

Abedin, born in Michigan but raised in the Middle East, is Muslim. Weiner is Jewish.

McCain, the 2008 Republican presidential nominee, went to the Senate floor Wednesday
to denounce his House GOP colleagues.

"These allegations about Huma, and the report from which they are drawn, are nothing
less than an unwarranted and unfounded attack on an honorable woman, a dedicated
American, and a loyal public servant," he said.

Rollins, a veteran GOP political operative and the onetime manager of Bachmann's failed
presidential campaign, let loose in an opinion piece on the FOX News website.

"I am fully aware that she sometimes has difficulty with her facts, but this is downright
vicious and reaches the late Sen. Joe McCarthy level," he wrote, referring to the Red-
baiting Wisconsin senator who charged that the Pentagon, the State Department and
Hollywood were full of communists.

"As a member of Congress, with a seat on the House [Permanent Select] Intelligence
Committee, Mrs. Bachmann you know better. Shame on you, Michele! You should stand
on the floor of the House and apologize to Huma Abedin and to Secretary Clinton and to
the millions of hardworking, loyal, Muslim Americans for your wild and unsubstantiated
charges," he wrote. "As a devoted Christian, you need to ask forgiveness for this grievous
lack of judgment and reckless behavior."

Graham told POLITICO Huddle on Thursday that he has traveled the world with Abedin
and calls the attacks on her "ridiculous."

"The person saying it has no idea what they're saying because they've never met her,"
Graham said. "She is about as far away from the Muslim Brotherhood view of women and
ideology as you possibly could get. She's a very modern woman in every sense of the
word, and people who say these things are really doing her a disservice because they
don't know what they're talking about, and I don't know what their motivations are, but
clearly it says more about them than it does her."

A senior House Republican who spoke to POLITICO on the condition of anonymity to
speak freely about a GOP colleague added this: "This is ridiculous and extraordinarily
petty. Clinton is the most pro-Israel member of this administration. Clearly, this is another
dumb idea from Michele."

And that's just the fire from the friendly side.

A new Facebook page, called "I stand with Huma," sprung up in response to the letter.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791363 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791363 Date: 11/30/2015




"Hmmmm... Huma or Bachmann???? Hmmmmm.... Bachmann doesn't have a fraction of
the character, intellect and grace of Huma Abedin," longtime Democratic strategist Burns
Strider wrote on the page. "Give me a break."

Reines called the allegations in the letter "nothing but vicious and disgusting lies," in a
statement released to news outlets.

Bachmann said the letters, which were also signed by Republican Reps. Louie Gohmert
(Texas), Tom Rooney (Florida), Trent Franks (Arizona) and Lynn Westmoreland
(Georgia), are "being distorted."

"The intention of the letters was to outline the serious national security concerns I had and
ask for answers to questions regarding the Muslim Brotherhood and other radical group's
access to top Obama administration officials," she wrote in a statement posted on her
Website. "I will not be silent as this administration appeases our enemies instead of telling
the truth about the threats our country faces."

Bachmann, a favorite of the tea party, angered liberals during the 2008 campaign when
she called on Congress to investigate "anti-American" lawmakers.

The upshot: Abedin has become an instant cause célèbre for the left and an instrument for
Bachmann's Republican critics.

Travis Worl, who worked with Abedin on Hillary Clinton's 2008 presidential campaign,
started the "I stand with Huma" Facebook page to illustrate the contrast he sees between
the two women.

"I wanted both Huma and Rep. Bachmann to know that I and the nearly 1,100 others who
have joined the group so far, stand with Huma against Bachmann's bullying tactics," he
told POLITICO.
© 2012 POLITICO LLC




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791363 Date: 11/30/2015
