UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794066 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL




                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                               February 3, 2012



  For: HRC
  From: Sid
  Re: Wilders Influence in NL



      1. As I mentioned, Geert Wilders, the neo-fascist, has inordinate influence in the
         Netherlands. Below is a memo written by my friend, Rob Riemen, president of the Nexus
         Institute, the leading intellectual foundation in the country (funded in part by the royal
         family).
      2. On the German succession: I mentioned Peer Steinbruck of the Social Democratic Party
         as Merkel's likely successor after next year's election. Steinbruck was Finance Minister
         from 2005-9 in the grand coalition government. He is coming soon to the US on a tour,
         some events arranged by Bill Drozdiak.


  MEMO
  From: Rob Riemen
  To:    Sidney Blumenthal
  Date: 2/1/12
  Topic: Political power of Geert Wilders in The Netherlands


   The present government of the Conservative Party (VVD) and Christian Democrats (CDA) is a
   minority government. To get a majority on the issues they consider important, they signed a
   contract with the PVV of Geert Wilders (Party for Freedom, Partij voor de Vrijheid). With this
   support they have a majority of one vote in parliament.

   Wilders gave his support in exchange for government support for his priorities: against Islam and
   Islamic people, against EU, against arts & culture, no compassion with minorities, in favor of
   being tough on criminals, against the left, etc.

   In this respect it looks like (political) business as usual. But it isn't. Wilders has a complete
   control on the government, as without his support the coalition will no longer be in charge.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794066 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794066 Date: 11/30/2015




   From three different sources (a former Prime Minister — who is close to HM the Queen, an acting
   Director General, and a former head of protocol to the Vice Prime Minister) I have been told that
   Prime Minister and Vice Prime Minister meet with Mr. Wilders once a week, they go through the
   list of issues and nominations, and he has to give his consent on every topic that it is part of the
   agreement between the coalition and Mr. Wilders. In practice this means that he has full control
   on all major political decisions and important nominations. It is a brilliant position as he doesn't
   have to take the heat for being responsible (as he is not in the government but controls the
   government!).

   In practice it means that everybody with a leading position (including all civil servants) must
   keep in mind: "what does Wilders want." There has developed a sphere of fear, self-censorship
   and censorship.

   To give a few examples: A candidate for the Dutch Supreme Court was no longer allowed to be
   candidate when it became public that during the trial against Wilders he had written a critical
   memo against Wilders.

   As all public media are depending on government subsidies, you'll not hear any critical voice
   against Wilders as he has make the threat that financial support will be withdrawn. One of the
   tragicomic consequences is that when Wilders' second man and party-ideologue, Martin Bosma,
   published his idiotic book in which he claims that Hitler was a leftist, and so the left/liberals are
   the fascists, he really could get away with all of this nonsense, as all talk shows complied to his
   demand that no other guest was allowed to come when he appeared.

   One of the consequences is a kind of internalizing of "Wilders-thinking" on all levels. As a result
   the Prime Minister can say, after he wins regional elections: "Finally we can give back the
   Netherlands to the Dutch people" (as at any time in the last decade this country no longer
   belonged to the Dutch people). And the Vice Prime Minister could make this argument: "I
   understand the worries of the Dutch people. With foreigners, you get foreign food and with
   foreign food foreign diseases..."

   The biggest problem is that Wilders and his neo-fascist ideas have become so much accepted,
   that indeed it has become unacceptable to criticize him. Brievik, the Norwegian fascist and mass
   murderer, mentions Wilders over 30 times as his great hero, example etc. Wilders' line of
   defense: "Breivik is insane. I have nothing to do with him. But responsible for the acts of Breivik
   are the Muslims because they drove him to these actions...." The argument is absurd, but again,
   it is widely accepted.

   In the latest polls, however, he is losing a bit of support. This might be because Wilders made
   one comment about the Queen, which was even for a majority of his voters too much. But it is
   way too soon to say that he is over the top. He is in control, he decides how long this cabinet is
   allowed to exist, and he has proven again and again to be the most brilliant politician we have
   had in decades.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794066 Date: 11/30/2015
