       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791443 Date: 11/30/2015

                                                                                                      RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Sunday, July 22, 2012 5:05 AM
To:
Subject:                         Fw: Paris - A Love Story Reviews




From: Kati Marton [mailto                                                                                              B6
Sent: Friday, July 20, 2012 12:15 PM
To: Kati Marton •
Subject: Paris - A Love Story Reviews

Hi All,

Here is the Newsweek/Daily Beast review of my as yet unpublished, Paris – A Love Story:
http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek/2012/07/15/kati-marton-s-yearnings-for-lost-loves-in-paris.html
Please ignore meaningless tabloid caption and schadenfreude tone.

Also, check out the Vogue August issue for an excerpt from the book.

Cheers,

Kati

Kati Marton's Yearnings for Lost Loves in Paris
Jul 16, 2012 1:00 AM EDT
Kati Marton spills her secrets.
By Susan Cheever

He goes out to walk the dog, or he asks for another Scotch, or—if he is Richard Holbrooke described by his
wife, Kati Marton—he is on the phone planning Christmas and saying, "It feels so good to laugh." Then life
changes for her in a moment. Instead of shopping in Paris for aubergine velvet, late-night love calls from
Afghanistan, and happiness so intense that superstitious fear tells you it is too good to last, you are catapulted
into a world of hospital emergency rooms, doctors with grim faces, and closets filled with suits that suddenly
have no one to wear them.

LcKVIarton is the latest of the unmerry widows, women who—since Joan Didion wrote about her husband's
death in 2005—have described what it's like to suddenly lose a man you have loved for a long time. Holbrooke,
Marton's husband of 15 years, died on Dec. 13, 2010, after doctors at George Washington University Hospital
spent two days trying to repair his ruptured aorta. Like the others—Didion, Joyce Carol Oates, and Abigail
Thomas, to name a few—Marton defies the conventional wisdom that good writing is Wordsworthian emotion
recollected in tranquility; she seems to be writing the story as it is happening. The book, short and intimate,
reads like the wind from the urgency of the opening scene—she is caught in traffic and late to meet Holbrooke,
the U.S. special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan, for a citron presse at the Café Flore in Paris.
Later, he sleeps in after a glorious night together in their perfect Paris apartment ("he appears a few hours later,
looking sheepish and like an unkempt boy"). They shop for a suit for the upcoming party for her prize-winning
memoir about her Hungarian journalist parents—Enemies of the People
<http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B005EP1ZSM/thedaibea-20> —and he heads back to

       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791443 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791443 Date: 11/30/2015




Afghanistan.

Even then, life isn't quite perfect. In a bookstore after saying goodbye to Holbrooke, Marton picks up Bob
Woodward's Obama's Wars, flips to her husband's name in the index, and finds an infuriating story. She writes,
"The President soured on Richard when my husband asked him to call him Richard, not Dick, at the ceremony
appointing him special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan." Holbrooke had explained to the president
that Kati, who was in the audience, did not like the nickname Dick. Standing in a Paris bookshop, Marton is
furious—how can Obama, who doesn't like to be called by his nickname, Barry, be irritated that she doesn't
want people to call her husband Dick?

The rich are different from you and me—they are a lot more fun to read about. Marton and Holbrooke's first
date was a three-day jaunt to Chartres and the Chateaux of the Loire Valley at Christmastime in 1993. He was
in his 50s, the American ambassador to Germany taking a few days off; she in her 40s was just barely separated
from anchorman Peter Jennings, one of the most famous men in the world. They talked about Gothic vs.
Romanesque, spoke perfect French, and ate at Chez Benoit where they ran into Holbrooke's friend Pamela
Harriman, the ambassador to France. (Harriman snubbed Marton.) No sweaty groping in cheesy hotel rooms for
these two! Holbrooke's most excited moment was when he and Marton sat side by side in a pew of the great
Chartres cathedral. "Just imagine," he whispered urgently, "the pilgrims' first reaction to these windows! The
power of this place for medieval peasants." At the end of five days together, they held hands.

And that's not the only difference. Most of us, when packing to move, don't have Bill Clinton drop by to help
with the -boxes. (Clinton, opting out of the Richard/Dick controversy, diplomatically always called his friend
"Holbrooke.") Most patients don't have Hillary Clinton sitting hopefully beside their hospital bed, or get loving
advice from Pakistan's President Asif Ali Zardari about grief; he told Marton that he has kept his wife Benazir
Bhutto's room just as she left it. Most of us won't have the president at our husband's memorial services,
putting an arm around our shoulders, and most won't see a tall blonde woman hunched inside a black coat,
mourning: Holbrooke's former lover Diane Sawyer.

The public face of Marton and Holbrooke's marriage, especially when he was ambassador to the United Nations
and their glam dinners included everyone from Whoopi Goldberg to Nelson Mandela, is charming, but Marton
is most eloquent in writing about the dishy private parts of their marriage. She describes how her earlier
marriage to Jennings—whom she met when he was her boss at ABC News—was derailed by Jennings's brittle
insecurity. An old-fashioned man, he was uneasy being with a woman who had her own ambitions and
accomplishments. "I wish sometimes that I didn't have these weird bouts of need," he wrote to her in a
heartbreaking letter.

He could also be a tyrant. En route to a dinner in honor of Prince Charles and Princess Diana, Jennings
appraised Marton's strapless black velvet and asked, "Are you sure you want to wear that?" Seated next to
Prince Charles, Marton no doubt delighted him by spending the evening tugging at the top of her dress. But
Jennings's emotional withdrawal, and his own rumored infidelities, provoked Marton. Ten years married, with
two children, Marton fell in love with someone else—reportedly Washington Post columnist Richard Cohen,
although she does not mention his name in the book—and this was the beginning of the end of the marriage.
That affair ended. Then a few months into her separation from Jennings, Holbrooke called.

Holbrooke was a brilliant diplomat who served in the State Department under Presidents Carter, Clinton, and
Obam. a. He had managed the Dayton Accord, which ended the war in Bosnia, and his marriage to Marton was
its own kind of détente. When he and Marton fought—about his busyness, about her tendency to exaggerate—
he never wavered in his goal: to keep the marriage intact. This eyes-on-the-prize attitude persisted even under
the ultimate strain. While researching her own childhood in Budapest, Marton fell for another man, a
distinguished Hungarian. "We spoke the language of my childhood and laughed at the same things," she writes.
"He knew the words to my favorite childhood song about a lonely fisherman on Lake Balaton." After this affair,
10 years into her marriage to Holbrooke, Marton confessed while sitting on the grass of their house in
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791443 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791443 Date: 11/30/2015




Bridgehampton. Holbrooke wept, but like a true diplomat he rose above the fray. He never even asked the
man's name; when Marton traveled to Budapest, he was unfazed. "I know it took real courage," he wrote
Marton about her honesty in breaking off the affair. "If you had not done so our lives would have become
increasingly distant and embittered beyond repair. You caused this crisis, but you have also given us another
chance." The crisis passed.

What's thrilling about this book is more than cheap schadenfreude. It's about people who do not live the way
most of us live—but who have the same problems we have. Bossy husbands, attractive other men, the balancing
act of life as a woman, a mother, and a writer, a husband who is working too hard and doesn't get on with his
boss: these are the problems all women have in the 21st century even when the boss is not the president of the
United States. Great writing is often about yearning, yearning for a lost place, a lost love, or just a lost moment
in time. Marton knows a lot about longing for the past. Her own childhood in Budapest ended when her parents
were imprisoned long ago. This book feels like her way of keeping Richard Holbrooke alive if only on the page.
It works.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791443 Date: 11/30/2015
