      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790449 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                              Valmoro, Lona J <ValmoroU@state.gov>
Sent:                              Wednesday, May 30, 2012 9:32 AM
To:                                H; bstrider                                                                                B6
Subject:                           Re: my group on Huffington re ATT (Treaty): The Most Important Treaty You've Never
                                   Heard of and How the NRA Wants It Dead



Will follow up with you, Burns.



From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Wednesday, May 30, 2012 09:30 AM
To: 'bstrider                  <bstrider                                                                                      B6
Cc: Valmoro, Lona J
Subject: Re: my group on Huffington re ATT (Treaty): The Most Important Treaty You've Never Heard of and How the
NRA Wants It Dead

I'm copying Lona asking that she work to find a time for you to come see me (and bring         if you choose), but it may     B6
take longer than I'd prefer. Thx.


From: Burns Strider [mailto:                                                                                                  B6
Sent: Tuesday, May 29, 2012 11:53 AM
To: H
Subject: RE: my group on Huffington re ATT (Treaty): The Most Important Treaty You've Never Heard of and How the
NRA Wants It Dead

I hope you had a good Memorial Day... as well as the President and Chelsea... we had a great time on Saturday night at
                                                                                                                              B6




I would love to see you soon...                                                              ... "we'd love a 'do over" ...   B6
© And, I'd love the chance for some face time to talk about all our next steps, moving forward...

                                                                                                                              B6



I know you're busy... and I'm always praying and hoping the best... let's find a good encounter soon... I could really use
it...

The best to my Bosslady, B.




From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Sunday, May 27, 2012 9:01 PM
To: 'bstrider                                                                                                                 B6
Subject: Re: my group on Huffington re ATT (Treaty): The Most Important Treaty You've Never Heard of and How the
NRA Wants It Dead

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790449 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790449 Date: 11/30/2015




Good for you!


From: Burns Strider jmailto:
Sent: Saturday, May 26, 2012 02:13 PM
To: H
Subject: my group on Huffington re ATT (Treaty): The Most Important Treaty You've Never Heard of and How the NRA
Wants It Dead



This is penned under Eric Sapp, my exec dir at The American Values Network (and my partner at Eleison):

The Most Important Treaty You've Never Heard of and How the NRA Wants It Dead

http://www.huffingtonpost.com/eric-sapp/the-most-important-treatv-youve-never-heard-of b 1544593.html

There are currently no international laws or treaties regulating the international sale of conventional weapons.
You read that right. There is more international oversight of the sale of bananas and iPods than grenade
launchers and AK-47s. As a result, the bullets killing our troops in Afghanistan and the weapons used by
warlords to commit genocide in Africa are purchased on the black and grey international weapons markets that
thrive in this unregulated environment. Thankfully, all of that is about to change -- at least, we hope.

This July, the nations of the world are gathering in NYC to negotiate the first ever Arms Trade Treaty (ATT),
which would set up a global framework to regulate the international weapons trade and close loopholes
exploited by evil doers around the world. A robust ATT would help prevent weapons sales to states that are
human rights violators, and create uniform laws and transparency that would put a serious squeeze on black
market arms dealers who supply weapons to terrorists.

As a result, a large and ideologically diverse coalition has emerged to support this treaty. Some of the strongest
voices come from the faith community: The National Association of Evangelicals and National Council of
Churches have joined the Vatican and the World Evangelical Alliance to call for a robust ATT. Last spring
American Values Network organized Christians in 48 states from over 3,500 mostly evangelical congregations
to join in a day of prayer and fasting for a successful ATT. And numerous services and prayer rallies are being
organized around the upcoming July negotiations.

Joining this chorus of the faithful have been a number of retired generals and admirals who are echoing the
Pentagon's assessment that the greatest future threats to America's troops and security will likely come from
terrorist groups and small bands of guerrilla fighters -- currently arming themselves through the under-regulated
international weapons market.

Last but not least are the humanitarian organizations like Oxfam, Amnesty International, Arms Control
Association and countless others who toil non-stop to be a voice for the voiceless and make our world a safer
and more just place. Yesterday, more than 50 groups from this combined faith, security, and humanitarian
coalition submitted a letter to President Obama thanking him for his Administration's leadership on this issue,
highlighting the treaty priorities, and encouraging the President to "seize the historic opportunity to negotiate a
robust, bullet-proof Arms Trade Treaty."

You'd think there would be universal support for a treaty that will help stem the flow of weapons and
ammunition to terrorists, warlords, pirates and dictators -- that would help save American lives and reduce
atrocities around the globe. But if so, you haven't met the NRA and Heritage Foundation.

Sadly, for these groups, politics and money are more important than protecting our troops, patriotism and moral
decency. And in the ATT, they see a way to raise money by telling their base that Obama and the UN are
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790449 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790449 Date: 11/30/2015




coming to take your guns. They know full well that 1) the ATT charter forbids it from having any impact on
domestic gun laws or sales, 2) the Obama Administration has said it would oppose any treaty that threatens the
Second Amendment, and 3) no international laws trump our Constitution. But what are facts when money is to
be made and political muscles can be flexed?

And so yesterday, the NRA got an amendment introduced in the Senate to forbid the U.S. from participating in
negotiations of an Arms Trade Treaty that would violate the Second Amendment. But rather than fighting the
amendment as the NRA had hoped, supporters rallied every Democrat to endorse the NRA amendment, sending
a clear message that the ATT is no threat to the Second Amendment, and the Second Amendment is no threat to
the ATT.

Bishop Elias Taban, a former child soldier who now heads the evangelical churches of Sudan, has said this
treaty would be an "answered prayer" for him and his people. It would be a disgrace if a fundraising ploy by the
NRA and Heritage somehow prevented Bishop Taban's prayer from being answered.

You may not have known what the ATT was before reading this piece, but now you know what it is and what is
at stake. Spread the word in your communities and congregations. Check back on American Values Network's
ATT page over the next few weeks to learn more about the Day of Prayer and Fasting and other events leading
up to the July negotiations. And pray that our leaders will put our moral interests over the special interests and
lead the world toward a robust ATT with strong humanitarian protections that will create a brighter future for all
of God's children.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790449 Date: 11/30/2015
