      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793440 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, December 6, 2012 7:24 PM
To:
Subject:                           Belfast



I've had an incredible day here -- so many lessons from NI for other countries and still much unfinished business for NI to
address. I may only see you fleetingly as I have to rush to airport tomw for flights to take me to Dhaka on time.

There's been another hiccup in the journey to sustainable peace here with the violent activity triggered by some
extremists over flying the Union flag. Some see this as politics for political advantage and others as a sign of the deeply
entrenched sectarianism that still has a strong hold in some places.(Reference to this in your remarks,) When you meet
with the leaders tomw, I hope you will stress their obligation to be genuine LEADERS, to defend the peace agreement
and keep working on the peace process which must be a continuing commitment. Many told me that it is good you're
coming at this time and there is much expectation.

After my speech here, I got an earful on what isn't being done and lack of economic opportunity, particularly In the
poorer communities -- and this from people where were working to make a difference! The lack of much progress on
integrated education also really needs to be seriously addressed.

I had an extraordinary meeting with all the women peace leaders with whom you worked. (You will see some of them at
the lunch tomw.) We have to help them think hard about how to mark the 15th anniv of the Peace Accord next year in a
way that shows the world the remarkable progress achieved here and lessons from here, but also focuses on the work
that still needs to be done. I am inspired anew at what these gutsy women have done in so many ways, altho they still
don't get the attention they deserve from the very male power structure.

Finally, your letter got to Inez's husband and daughter, as did an album of photos and messages from vital voices women
from around the world. They were very grateful. Inez is hardly awake anymore and her time on earth seems very short.
I choke up every time I mention her. What a remarkable woman!

Your visit here is being eagerly awaited,




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793440 Date: 11/30/2015
