UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL
                              Remarks of Sir Howard Stringer

                                    Global ICT Summit

                                       June 11,2012

                                       Tokyo, Japan




        Thank you for that kind introduction. It is good to be back in Japan for
  a few days, following a whirlwind journey that took me from London to New
  York to Los Angeles to San Francisco to here, all in the past seven days.


         I'm honored to be with you today, and later this week, I am looking
  forward to the world premiere of our studio's new film, The Amazing Spider-
  Man, which is happening right here in Tokyo in 3D - a testament to the power
  of the Japanese box office, and perhaps also to my position as chairman of
  Sony!


         I must say, however, that many of us might rather be in Australia this
  week for the big match between Japan and Australia. I have a special interest
  in that game because of Shinji Kagawa, who has been playing brilliantly. I am
  especially excited about his success because he will be joining my own favorite
  team, Manchester United, as the first Japanese player to play at that great
  club. Also, tonight, Minister Vaizey and I will try to watch our team, England,
  play against France at Euro 2012.


                                             000


        One of the things I look forward to after I move on from an operational
  management role at Sony later this month -- besides having more time for
  football -- is the opportunity to think what is jokingly referred to in American
  culture as "deep thoughts."




                                                                                            1

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015




          What that really means is I'll have more time to meet with entrepreneurs,
  journalists, public officials and others who are not directly involved with Sony.
  I'll be able to read entire newspapers and magazines, even an occasional book -
  and not just the Sony news clippings. And, I hope, I'll begin to see the world
  through a clearer lens with a wider field of view. Sony makes great image
  sensors and I look forward to fashioning one for my own mind's eye.


        Lacking that degree of clarity and perspective today, I am afraid you will
  have to contend with ideas that may not be fully-formed. So I tread very
  cautiously down this road, with a sense of humility.


        Nonetheless, I deeply appreciate the chance to speak with you and hope I
  can add a little bit of value to the big, growing debate about how to unlock the
  doors of opportunity in Japan and unleash the full potential of its great people.


                                             000


        We are living in an era when the problems in one part of the world
  quickly become problems for the rest of the world. Just consider the ongoing
  financial crises in Greece and Spain and the Eurozone, and in the United
  States, where unemployment is on the rise and home values are not.


         Japan, once immune by virtue of its island status to the vicissitudes of
  life elsewhere, is today deeply affected by the world's ills, especially given the
  strength of the yen. The complexity, the fast-changing nature, and the
  interconnectedness of the global marketplace puts a premium on new ideas
  and innovative solutions. The old ways of doing business must change. It is
  time, as the title of this conference suggests, for a smart revolution, indeed.


                                             000



        [believe Japan can experience a smart revolution - and expedite a
  return to greatness, but to do so must embrace and elevate the status of
  young people and women in the economic life of the country, and accept
  the virtues of a "trial and error" culture and the wisdom of taking risks in
  this hyperconnected world.




                                                                                            2

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015




        These reforms are especially important given the way information and
  communication technology - the world that joins so many of us here today -
  has revolutionized economies and societies around the world, putting a
  premium on speed, change and creativity.

                                             000



        First let me talk about the contributions young people can make to
  revitalizing Japan's economy. I've been thinking a lot about the next
  generation lately, in part because my son just graduated from high school two
  weeks ago, and I was asked to deliver the commencement address.

        In preparing for that speech, I had a chance to hear from a man who
  does marketing research for MTV, a popular television channel that targets its
  music videos and other programs to the generation now named the MillenniaIs
  - people born between 1981 and 2000.

         This expert told me today's young people are characterized by these
  attributes: they are creative, self-expressive, smart, innovative and
  resourceful.

         And they are the first generation to grow up not only with computers and
  the internet, but with social networks that connect them with each other
  constantly, instantly and very publicly. They are so wired in that their biggest
  fear is the fear of missing out.

        Such advances in technology have had an incredibly leveling effect on
  global culture. That is not to say that everything is trending towards
  homogeneity; if anything, technology allows people to explore their differences
  as well as share in their similarities. In this networked era, national
  boundaries have less meaning. Communities are defined by interests
  more than geography. No doubt many of you are in the forefront of these
  tectonic social shifts.

        So it is very important to make products that can be offered to the world,
  not just one country.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015




        Because young people are "switched on" wherever they roam...the
  technologies they acquire and the networks they access should be as
  worldly as they themselves have become.


         It's very exciting, actually, even if a little frightening, too. But it seems
  clear to me that we cannot create and define our future without understanding
  young people. They have much to offer, as witnessed by the creative spirit so
  much in evidence among young Japanese, especially in the worlds of art,
  fashion and music, where so many revolutionary things are happening.

        The young do have much to offer, and we have much to gain from
  involving them more integrally in the heart and soul of our business lives. They
  are our customers, and very well informed customers at that. Do not ignore
  them.


                                             000



        However, there is one issue of concern regarding young people in Japan,
  and that is the question of complacency. A professor named Ian Buruma has
  written about that subject, contrasting the atmosphere in Tokyo with Chengdu
  in China, which has a very vibrant and innovative culture these days. He says:

        "Young Japanese, growing up in relative comfort...become more reluctant
  to take risks... .This lack of risk taking, more than anything, explains why
  Chengdu (in China) now feels different from Tokyo, despite the greater size,
  wealth and cultural sophistication of the Japanese capital."

       That gets me to the next reform I believe is necessary to get Japan's
  economy moving again - encouraging people to take more risks. That's
  something else I spoke to the graduates of my son's high school about last
  month. I said,


          "If you have the courage to change, you will always find new opportunities
  in life and shape your own destiny - and not have it shaped for you by forces
  outside your control."


        Taking risks, being willing to try and fail, is at the heart of an
  innovative culture. Silicon Valley wouldn't exist without people who have
  the courage to change.


                                                                                            4
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015




        A recent Wall Street Journal article captured the importance of what it
  called "pivoting," noting that there is:

        "a new breed of entrepreneurs in their 20s and 30s who strategically
 'pivot' - try out new ideas, shed them quickly if they don't catch on, and move on
 to the next new thing."


        There is a conflict in the Japanese technology arena between those who
 like to "pivot" and those who do not, and I characterize them as the "software
 culture" and the "hardware culture."

        The software culture emphasizes speed. "Launch first, fix problems
 later" is the mantra. It is evident in products that are network-connected and
 can be evolved and improved through software updates.

       The hardware culture, in contrast, focuses on creating "perfect" products
 from the start. While it is important to offer reliable, long-lasting devices to
 consumers, making a fetish of perfectionism could be a disadvantage when so
 much rests on the race to market. We should not let the perfect be the
 enemy of the upgradeabk good. As my successor, Kaz Hirai, said in an
 interview last month, "we need a culture where employees won't be afraid to
 take risks."

       To make that kind of psychic shift in Japanese society will not be easy,
 because historically, getting things wrong can lead to shame. Now, the concept
 of shame is not necessarily a bad thing. Shame can be a force for good. It
 discourages people from doing bad things. We should feel shame when we sin.

       But it can be taken too far, especially if applied to mistakes made by
 good people taking risks to make good things happen. Trying something new
 in hopes of a positive result is not a Sin, and if failure results L as it often will
 when you push the envelope -- it should not be a shameful thing.

      The young people of Japan, as elsewhere, must have the confidence
 to know that not only does life go on when you make mistakes, but life
 can be even better if you learn from them.




                                                                                           5

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015




        As noted in that Journal article:

         "Many of the new breed of young guns have made mistakes, all the while
  gaining the seasoning and experience that may increase their chances of
  succeeding with their next idea... They may fail at one start-up idea but 'don't
  just go away with their tail between their legs. They go on to do something else."

       This is especially important now that we are in an era of disruptive
  technology. We all need to allow ourselves to be disrupted out of our
  complacency, young and old alike.

        Consider that, here in Japan, there has been no new entrant into the top
  ranks of Japanese electronics manufacturing for decades. Instead, when new
  technologies emerge, a new division is created to foster it within existing
  businesses. That leads more often to incremental innovations than
  groundbreaking ones.

         Elsewhere in the world emerging technologies are usually championed by
  new firms, often led by young entrepreneurs, with no emotional commitment to
  the products of yesteryear. Japanese companies, like many established
  businesses everywhere, seem to prefer the status quo - long after the quo has
  lost its status.

        We are sometimes guilty of keeping bad programs on life support with
  insufficient capital for new ones. Daniel Kahneman, a Nobel Prize winner in
  economics, argues that too many businesses act like losing gamblers who won't
  leave the table until they make up their losses.

        So it should be no surprise when 13 mostly young people built
  Instagram, a smartphone app for sharing photos. Great camera makers from
  Kodak to Polaroid to Canon to Nikon to Sony didn't do it. Neither did
  Facebook, and because it didn't Facebook paid $1 billion to acquire that small
  team of engineers and get access to their 30 million users.




                                                                                           6
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015




       Companies today need to find ways to either develop disruptive
  technologies on their own, or recognize them in their embryonic stages
  when developed outside their walls and find a way to partner in their
  growth.

         That means taking risks. Economist Takashi Masuda, writing in the
  Nikkei last month, said people in Japan tend to think rules are created by
  someone else and must be followed. He said the private sector and government
  need to work together to encourage a trial and error environment out of which
  innovative social and technological change can emerge, not just for Japan, but
  for the world.

        Creative Japanese leaders have done so in the past. Sony helped do it
  with the CD, and more recently, with the establishment of Blu-ray as the global
  standard for next generation disc technology. This kind of trailblazing can be
  done again, especially if the doors of opportunity are opened to more young
  people, who can help lead the way to such a dynamic future.

         Their enthusiasm and creativity can contribute new energy and ideas at
  a time when both are in high demand, especially given the pace with which
  information and communication technology is changing the way the whole
  world works and plays, and when coupled with a culture where risk taking and
  trial and error methods are rewarded.

                                             000



         Speaking of injecting new people, energy and ideas into the economy at
  this crucial moment in history, let me talk about the role of women in the
  workforce in Japan.

        According to a new government study, 86 percent of married women with
  children in Japan want to work. So the desire of Women" to contribute to the
  economy is there. What is lacking is the desire of .enough businesses to hire
  them, as well as the availability of day care for their children.

         As a result, according to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and
  Communications, more than 70 percent of working age men are in the labor
  force, versus less than 50 percent of women.




                                                                                            7

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015




      Changing that equation is no easy task, I know. In addition to creating
 more childcare options and family leave and flextime policies, which is hard
 enough to do, people's attitudes have to shift, too. I know that's difficult to
  achieve, especially when so much of the social fabric relies on and
  perpetuates the absence of women from the workforce.


     But I believe it's a necessary step. For I cannot stress how much value
 women can add not just to Japan's future, but to the world's.

       One report, by Goldman Sachs, demonstrates that if you reduce the
 barriers to women participating in the labor force in Japan, you would
 increase GDP here by close to 16 percent.


       As the U.S. Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, noted in a speech last
  September,

       "When we liberate the economic potential of women, we elevate the
  economic performance of communities, nations, and the world."

         She also said,

         "When it comes to the enormous challenge of our time. ..we certainly don't
  have a gender to waste..., we are entering the participation age, where every
  individual. ..is poised to be a contributing and valued member of the global
  marketplace."

        Echoing that idea, in an essay on expanding Japan's social capital,
  William Saito, an entrepreneur and venture capitalist, writes,

         "from any perspective, getting more women into work is the only
  economically rational choice for Japan.. .the economy desperately needs ways to
  revitalize growth."


      Saito goes on to point out that Japanese universities are educating large
  numbers of smart women but Western firms then hire them.




                                                                                            8
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015




       We have taken small steps in the right direction at Sony - we have a
 woman on our Board of Directors, and a woman serves as our General
 Counsel; she will become President of Sony Corporation of America later this
 month. A woman is co-chair of our motion picture and television studio; the
 only woman to hold such a position in Hollywood. I chose a woman to be my
 Chief of Staff at Sony in Japan.

         And the company has created a mentoring system to encourage women
  to set their sights high within the organization, and is doing outreach to recruit
  female students who aspire to become engineers.

        But there is far more to be done at Sony and throughout the economy,
  not only in Japan but worldwide, before substantial progress can be achieved.

        Empowering women is the right thing to do from the perspective of
  equality and human rights. And just as important, it is the right thing to do to
  create jobs and advance opportunity for all people, men and women alike.

                                             000



        Now this is the moment when you might expect me, as a Westerner, to
  raise questions about the jobs for life culture in Japan. No doubt that culture
  has inhibited the rise of women and young people in the workforce.

        But at the same time, I recognize that American unemployment is more
  than eight percent, while Japanese unemployment is a more respectable 4.6
  percent, according to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications.

         Unemployment is an insidious experience which dehumanizes society
  over time unless growth is accelerated fast enough to reinvigorate the economy.
  Japan is a harmonious society which cherishes its social values, including full
  employment. That inevitably leads to conflicts in a world where shareholder
  values call for ever greater efficiency.

         That said, the balance between job protection on the one hand and
  productivity on the other is a global issue, not just a Japanese one, especially
  in the midst of the economic crises that are occurring in so many places
  around the world.



                                                                                            9
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015




        Still, Japan should leverage its skills in information and communication
  technology to establish a system to maximize the potential of women who need
  to juggle both their profession and parenting.

       With Japanese unique harmonious nature, the information and
  communication technologies also create opportunities to promote social and
  generational unity rather than to widen the digital divide.

        Ask young people at a Japanese company what the biggest obstacle to
  innovation is and they will invariably say middle management — too many
  layers stifling vertical communication and mobility.

        This was true of big companies like IBM and AT&T in the 1990's. A
  senior executive of a major American firm once observed that his company
  practiced "one-stop shopping." Any one person, he said, "could stop anything."

        The bigger the company, the harder it is to identify roadblocks and the
  roadblockers. When the Japanese economic miracle began after World War II,
  the entrepreneurial spirit of this society was alive and flourishing. Promotions
  came swiftly in the heat of competitive energy, and age was not a handicap.

         Fifty years later many of the giant electronics companies are bigger and,
  like giant department stores, less flexible and less willing to mount a more
  specialized attack on competitors. Today, they compete with giants in every
  field; giants who often specialize in efficiency. Canon doesn't make
  smartphones. Apple doesn't make cameras. Microsoft doesn't make
  televisions. Sony seems to make everything.

         As I mentioned earlier, the brilliance of Japan's educated young people is
  today reflected in industries that are not dependent on a huge infrastructure.
  Fashion, design, media and the arts offer options to individual creativity...just
  as the financial wherewithal of Silicon Valley offers options for countless small
  start-ups which value individual skills over consensus development.

         Greed isn't as much of a motivator in Japan as it is in America, and
  that's probably a good thing. But excitement and fulfillment can be just as
  motivating.




                                                                                           10

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015




       Among the most thrilling moments I experienced at Sony were over
 dinner with young engineers whose enthusiasm was contagious. How do we
 sustain that energy and optimism? It is surely not by forcing them into a rigid
 bureaucracy which makes them adapt to the company's old ways, and never
 forces the company to adapt to this exciting new generation. Lose them and
 you lose the future.

        Young people around the world today have much less respect for the
  hierarchies that they believe stand in the way of their destiny. We need to have
  more respect for what the young have to offer.

       It is up to the people and institutions and businesSes of Japan to grapple
 with this reality and to find ways to strike the right balance between great and
 age-old values and the imperatives of an interconnected, global economy that
 puts a premium on innovation and upward mobility.

       This is a particularly urgent issue for Japan because of the coincident
 problem of a shrinking and aging population. Here, too, I believe the
 advancement of the young and women can have a positive effect.

       As the president of Shiga University recently wrote, Japan's population is
 expected to fall to 97 million by 2050, from 127 million today. And at that
 time, nearly 40 percent will be 65 years of age or older, up from about 23
 percent today.

        Henry Tricks, the Tokyo bureau chief of The Economist, notes that
  problem and says,

       "Fewer workers mean the country needs to reboot productivity to maintain
 economic growth. The alternative is to entrench deflation and to erode living
 standards.. .Japan needs to exploit its workers' creative abilities and not keep
 them chained to the factory floor."


       I agree. More must be done, throughout the economy and society, to
 make the young and women part of the solution to Japan's problems, not
 additional victims of them.




                                                                                          11

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015




        An article in the Financial Times about Japanese companies making
  foreign acquisitions says,

       "As Japan ages and its economy matures, it is right and proper that its
  companies look abroad for growth"


        That is no doubt true, and I would add that companies can look within
  for growth as well, by focusing on the untapped potential of women and the
  young.

         We should not let gender, age and lack of seniority be a barrier to
  acceptance of ideas or to a rapid rise in the ranks. Mark Zuckerberg of
  Facebook isn't even thirty yet, and look at all he has accomplished, along with
  his gifted colleague, Sheryl Sandberg. And lest we forget, Akio Morita was but
  25 when he co-founded the company that became Sony.

                                             000


       One additional thought about the importance of elevating young people
  and women. They add value to the economy not simply by virtue of their
  productivity in the workplace, but they are strong consumers as well.

        As some of you may know, the Walkman has regained a leading position
  in the digital music player market in Japan. This success was due not simply
  to Sony's superior audio technology, but also our product planning and
  marketing, which targeted female high school students. That, in turn, helped
  ignite popularity among Millennials and helped grow its business.

        As a researcher for the Nomura Research Institute recently said, "women
  have become bigger spenders than men" and are crucial to the recovery of the
  Japanese market.

         In addition, by engaging women and young people more actively in
  business environments, it will be easier for companies to learn from their
  diversity of viewpoints, and therefore make and market products more
  effectively to greater numbers of people.

                                              000



                                                                                           12

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015




      There is an old saying, "Charity begins at home," and since there is a
 measure of social responsibility involved in what I speak of today, I do hope, in
 my new oversight role at Sony as a member of the Board, that I can do more to
 encourage the hiring and advancement of women and the next generation of
 innovators.


        As I've described, we at Sony have worked to do that over the years, but
 there is always, always room for improvement, and I intend to take that
 mission seriously.


       But more important, I hope it is a cause that is taken seriously
 throughout the business sector and beyond. On that point, I am optimistic
 about progress in Japan.


      Why? Because the people, businesses and leaders of Japan are
 recognizing the problems facing the country with candor and are
 beginning to work on solutions.


       Books are being written about the subject. I quoted several passages
 from one recently published here, called "Let's Talk about the Future of Japan."


       The fact that these topics are being widely discussed and debated in
 forums like this gives me confidence that positive changes are coming. For,
 once the people of Japan come to grips with a serious problem, there is
 no stopping them from finding a solution.


       In the wake of the Great Earthquake and tsunami last year, I wrote
 about the resilience of the Japanese spirit in the Wall Street Journal, and the
 strength of character that is best captured in the phrase "fukutsu no seishin."




                                                                                          13
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015




       If I pronounced it correctly, you know it means "never give up," and
 certainly Japan never gave up once disaster struck here.

      The thread of community that is woven tightly through the people of
 Japan helped everyone devote their efforts to saving their communities and the
 country, not just themselves.

       The economic troubles of today are not as sudden, deadly or devastating
 as the natural disaster of last year. But they constitute a crisis and a threat to
 the prosperity of this great land.

        I do believe the spirit of fulcutsu no seishin will be applied to the task of
  navigating the challenges you face, and because of that, I have confidence that
  better days lie ahead.

        I wish you well in all you do to reform and grow the economy, and I hope
  to contribute in some small measure to the effort along the way.

       Though my time as CEO at Sony has come to an end, I continue to love
 and respect the people who work there, just as I came to love and respect the
 people of Japan. I care about Japan's future very much, and I appreciate this
 opportunity to talk about it with you here today.

        Thank you all.




                                            00000




                                                                                          14
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794723 Date: 11/30/2015
