     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795428 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                     B6
                                       AIIIIMEMESINMEIZEIEr



From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Tuesday, September 11,2012 5:14 AM
To:                                'pverveer                                                                                    B6
Subject:                           Re:



That must have been a surreal moment--so far from home but so present. He did a great job for the President, the party
and the country.

Come see me when you have time this week.

    Original Message
From: Melanne Verveer [mailto                                                                                                   B6
Sent: Thursday, September 06, 2012 12:58 AM
To: H

I'm in the business lounge at Dubai airport en route to Dhaka watching your husband's extraordinary speech and
surrounded by countless foreigners all cheering him on. Only he would elicit that kind of reaction at home and abroad! I
think it was his most brilliant performance yet, all bias aside.      emailecl me in the middle of it to say that you           B6
have to run for president so she can work for you!!!

The BIV1ENA meeting in Morocco went better than I anticipated with a really impressive group of participants from the
region -- men and women, NGO and govt reps speaking candidly from their experiences about the key issues that need
to be addressed. The Arab Spring has created a whole new understanding about the role of women and that was
underscored over and over. I will write you a short summary as they provided many important insights.
Last night I net with a group of women leaders over dinner at Laila AJOLICS. (Ed Gabriel dropped by.) We -- Americans
and Moroccans -- all talked about you. As Laila said, "We're Hillary people." The women are so concerned that the
future of the family law reform, women's equality in the constitution and their other achievements will be reversed by
the Islamists. I think they have to find a way to organize themselves and even act as an influential force in the region. I'm
going to see if VV will do more in the region to help.
Ed was in background discussions on the upcoming strategic dialogue. He said the Moroccans want women's
empowerment on the dialogue agenda (l'll foilow up). He also said the King was very grateful to you for making the
dialogue happen. They are not without big challenges there.
Good luck at the A.PEC meetings!




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795428 Date: 11/30/2015
