      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779088 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                       B6


From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Monday, February 14, 2011 7:18 AM
To:
Subject:                           FW: cyber - QDDR Passage


QDDR passage.

Highlighted below

I have issues with this as I read it now....curious when it was added in draft so am going to go look for that.

cdm

From: Caitlin Klevorick [mailto:
Sent: Monday, February 14, 2011 7:14 AM                                                                           B6
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: cyber

An Office of the Coordinator for Cyber Issues
Cyberspace provides a platform for innovation, the free expression of ideas,
prosperity and the means to improve welfare around the globe. Harnessing and
promoting online technologies for good is a major element of State and USAID's
work. Yet these same technologies also create new vulnerabilities to public and
private assets of critical national security importance. Foreign governments or terrorist groups no longer need
physical weapons to attack the United States—
they can organize cyber attacks to disrupt U.S. financial markets, electrical grids,
and other critical infrastructure. The online theft of government information and
commercial intellectual property threaten our security and long-term economic
wellbeing. To organize more effectively to address these issues and combat these
threats, the State Department is creating a Coordinator for Cyber Issues. The Coordinator will bring together the
disparate elements in the Department working on cyber issues to more effectively advance U.S. cybersecurity
and other cyber interests. The Coordinator will lead the Department's global diplomatic engagement on cyber
issues, serve as State's primary liaison to the President's Cybersecurity Coordinator for activities involving
cyber issues, and will serve as liaison to other federal agencies that work on cyber issues. State Department
bureaus that currently work on these issues will name a representative to work directly with the Office of the
Coordinator, and representatives of regional bureaus will participate in a working group under the Coordinator's
authority. The Coordinator will be in the Office of the Secretary, will report to the Secretary, and will be guided
by a cyber advisory council, chaired by the Deputy Secretary and including the Under Secretary for Economic
Growth, Energy, and the Environment, the Under Secretary for Arms Control and International Security, and
the Under Secretary for Management as permanent members. Other senior Department officials will be
consulted as appropriate.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05779088 Date: 11/30/2015
