      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796502 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART B6


From:                               Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                               Wednesday, July 11, 2012 2:49 PM
To:
Subject:                            Fw: I think you will like this.




From: Anne-Marie Slaughter [mailto:
Sent: Wednesday, July 11, 2012 01:28 PM
To: Abedin, Huma; Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: FW: I think you will like this.

Meant to copy the two of you, of course!


From: Anne-Marie Slaughter
Sent: Wednesday, July 11, 2012 12:59 PM
To: H
Subject: I think you will like this.

A number of people have asked why I didn't try harder to get more flexibility at State; here is a response on the record
that I think you will appreciate. It's from an interview that I did with Reuters yesterday. Btw, the global response has
been amazing — I've done interviews with press in Japan, Australia, India, Norway, Germany, Britain, Israel, the
Netherlands and heard from people in Vietnam, Nigeria, Pakistan, Russia and many more countries.
All best, and have been thinking of you re this latest trip — Afghanistan, Japan ... hot hot hot.

Q. Many people have questioned why you didn't ask for what you needed when you were working at the State
Department. A. I did everything I could possibly do for two years to make it work. But you cannot be at top of the
State Department and ask for more flexibility. It's like saying to the Egyptian government: "Can you hold that
revolution?"
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton might have let me work from home one day a week, but I wouldn't be doing the job
she expected of me.
Moving my family to Washington from New Jersey would have been disastrous. It would mean putting my older son,
who was having problems in school, in a completely strange environment without the support systems we have in
place.
Some jobs simply don't have flexibility. A woman surgeon wrote to me and said, 'What am I supposed to do? Tell
them to make an appointment for their appendix?"


Here's the rest of the interview.


Young Bucks: Anne-Marie Slaughter on having it
all
NEW YORK I Wed Jul 11, 2012 11:13am EDT
 (Reuters) - Anne-Marie Slaughter's recent tell-all in The Atlantic magazine -
"Why Women Still Can't Have It All" - is adding fuel to the long-simmering debate
about managing a family and a career.
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796502 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796502 Date: 11/30/2015



Slaughter, a politics and international affairs professor at Princeton University, said the two years she spent in a
high-powered State Department position were hard on her family, particularly her teenage sons, who are 13-1/2 and
15-1/2.
Slaughter's piece, which became prime blogosphere fodder, elicited a record 1.3 million hits on TheAtlantic.com. It
attracted upward of 2,100 comments, more than 175,000 tikes' on Facebook - often with long threads - and 6,700-
plus Tweets.
Here are edited excerpts of an interview with Slaughter, 53, about what's next.

Q. What's your reaction to the reaction? A. I wanted to launch a conversation, and, boy, did I. I've been profoundly
moved by the number of stories I've received from women who all start by saying "thank you," and then go on to tell
me these stories of how they've tried to make things work, and how badly so many of them feel that they aren't living
up to the expectations of where they thought they'd be when they left school. It just makes me want to cry.

These women were raised to believe they could compete on any terms they want - their teachers, parents, and
society expected it. Through no fault of their own, they are finding they simply cannot do what they want to do on the
work and family front.
Q. Whose response surprised you the most? A. I knew I'd hear from younger men, but I didn't expect to hear from
so many fathers. They came of age in one generation and are sharing in the career dreams of their daughter's
generation. They see that their daughters don't have great choices.
Q. You've done a bunch of interviews and written a response to your article. Why did you feel the pressure to back
off from your original premise that women can't have it all? A. I'm not backpedaling one bit - only agreeing with many
of the critiques around the phrasing of "having it all." Clearly, that phrase is misunderstood. I talked to too many
people of my generation - I grew up in the 1960s and the 1970s - about the title. What I didn't realize is that so many
younger people hear it as wanting perfection. It's not perfection - it's about having the same career and family
choices as men.
No one can have everything they want. That's ridiculous, but in this country we believe you should have a level
playing field to pursue your dreams.
Q. How can we fix the problem? A. We need better choices for women and engaged parents. Men who want to
spend more time with their families are part of this equation. They are going to need better options as well.
We need to offer more flexibility in the workplace so people can stay in the game. And we need to make sure people
don't pay a penalty down the road when they make a lateral move for family reasons - it just means they are
delaying a promotion.
Q. What career advice would you give to women who are just entering the workforce? A. You are going to feel
different at 35 and 45 then you do at 25. At 25, kids were so far from my mind. I couldn't imagine how much I'd want
them at 35. When I was 35, I couldn't imagine at 45 and 55, that no matter how committed I am to my career, I'd
also feel that fulfilling personal goals and responsibilities are as important as fulfilling professional goals and
responsibilities.
Try to have kids before 35, if you can, especially if it means you can avoid the agony of infertility treatments. Also
understand that child rearing is non-linear. When your kids are teenagers, they can get themselves into messes that
a Band Aid and a hug will not get them out of.

And, finally, ask for what you need.
Q. Many people have questioned why you didn't ask for what you needed when you were working at the State
Department. A. I did everything I could possibly do for two years to make it work. But you cannot be at top of the
State Department and ask for more flexibility. It's like saying to the Egyptian government: "Can you hold that
revolution?"
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton might have let me work from home one day a week, but I wouldn't be doing the job
she expected of me.
Moving my family to Washington from New Jersey would have been disastrous. It would mean putting my older son,
who was having problems in school, in a completely strange environment without the support systems we have in
place.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796502 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796502 Date: 11/30/2015




Some jobs simply don't have flexibility. A woman surgeon wrote to me and said, "What am I supposed to do? Tell
them to make an appointment for their appendix?"
Q. What do you think of the competitive Tiger Mom phenomenon? A. It's bad for our children. Kids need time to be
kids. Downtime as well as creativity are both things we need for the future of our economy.
On the other hand, raising children takes a lot of discipline. You have to be willing to have them not like you part of
the time. My husband is sort of the Tiger Dad in our family, and I'm greatful for it.
Q. What's next for you? A. I'm back at Princeton, and I'm sorting out exactly what I want to do to turn this
conversation into action. I'm certainly contemplating a book; I'm equally contemplating how to develop what could
easily become a platform for publicizing a lot of great work that's been done. I can convene, connect and curate the
voices of powerful women who are willing to tell their story.
I'll spend the rest of the summer trying to read responses to the piece and trying to figure out where we go from
here.
Q. What haven't I asked you? A. I would never gotten where I've gotten without very important and powerful male
mentors. Abram Chayes at Harvard Law, Robert Keohane at Princeton, my husband and my dad are all men who
so believed in the cause of women's rights.
People say my article was an attack on feminism. It makes me crazy. I grew up in Virginia in the 1960s. Women
were supposed to be seen and not heard. From my earliest age, I remember thinking I don't fit here.
Now I look around Virginia and everywhere, and I see so many talented, articulate, educated women. I know it's a
cigarette ad, but I want to say: "You've come a long way, baby." It's time to make the next round of change.



Anne-Marie Slaughter
Bert G. Kerstetter '66 University Professor of Politics and International Affairs
Princeton University
440 Robertson Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544

Assistant: Terry Murphy
Website: www.princeton.edui—slaughtr




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796502 Date: 11/30/2015
