    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794691 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                         RELEASE IN
                                                                                                         PART B6


From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                             Thursday, June 7, 2012 1:11 AM
To:                               'pverveer
                                                                                                                      B6
Subject:                          Re: Vital Voices



Oh, I wish I could have been there! I'm thrilled about Chelsea's participation for the first time and hope VV has a video so
I can watch her and everyone else.

I also read the nice piece in the Post and another about Alyse in the Daily Beast. I'm so thrilled w what's been done these
last years. And I wanted to go on and on about it and you in my video but got the hook so did the bare minimum in your
intro.

And, that Tawakkol is a pistol. If she were American, she'd be either Speaker of the House or leader of Occupy Wall
Street!

Woke up yesterday in Batumi, lunched in Baku and ended at another Syria meeting in Istanbul----so ready to get back.

As always, onward---but, where is the question!! H




From: PVerveer
Sent: Thursday, June 07, 2012 12:02 AM
To: H
Subject: Vital Voices

Your presence was felt tonight in so many ways -- the foremost of which was Chelsea. It was fabulous to have her for the
first time and she was terrific. She'd rewritten her script and was both personal, funny and inspirational.She mentioned
that she too was at the first Vital Voices conference in Vienna (by the way, Swanee was there tonight and very happy).
Chelsea also talked about your commitment to women's issues and while most people would describe that as a
commitment to the next generation, she said, "if my mom were here she'd describe it as a commitment to the
grandchildren she's hoping to have!"

Bill Burns was in the presidential box with his girls, which was very nice. The place was jammed with your friends from all
over the country. It was like a campaign rally and almost turned in to one when Tawakkol, the Nobel laureate from Yemen,
kept talking and then started chanting,
"1,2, 3, 4, push Assad out the door." And the audience egged her on. We barely avoided a diplomatic incident! The only
sad moment was                                                                                   so her spot on the stage
was a spotlight with no one under it.

Your introduction was over the top,but I'm very grateful that you made VV happen and it's just so gratifying to see where it
is today.

Finally Kay Hutchison said she'd like to see you.

We missed you hugely but Chelsea was a wonderful stand-in for her mom.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794691 Date: 11/30/2015
