        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797935 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                        RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                        B6



From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Thursday, October 25, 2012 10:50 AM
To:                                 'ColemanCL@state.gov'
Subject:                            Fw: Inez background



Pls print for me.

    Original Message ---
From: Abedin, Huma [mailto:AbedinH@state.gov]
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2012 10:31 AM Eastern Standard Time
To: H
Subject: Inez background

                                                                     This was note we got

I'm a documentary maker based in Belfast. I've been approached by the family of Inez McCormack to produce a
documentary on her life. Inez met and began working with Secretary Clinton almost 20 years ago.
Unfortunately, she received horrific news in recent weeks that she is suffering from cancer and has been given a very
short time to live. Over the past few months, Stella and I have been discussing Secretary Clinton's lasting legacy in
Northern Ireland and enduring relationship with that part of the world. The impact of that commitment is seen today in
the streets of Belfast and beyond through the work of Inez McCormack, who became friends with the Secretary and was
a founding member of the Vital Voices Global Advisory Council. I understand that Secretary Clinton isn't as yet aware of
Inez's illness and I deeply appreciate that you will be able to bring this news to her with sensitivity.
Despite the incredible pain she is suffering, Inez is showing typical bravery in dealing with her illness. The fact that she is
spending some of her last days talking to us about the issues that concern her is testament to her own commitment to
helping the less fortunate.
Inez has spoken about the strength of her relationship with Secretary Clinton and the inspiration she drew from the
Secretary since the time they first met. I'm approaching you in the hope that we could include the Secretary for this
project.
Inez wants the documentary to raise awareness of the impact of projects such as Vital Voices and her own Participation
and Practice of Rights organisation and how through clear leadership real and meaningful change can come, even to
societies that have a history of conflict such as Northern Ireland.

Best wishes
Trevor Birney




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797935 Date: 11/30/2015
