        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773654 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                      RELEASE IN
                                                                                                      PART
                                                                                                      B1,1.4(B),1.4(D),B6


From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                               Tuesday, January 26, 2010 7:11 AM
To:                                 'sullivanjj@state.gov'
Subject:                               Re: H: IMPORTANT. Latest urgent NI attached and in text. Sid



I responded re the calls. Didn't you get it yet?
                                                   Classified by DAS, A/GIS, DoS on 08/27/2015 — Class:
    Original Message                           CONFIDENTIAL — Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 01/25/2020
From: Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivanii@state.gov>
To: H
Sent: Tue Jan 26 06:58:31 2010
Subject: Re: H: IMPORTANT. Latest urgent NI attached and in text. Sid

This is consistent with what DecIan and I are hearing. I sent you an email a short while ago.



    Original Message
From: H <HDR22@clintonemail.com>
To: Sullivan, Jacob
Sent: Tue Jan 26 06:54:47 2010
Subject: Fw: H: IMPORTANT. Latest urgent NI attached and in text. Sid

Fyi

    Original Message
From: sbwhoeop
To: H
Sent: Mon Jan 25 23:14:46 2010
Subject: H: IMPORTANT. Latest urgent NI attached and in text. Sid




                            CONFIDENTIAL



                                            January 25, 2010




For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Latest in NI Crisis Negotiations



1.      Brown and Cowen ended their NI negotiations at 3:30 a.m at Hillsborough. Shaun called me directly afterward.



        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773654 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773654 Date: 11/30/2015




3.   Cameron has intervened, threatening recklessly to destroy a generation of work, in order potentially to gain
marginal seats in NI in case of a hung parliament. Secret meetings were held at a country house of NI Unionists and 1 . 4(B),
Tories. The enclosed Guardian article below is highly accurate.                                                     1.4(D)
4.   I will forward you Shaun's memo asap on Tuesday.                                                               B1

Brown and Cowen in talks to rescue Stormont power-sharing deal British and Irish leaders fly in to save peace process as
Cameron's intervention causes consternation <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/nicholaswatt>
Nicholas Watt <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/nicholaswatt> and Henry McDonald
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/henrymcdonald>

        The Guardian <http://www.guardian.co.uk/theguardian> , Tuesday 26 January 2010

The prime minister Gordon Brown <http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/gordon-brown> flew into Belfast last night for
urgent talks with his Irish counterpart, Brian Cowen, to try to rescue Northern Ireland
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/ireland > 's power-sharing executive, as senior British government sources expressed
deep unease at the Conservative approach to the political crisis in Ulster.
Brown believes the Conservatives are endangering the Northern Ireland
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/northernireland > peace process by adopting a pro-unionist stance in breach of the
bipartisan approach which dates back nearly 20 years. He is attempting to broker a deal between Sinn Fein
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/sinn-fein> and the Democratic Unionist party to devolve policing and criminal
justice powers to the Northern Ireland assembly.
He has told aides of his astonishment after the Tories convened talks among unionists at an English country estate.
Peter Robinson <http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/peter-robinson>, the DUP leader, joined talks with senior figures,
from the rival Ulster Unionist party at Hatfield House in Hertfordshire, the country seat of the Cecil family, over the
weekend of 16-17 January. The Marquis of Salisbury, the current head of the family, was the most pro-unionist member
of John Major's cabinet.
The talks, convened by the shadow Northern Ireland secretary, Owen Paterson, prompted speculation in Northern
Ireland that the Tories are attempting to establish a pan-unionist front to limit the success of Sinn Fein and the SDLP in
the general election. The Tories have already formed a pact with the Ulster Unionist party to field joint candidates in
Northern Ireland's 18 parliamentary seats.
A senior government source said: "We are simply astonished at what the Tories are doing. The Northern Ireland peace
process has been strengthened by the bipartisan approach between all major parties at Westminster. Holding talks at a
country estate and excluding the nationalists is absolutely not within that spirit."
The bipartisan approach dates back to November 1993, when it was revealed that Major's government had held secret
talks with the IRA. John Hume, the former SDLP leader, marched into the office of the late Labour leader, John Smith, to
ask him to pull his punches because an important political process was under way.
The Tories were strongly criticised in Northern Ireland last night. Alasdair McDonnell, the deputy leader of the SDLP,
said: "This is a very sinister development. We have travelled far over 15 years of peacemaking and are now at the point
of putting in the last piece of jigsaw. What we have is Mr Cameron parachuting in with hobnailed boots, going off into a
corner with two parties and excluding three others."
Alistair Carmichael, the Liberal Democrat Northern Ireland spokesman, said: "How would Owen Paterson, if he were
ever to be Northern Ireland secretary, possibly hope to command any confidence with the nationalist community? It is
incredibly irresponsible."
The Tories said the Hatfield House talks had been blown out of proportion. Sources blamed Robinson for briefing that
they were designed to establish a pan-unionist front. A Tory spokesman said: "This is yet another attempt by Gordon
Brown to create an imaginary political dividing line. The meeting was a genuine and sensible attempt to help the peace
 process stay on track. We have consistently supported the government on Northern Ireland. Like the prime minister we
want nothing more than to see policing and justice powers devolved to Northern Ireland and the situation there
stabilised."



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773654 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773654 Date: 11/30/2015



But nationalists are alarmed. The SDLP says it has sporadic contact with the Tories. Sinn Fein said Gerry Adams
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/gerryadams>, its president, has never met Cameron. Martin McGuinness, the
party's deputy first minister, has met Cameron once. Adams and McGuinness have both met Paterson.
The row came as the British and Irish prime ministers met the DUP and Sinn Fein at Hillsborough Castle, Co Down, last
night. Brown, who postponed today's cabinet meeting until Thursday, flew with Cowen to Belfast after talks in Downing
Streetat on the ongoing row between Sinn Fein and the DUP over the failure to transfer policing and justice powers.
McGuinness said he was "frustrated" by the lack of political progress after a lunchtime meeting with Robinson. Sinn Fein
had earlier described the encounter between McGuinness and Robinson as "critical and defining".
Sinn Fein is under increasing pressure to pull out of the devolved government and bring the historic power sharing
coalition down. It blames the DUP's obstinacy over policing and justice as the main cause for the crisis.
During a break in the negotiations, the Northern Ireland secretary, Shaun Woodward, said: "The prime minister and the
Taoiseach met this afternoon in Downing Street and decided that the time was right to come to Belfast and engage in
intensive talks with the party leaders, with Peter Robinson and with Martin McGuinness.
"Those talks are now under way, they will continue this evening and we expect them to continue into tomorrow.
"And we stand, both governments, ready to help the parties here in their talks on policing devolution and those
remaining outstanding issues."
Micheal Martin, Ireland's foreign minister, said the governments were committed to finding an agreed way forward.
"We are prepared to stay overnight to ensure we bring these talks to a conclusion and get the key issues agreed."
Sinn Fein junior minister Gerry Kelly briefly emerged from the talks to underline his party's demand for a swift transfer
of law and order powers.
"We are here to do the business and we are here to talk about a date for policing and justice and that's what the
discussions are about," he said. "I cannot go into detail..."
He revealed that while his party had held discussions with the two governments it had by lOpm yet to hold direct talks
with the DUP in Hillsborough.
"We are here, we are talking, we do want to get this sorted out," he added.
DUP ministers Sammy Wilson and Arlene Foster stepped out of the castle to provide an update on negotiations and
expressed hopes that a deal could be secured, though they were critical of what they described as the atmosphere of
crisis that had developed.
Mr Wilson said: "As far as we are concerned this is a contrived crisis, we don't need to be here.
"There are many things I am sure most people would prefer that the Assembly would get on with the task which it
already has competence over and secondly that the parties then would sit down in a responsible way and deal with the
issues which are still outstanding to allow devolution of policing and justice to take place.
"That would have been a much better way to have dealt with this issue rather than the way in which Sinn Fein have tried
to create this crisis here and of course the instability which is attached to that."
He insisted however that his party was committed to finding a resolution.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773654 Date: 11/30/2015
