     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795940 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                   B6



From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, July 5, 2012 8:40 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: Vali Nasr latest column: U.S. Apology Ends Doomed Policy of Bullying Pakistan



Pretty good.

    Original Message
From: Nasr, Vali R
Sent: Thursday, July 05, 2012 07:14 PM
To: Undisclosed recipients <Undisclosed recipients:;>
Subject: Vali Nasr latest column: U.S. Apology Ends Doomed Policy of Bullying Pakistan

http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-07-05/u-s-apology-ends-doomed-policy-of-bullying-pakistan-vali-nasr.html

Bloomberg
U.S. Apology Ends Doomed Policy of Bullying Pakistan: Vali Nasr By Vali Nasr - Jul 5, 2012

It took eight months, but the U.S. has finally apologized for killing 24 Pakistani soldiers irva firefight on the Pakistan-
Afghanistan border.
With that, the U.S. military is again able to use routes through Pakistan to supply its forces in Afghanistan without paying
exorbitant fees. Plus the threat that Pakistan will bar U.S. drone strikes is for now moot.

However, the main implication of the apology, a triumph of Secretary of State Hillary Clinton over both the White House
and the Pentagon, is that it ends the experiment of the U.S. trying to bully Pakistan into submission.

The clash in November between U.S. and Pakistani forces was a mess, with miscommunication on both sides but
fatalities on only one. Pakistan, still seething over the U.S. breach of its sovereignty in the raid on Osama bin Laden's
compound, closed U.S. military supply routes to Afghanistan when the U.S. initially refused to apologize. The U.S., in
turn, froze $700 million in military assistance and shut down all engagement on economic and development issues. In a
further deterioration of ties, the Pakistani Parliament voted to ban all U.S. drone attacks from or on Pakistani territory.

No Sympathy
The Pakistanis held firm in their insistence on an apology. Officials at the Pentagon thought the case didn't merit one.
Many had no sympathy for the Pakistanis, whom they regarded as double-dealers for stoking the insurgency in
Afghanistan and providing haven to the notorious extremists of the Haqqani Network. The White House feared that an
apology would invite Republican criticism. Throughout the crisis, Clinton and her senior staff argued that the U.S. should
apologize. She supported re-engaging with Pakistan to protect a critical relationship while also holding Pakistan
accountable for fighting the Taliban and other extremists, a point she has raised in each of her conversations with
Pakistani leaders.
Clinton's recommendations were contrary to the policy the Pentagon and Central Intelligence Agency put in place in
early 2011. Relations had soured when the Pakistanis held CIA operative Raymond Davis after he shot two Pakistanis.
Frustrated with Pakistan's foot-dragging on counterterrorism, the two agencies successfully lobbied for a strategy to
reduce high-level contacts with Pakistan, shame Pakistan in the news media, and threaten more military and intelligence
operations on Pakistani soil like the bin Laden assassination. It was a policy of direct confrontation on all fronts, aimed at
bending Pakistan's will.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795940 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795940 Date: 11/30/2015




It failed. Pakistan stood its ground. Far from changing course, Pakistan reduced cooperation with the U.S. and began to
apply its own pressure by threatening to end the drone program, one of the Obama administration's proudest
achievements.
Months of behind-the-scenes wrangling failed to resolve the apology issue. A high-level U.S. visit to Islamabad on the
eve of the May 20-21 NATO Summit in Chicago proved a fiasco. Pakistan informed the Americans that after an apology,
it would charge a much higher fee to let NATO supplies into Afghanistan. (That has not come to pass.) President Barack
Obama refused to meet Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari at the summit unless the supply routes reopened, but that
did not break the impasse.

Finally, Washington tallied the costs of confrontation with Pakistan. Supplying troops through other routes was costing
an additional $100 million a month. Without Pakistani roads, the U.S. military wouldn't be able to get its heavy
equipment out of Afghanistan on time or on budget once it begins to withdraw from the country in earnest. If Pakistan
remained off-limits, the U.S. would have to rethink its entire exit strategy from Afghanistan.

Open Airspace
What's more, if Pakistan truly shut down the drone program, it would cripple the administration's most successful
terrorism- fighting tool. Pakistan might also close its airspace to U.S. planes flying between the Persian Gulf and
Afghanistan. Americans were understandably angry that bin Laden was found hiding in a Pakistani city, but few knew
that the plane that transported his body from an Afghan base to a U.S. Navy ship for a sea burial had to fly over Pakistani
territory.

The conclusion: Open conflict with Pakistan was not an option. It was time to roll back the pressure.
The apology is just a first step in repairing ties deeply bruised by the past year's confrontations. The U.S. should adopt a
long-term strategy that would balance U.S. security requirements with Pakistan's development needs. Managing
relations with Pakistan requires a deft policy -- neither the blind coddling of the George W. Bush era nor the blunt
pressure of the past year, but a careful balance between pressure and positive engagement. This was Clinton's strategy
from 2009 to 2011, when U.S. security demands were paired with a strategic dialogue that Pakistan coveted. That is still
the best strategy for dealing with this prickly ally.
(Vali Nasr is a Bloomberg View contributor, dean of the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies at Johns
Hopkins University and a senior fellow in foreign policy at the Brookings Institution. The opinions expressed are his
own.)




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795940 Date: 11/30/2015
