     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793322 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                            RELEASE IN
                                                                                                            PART B6



From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Sunday, January 8, 2012 4:33 PM
To:                                'sullivanjj@state.gov'
Subject                            Re: Burma article



Should I ask Derek to carry letters from me to ASSK +/or Than Sein?


From: Sullivan, Jacob J [mailto:Sullivann@state.gov]
Sent: Saturday, January 07, 2012 01:31 PM
To: H
Subject: FW: Burma article

Worth a read.


From: Derek Mitchell
Sent: Saturday, January 07, 2012 12:03 AM
To: Kurt Campbell; Campbell, Kurt M; Sullivan, Jacob J; Yun, Joseph Y; Murphy, W Patrick; Patel, Nirav S; Murphy, Erin L
Subject: Burma article

All: This is the most interesting article I have seen in a while analyzing internal dynamics in GOB. Reflects overall lack of
clarity we have over what exactly is happening nowadays inside the government. I will be seeing the author (Aung Zaw)
in Chiang Mai late next week (and asked for a meeting with 1st Vice President Tin Aung Myint Oo -- will see if I get
it). Derek

OPINION / OTHER

January 6, Irrawaddy
Are there cracks in Thein Sein's cabinet? Aung Zaw

This week's release of just a handful of political prisoners bitterly disappointed many in Burma. Dissidents saw the move
as proof that Naypyidaw had not changed—that the so-called "reforms" were all a facade. The public vented its collective
anger on social media and in emails to each other.

The main target of their vitriol was of course the president, Thein Sein, and the other high-ranking officials who had—over
the past weeks and months—gone out on a limb to promise that political opponents would soon be freed from prison.

But when criticism spread to opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi for her perceived role as an accomplice, The Lady
herself had to react quickly to urge everyone to keep a cool head and to remind the gloomy public that the president alone
could not enact reforms single-handedly.

A senior official close to the president confirmed the sentiment by disclosing that the decision to release just over 30
activists was the result of an ongoing power struggle between Thein Sein and the hardliners.

In an interview with The Associated Press, Suu Kyi cautioned against too much faith in the current changes, and said that
Burma's long-ruling military still wields enormous power despite the veneer of democracy provided by the elections.

"I am concerned about how much support there is in the military for change," she said. "In the end, that's the most
important factor—how far the military are prepared to cooperate with the principles of reform."

Analysts inside the country pointed to the powerful National Defense Security Council (NDSC) and to Snr-Gen Than
Shwe, the retired dictator who may continue to exercise influence from behind the scenes.

"As long as Than Shwe is alive, don't expect any genuine change in this country," said an outspoken editor in Rangoon
who, on this occasion, requested anonymity.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793322 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793322 Date: 11/30/2015




High-ranking officials have leaked the fact that recent NDSC meetings have been peppered with discord, and that the
political prisoners issue is one of its most divisive.

Chairing the meetings is the president, Thein Sein, a former military general, but one who is reputed to be honest and
sincere. Even skeptics admit that he is arguably the least corrupt of the top-ranking officers, and the general with the
cleanest hands when it comes to the blood of past human rights abuses.

The Council is comprised of 11 senior government leaders, 10 of whom were previously military generals. The team
includes the two vice-presidents, the commander-in-chief and deputy commander-in-chief of the armed forces, and the
ministers of defense, home affairs, foreign affairs and border affairs. The speakers of both Houses are also members of
the NDSC, and on occasion Information Minister Kyaw Hsan is invited to sit in as an observer.

Together the NDSC represents the inner circle of government in Burma; its members hold sway over all the highest
priority matters, including national security, economy, and the pace of democratic reform.

Aides claim that the president usually makes the final decision on any particular issue, but that he is an attentive listener
and prefers to hear competing angles before he commits himself.

However, it also appears that military hardliners still hold the power to overrule any decision. First vice-president, Tin
Aung Myint 0o, is renowned as a battle-hardened general, but is also reputedly one of the most corrupt officials, loyal to
Than Shwe, and always ready to stamp down on any dovishness at the NDSC and to maintain the status quo.

The hawks in the Council argue that releasing prominent dissidents will endanger national stability. It won't. And Thein
Sein, who served in the armed forces since 1968, knows that.
Inside sources say that Thein Sein faces mounting challenges to his authority—a suggestion he appeared more than
willing to share with Western diplomats.

One story goes that when the president saw the news report published in both The Irrawaddy and the Bangkok Post that
suggested that Tin Aung Myint Oo was constantly undermining him and was perhaps positioning himself in the driving
seat for a military coup, he simply asked his staff to bring him extra copies of the news article. He then pinned a short note
to the clippings and sent them over to the vice-president's office.

But still some observers deny the existence of the hardliners. They want to play ball and so they prefer to believe that the
government is just playing the time-tested old game of Good Cop, Bad Cop. They say Naypyidaw has developed this
strategy to frighten and cajole the international community, and to justify itself when it needs to stall.

That's why, of course, Thein Sein's allies were so comfortable to disseminate word that they were involved in a daily
power struggle with the hardliners, and that the possibility of a coup loomed large unless they were supported 100 percent
down the line.
Insiders have also disclosed that since the visit of US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to Burma, the hardline faction has
been neutralized and has faded into the background.

That does not preclude the fact that they could always come back.

But this too is no secret. Remarking on the process of reform in Burma, Suu Kyi recently told AP: "I wouldn't say that there
are many dangers, but I wouldn't say that it is unstoppable either. I think there are obstacles, and there are some dangers
that we have to look out for."
(top)




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793322 Date: 11/30/2015
