        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791543 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                               Anne-Marie Slaughter
Sent:                               Thursday, August 2, 2012 2:31 PM
To:
Cc:                                 Abedin, Huma; Cheryl Mills; Jacob J Sullivan (SullivanJJ@state.gov)
Subject:                            v interesting piece from Tony Karon on way in which Syrian regime is transforming into
                                    factional militia



Syrian Paradox: The Regime Gets Stronger, Even as It Loses Its Grip
As the regime's ability to govern Syria declines, it is being transformed into a powerful militia that has
little incentive to compromise
By Tony Karon iRtonvkaron I August 2, 2012 111

  0




                                                                                                    SYRIAN ARAB NEWS AGENCY / EPA
Syrian army soldiers carry Syrian flags and pictures of President Bashar Assad in Damascus on Aug. 1, 2012, at a ceremony marking
the 67th Army Day

News reports typically characterize the Syrian rebellion as being 16 or 17 months old. It is one of those descriptions
delivered en passant while relating the news of the day: the battle for Aleppo grinds on into its sixth day threatening
a massive humanitarian crisis; new video shows rebels executing unarmed prisoners; President Bashar Assad urges
his troops on through written messages but declines to make public appearances, and so on. But the International
Crisis Group (ICG), a respected organization of analysts, mediators and former diplomats, on Wednesday issued a
report urging opponents of the Assad regime, both Syrian and international, to pay closer attention to the
implications of that 17-month time span.

Not only has the Assad regime survived an unprecedented assault, the ICG argues, but it also is no longer the Assad
regime of February 2011 — and the rebellion challenging it also may have morphed into something quite different
from the uprising that began last year. As a result, stakeholders looking to end the crisis are in urgent need of some
thinking that goes beyond speculating whether Assad will go the way of Libya's Muammar Gaddafi, Yemen's Ali
Abdullah Saleh, or any other autocrat felled during the past year's Arab rebellion. Syria's trajectory will be very
different. Says the ICG report:

Perhaps the most significant and least appreciated is what, over time, has become of the regime. The one that
existed at the outset of the conflict almost certainly could not have survived the spectacular killing of top officials in

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791543 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791543 Date: 11/30/2015




the heart of its traditional stronghold; street combat in Damascus, Aleppo and a string of other towns; the loss of
important border crossings with Turkey and Iraq; all amid near-total economic devastation and diplomatic
opprobrium. That, a year and a half later, its new incarnation not only withstood those blows but vigorously
counterpunched sends a message worthy of reflection.

(MORE: When Syria's Dust Settles, Will Assad Be Replaced by a 'Junta in a Box'?)

Assad's regime, it warns, is morphing into something less like a government and more akin to factional militia
locked into an increasingly brutal fight for its collective survival, relying on an Alawite community that sees a rebel
triumph as nothing less than a mortal threat.

[The regime] is mutating in ways that make it impervious to political and military setbacks, indifferent to pressure and
unable to negotiate. Opposition gains terrify Alawites, who stand more firmly by the regime's side. Defections solidify
the ranks of those who remain loyal. Territorial losses can be dismissed for the sake of concentrating on "useful"
geographic areas. Sanctions give rise to an economy of violence wherein pillaging, looting and smuggling ensure
self-sufficiency and over which punitive measures have virtually no bearing. That the regime has been weakened is
incontrovertible. But it has been weakened in ways that strengthen its staying power.

(MORE: 5 Ways Syria Can Get Even Worse)

The rebel campaign in Aleppo was, by some rebel accounts, an attempt to create a "safe haven" that would
encompass Syria's largest city, and its commercial hub, and stretch all the way to the Turkish border. That would not
only allow armaments to be delivered more freely from Turkey but would also create a beachhead on which rebels
could proclaim an alternative political authority that could then be recognized by foreign powers as Syria's legitimate
government. Clearly, foreign backers were hoping for that outcome — Secretary of State Hillary Clinton last week
even predicted the emergence, soon, of a "safe haven" for anti-Assad forces in Syria — which is modeled loosely on
Libya. There, it was after rebels had taken control of the eastern city of Benghazi and proclaimed an alternative
government, that NATO intervened ostensibly to protect them from being overrun but then waged an offensive air
campaign to take down Gaddafi. The emergence of a rebel-controlled zone in Syria would certainly have raised
pressure on Western governments to provide direct military support to defend it.

So far, that outcome isn't looking likely. Not only are Syria's rebel military and political groupings far more diverse
and divided than their Libyan counterparts were, but the city of Aleppo itself appears to be divided between
supporters and opponents of the rebellion. Large sections of the civilian population, particularly middle-class and
wealthier residents, and also its Christian community, are hostile to the presence of rebel fighters in their city, even
if they might be politically opposed to Assad.

If, as is expected, the superior armaments of the regime's forces see them prevail in the current battle for Aleppo,
that would reinforce a sense of strategic stalemate: the regime is unable to bludgeon the rebellion into submission,
and it has lost control of large swaths of rural Syria to an insurgency capable of fighting on a number of fronts but
that is unable to muster a knockout blow.

(PHOTOS: As Syria Grieves: Photographs by Nicole Tung)

The evolution of the protest movement that began early in 2011 into a full-blown civil war involving actors ranging
from the U.S., Turkey, Saudi Arabia and al-Qaeda to Russia and Iran, has probably done more to strengthen the
regime's core and its determination to fight to the end than it has done to create a soft-landing. To the extent that
the Alawites believe the triumph of the rebellion consigns them to a grim fate, they will fight to prevent that — with
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791543 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791543 Date: 11/30/2015



the tacit backing of many in other minorities and sections of society that feel threatened by the prospect of a victory
by the hard men, many of them Islamists, who fight under the banner of the loose-knit Free Syrian Army. Video
imagery touted by the rebels of the summary execution of a group of Aleppo men accused of abuses on behalf of the
regime doesn't do much to ease such fears. And the sectarian undertow that grows stronger as the fight drags on
works to Assad's advantage. The rebellion may have forced the regime to relinquish control of large swaths of
territory, even the sovereign control of some of Syria's border crossings, but in doing so it has, if anything, reinforced
the determination of Assad's core supporters to fight on.

If the regime has, indeed, rendered itself immune to traditional levers of statecraft, the push to pressure Russia and
China to back new economic punishments for the regime will have limited impact. And seeking to prevail militarily
almost guarantees a protracted fight:

There can be nothing more to expect from a regime that, by its very nature — never much of an institutionalised
state, no longer genuinely a political entity — has ceased being in a position to compromise, respond to pressure or
inducement or offer a viable solution. Which means that the traditional international panoply of actions, from public
blandishments to condemnation, from threats to sanctions, is not about to work.

Preventing Syria's descent into a generational civil war may now depend on the ability of the Syrian opposition to
change the dynamic that keeps Alawites fighting for Assad as if their lives depended on it. A convincing
repositioning of the rebellion on inclusive terms will be tough, especially given the bitterness of the fight so far and
the divisions among the various parties. But absent the emergence of an alternative that coffers the Alawites and
other regime supporters a place in the post-Assad sun, the morbid spectacle of urban combat in Syria could drag on
for months, even years.



Read more: http://world.time.com/2012/08/o2/syrian-paradox-the-regime-gets-stronger-even-as-it-
loses-its-grip/#ixzz22PmWsoo

Anne-Marie Slaughter
Bert G. Kerstetter '66 University Professor of Politics and International Affairs
Princeton University
440 Robertson Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544

Assistant: Terry Murphy
Website: www.princeton.edu/–slaughtr




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791543 Date: 11/30/2015
