      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793535 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL




From:                           H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                           Monday, January 23, 2012 1:23 PM
To:                             'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject                         Fw: WSJ Op Ed: How the U.S. Should Handle the Islamist Rise in Egypt



Pls print for me.


From: Sullivan, Jacob J [mailto:Sullivann@state.gov]
Sent: Monday, January 23, 2012 09:28 AM
To: H
Subject: FW: WSJ Op Ed: How the U.S. Should Handle the Islamist Rise in Egypt


Worth reading.

From: Holladay, Darby G (PACE) [mailto:HolladayDG2@state.gov]
Sent: Monday, January 23, 2012 7:21 AM
To: PA-Monitoring-Group-DL; NEA-Press-DL; DRL-PPD-DL
Subject: WSJ Op Ed: How the U.S. Should Handle the Islamist Rise in Egypt

OPINION

JANUARY 23, 2012

How the U.S. Should Handle the Islamist Rise in Egypt

By ROBERT SATLOFF AND ERIC TRAGER



From an American perspective, the situation in Egypt is a nightmare. One year after Tahrir Square

triumphantly toppled a tyrant, Islamists are poised to profit from Egyptian "people power."



They, not liberals or secularists, proved nimble at the electoral process, with the Muslim Brotherhood's

Freedom and Justice Party and the even more fundamentalist Nour Party winning about two-thirds of the

seats in Egypt's next parliament. While both parties have paid lip service to respecting Egypt's international

obligations, American leaders cannot ignore the fact that the security partnership Washington had with Cairo

for more than 30 years is in serious jeopardy.



Some have sugar-coated the Islamists' ascendance by arguing that the responsibility of governance will

moderate them. Experience suggests otherwise. Islamist governments in Iran, Sudan and Gaza have proved

resilient and uncompromising against massive international pressure, none of which Egypt is likely to face



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793535 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793535 Date: 11/30/2015




anytime soon. And Turkey—the model du jour—went through a generation of military-supervised rule before
its Islamists, twice banished from politics by the generals, finally found a formula for governance.


Others point out that if the U.S. has built close security relationships with most conservative Muslim countries

such as Saudi Arabia and Qatar, then surely a Muslim Brotherhood-led Egypt can be friendly, too. But Egypt
is very different. Its Islamist narrative is of fighting to survive against the iron fist of a corrupt, American-

backed autocrat. Anti-Americanism—along with anti-Westernism and anti-lsraelism—is deeply embedded in

the DNA of Egyptian Islamist groups.


Still others pin their hopes on the very democratic process that is now empowering the Islamists. Play the

long game, they advise—help build non-Islamist political alternatives that can compete when Egyptians vote in
their second or third elections. This approach has merit, but only if the Islamists don't in the meantime take
steps to prevent any real competition in the future, such as convincing the country's Coptic minority—roughly

10%-15% of the population—that it has no future in an Islamist Egypt. Non-Islamists stand no chance of
electoral success if there is a Coptic exodus.


But enough with theoretical arguments. Islamists' words and actions over the previous few months speak for
themselves, and they suggest that key U.S. interests are likely to suffer.


First, Muslim Brotherhood leaders have vowed to put Egypt's 1979 peace treaty with Israel to a popular

referendum—a strategy that they believe will let them sink the treaty without being blamed for doing so. That
the group would work so deviously to undo a document that has prevented war for over three decades
demonstrates the organization's preference for radicalism over realism.


Second, a Muslim Brotherhood-governed Egypt appears inclined toward fueling, rather than countering,

violent extremism. In this vein, the Brotherhood's invitation for al-Gama'a al-Islamiya to join its coalition, even
if rejected, should be a source of grave concern. Al-Gama'a is a U.S.-designated terrorist organization, and
one of its top priorities is demanding that Washington release Omar Abdel Rahman, the "Blind Sheikh"

implicated in the ,1993 World Trade Center attack.


Third, an Islamist-led Egypt will be inhospitable for religious minorities and Egyptian secularists. Newly elected

Islamist parliamentarians aim to make Shariah the exclusive, not just the main, source for Egyptian

 legislation—and they vow to prosecute those who criticize Islamic law. The recent case that Islamists have

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793535 Date: 11/30/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793535 Date: 11/30/2015




    brought against Coptic billionaire Naguib Sawiris for tweeting a satirical image of Mickey and Minnie Mouse

,   dressed as Salafists is a scary sign of things to come.



    Yet Washington has assets to preserve its equities in Egypt. At $1.2 billion, U.S. military assistance is

    essentially the procurement budget for the Egyptian armed forces. While the Islamists may want the military

    out of politics, they also don't want to be accused of materially weakening the country. Direct U.S. economic

    support is much smaller, at $250 million, but America has a substantial voice in international financial

    institutions to which Egypt almost surely will turn for help. In the coming period, when Egypt's Islamist

    politicians will test just how far the U.S. will bend to accommodate a new political reality, the U.S. should be

    willing to use both these tools to advance its interests.



    Washington's message to Cairo's emerging leaders should be that U.S. support—both direct and indirect—is

    conditional on their cooperation in maintaining peace with Israel and preserving political pluralism and religious

    and minority rights. America should determine its relationship based on what Egypt's new rulers actually do on

    these issues, not the cooing sounds that their English-language spokesmen offer visiting American journalists,

    diplomats and politicians.



    Regarding Israel, simply not abrogating the peace treaty is not enough. The Egypt-Israel relationship has

    been stripped of so much content that there isn't much left to the peace treaty other than the absence of war.

    A more useful litmus test would be Egypt's commitment to invest the personnel and resources necessary to

    secure the Sinai Peninsula. Only such an effort will prevent the area from becoming, like Gaza in the 1950s

    and South Lebanon in the 1970s, a safe haven for terrorists that is likely to draw Egypt and Israel into

    eventual conflict.



    Protecting political pluralism and religious and minority rights is trickier but no less important. Especially critical

    is protection for Copts, the canaries in Egypt's coal mine. The fate of Egypt's democracy—and the chances

    for the emergence of non-Islamist options—will rest on whether this millennia-old community, as well as an

    array of other groups, feels comfortable in the new Egypt. A narrow focus on protecting pluralism and minority

    rights, rather than a broader and more diffuse effort to grow Egypt's democratic institutions, is easier to

    maintain, more conducive to a sticks-and-carrots assistance policy, and more likely to keep open future

    political alternatives.




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793535 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793535 Date: 11/30/2015




Merely protecting Egypt-Israel security and defending pluralism and minority rights would be a far cry from the

robust partnership of years past. But given the hand the U.S. has been dealt, this approach stands the best

chance of preserving what matters most to long-term American interests.



Mr. Satloff is executive director of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, where Mr. Trager is a fellow.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793535 Date: 11/30/2015
