      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797434 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                      RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                      B6


From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Saturday, October 27, 2012 6:45 AM
To: •
Subject:                           Fw: WSJ Editorial - The Other Embassy Attack




From: PA Clips [mailto:paclips@state.gov]
Sent: Friday, October 26, 2012 09:04 PM
To: PA-Monitoring-Group-DL; NEA-Press-DL; DS PA Media; Shore, Rhonda H; Atchison, Mark C; Moe, Grace T;
Coordination; Mills, Cheryl D; Toiv, Nora F; SARB
Subject: WSJ Editorial - The Other Embassy Attack

The Other Embassy Attack
Wall Street Journal Review & Outlook
Friday, October 26, 2012, 6:43 p.m. EDT

Tehran tries to turn Yemen into another Lebanon.

Government emails from Libya released this week show Foggy Bottom's finest knew within hours that an Islamist terror
group was behind the September 11 attacks that killed four Americans. Maybe this truth drip will force President Obama
to explain why his Administration so strenuously downplayed a terrorist connection and insisted an anti-Islamic video
was to blame. But amid media and Congressional efforts to uncover the truth about Benghazi, it's worth paying
attention to another attack on a U.S. diplomatic mission last month.

On September 13, several hundred people, mostly young men, stormed the Embassy in Yemen's capital of Sanaa. The
American staff had been evacuated, but the compound was overrun. In the melee four Yemenis died. At the time the
event was lumped in with other anti-American protests in Tunisia, Pakistan and Egypt that week.

Yet it has since become clear that the Yemen assault was also well coordinated, likely by one or more militias. More
alarming is an Iranian connection that signals that Tehran is expanding its long and quiet war on America to a new front.

The U.S. isn't ruling out the possible complicity of a Yemeni army faction loyal to ousted President Ali Abdullah Saleh. He
stepped down from power in February as part of a U.S.-backed political transition. Since his departure, the military has
been divided amid jockeying for control in this tribal society. The Salehs deny the accusation.

During months of anti-government protests in 2011, al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) also gained control of
territory in central Yemen. The group has several times tried to strike the U.S. mainland, and it may have been behind
the assassination this month of a Yemeni security officer employed at the U.S. Embassy.

However, the leading culprit is a Shiite rebel force backed by Tehran. Taking their name from a deceased commander,
the Houthi militia have since the mid-1990s fought against the Sunni-dominated government in Sanaa. According to
Western officials in Yemen, Iran has provided assistance for a Houthi resurgence in the past year. Their fighters have
gone to Iran and Lebanon for training, and money and arms have flowed from both into Yemen, officials say. The
Houthis run a satellite TV channel, al-Maseera, from Beirut.

In July the Yemeni government said it had uncovered an Iranian spy ring in Sanaa. That got the attention of the Saudis,
who are anxious about Iranian efforts to stir up their co-religionist Shiites in Bahrain, Yemen and most of all in the
Kingdom itself.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797434 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797434 Date: 11/30/2015




Tehran's strategy in Yemen calls to mind Lebanon in the 1980s, when Iran built up Hezbollah into what has become the
leading political power in Lebanon. The Iran-backed terrorists burst onto the scene by bombing the U.S. embassy and
Marine barracks in Beirut. If the Houthis were in the lead last month, the command and control chain runs straight to
Tehran.

The interim Yemeni government is also grappling with a separatist armed uprising in the south. One of the leaders of the
fractured rebel force lives in Beirut and has tried to build a pro-Iran movement in the south, according to a Western
diplomat in Sanaa.

The Houthis and the southerners are separate groups with somewhat different agendas. But Iran may be facilitating a
partnership, as well as reaching out to al Qaeda. They have one goal in common: To bring down the pro-American
government in Sanaa. "Despite the fact that they're on opposite ends of the religious spectrum, al Qaeda and Iran will
cooperate," a Western diplomat says. "You see indications that Iran is helping at Qaeda by trying to forge relations
between AQAP, Houthis and southern rebels."

The U.S. supports a "national dialogue" to stabilize Yemen, while waging a drone campaign against the AQAP. Both are
commendable goals. Yet Tehran has emerged as a new threat to Yemen's future and is fighting the U.S. through terror
proxies. Congress can seek more clarity about Iran's designs with an inquiry into the Sanaa attacks.


Harry Edwards • Press Officer • Press Desk • U.S. Department of State

2201 C St, NW Rm 2109, Washington, DC 20520 I    BB:               edwardshg@state.gov                                     B6




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797434 Date: 11/30/2015
