     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795370 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                  B6



From:                           H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                           Wednesday, July 25, 2012 5:11 PM
To:                             'Russorv@state.gov.
Subject                         Fw: Syria
Attachments:                    press release briansayers (2).docx

Importance:                      High



Pis print.


From: Anne-Marie Slaughter
Sent: Thursday, July 19, 201z 09:17 PM
To: H
Cc: Jacob J Sullivan (SullivanJJ©state.gov) <Sullivann@state.gov>; Burns, William J (BurnsWJ©state.gov)
<BurnsWJ©state.gov>; Cheryl Mills <MillsCD©state.gov>; Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
Subject: Syria


It was great to see you today, both at FPAB and at the data summit. I've been avoiding haranguing you directly
on Syria, putting my thoughts on the op-ed page instead. But this time I really think we have an opportunity that
I'm afraid we are going to miss, at least judging by the presentation that Bob Ford gave today. I didn't want to
say anything in front of the group, but here goes.

Below is the Declaration of Values that the nine commanders of the military councils of the FSA have signed and
are making public. They are exactly the values that we would want a new Syrian government to subscribe to, put
forward by military commanders on the ground who may not represent the entire Syrian armed opposition, but at
least reflect a good part of it — and the part that we would most want to triumph or at least triumph enough to be
able to share power with the Islamist groups. Further, if we put this together with the transition plan that Bob Ford
came out of Cairo, we have something tangible to go on. Further, see the attached press release, which I just
received, in which the FSA is following exactly the strategy that I laid out months ago. They are establishing safe
zones, `perimeters where all Syrian citizens can live under an umbrella of peace and security, regardless of their
ethnic background or religion." I see six reasons why we should publicly declare that we support these safe zones
and will be prepared to help defend them against the Syrian regime, in addition to the basic point that it is the
right thing to do.

    1) We have done much better in those MENA countries in which we have taken the initiative (Libya, Yemen)
       rather than hanging back and responding to events (Egypt, Syria). And if we can make a go of this and it
       comes out even half decently, then your legacy re US diplomacy in the equivalent of 1848 or 1989 will
       be remarkably good.
    2) After the Russian/China veto yesterday we have the perf&t opportunity to say that given their
       determination to support a murderous government, we are standing with the Syrian people and their
       regional neighbors.
    3) The opposition is going to win and is going to ask where we were. Supporting the declaration below and
       the safe zones does not prevent us from reaching out to the Islamist opposition; on the contrary, we might
       be able to help broker a coalition, working with the Turks/Saudis.
    4) The time to act is running out fast. This revolution is not going to wait on our election.
    5) If we don't seize this opportunity, the Republicans will. The Syrian Support Group is a fairly well
       organized and funded group of Syrian-Americans, as you probably know, many of whom are from the

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795370 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795370 Date: 11/30/2015




       mid-West and who are working every contact they have. This declaration of principles and the safe zones
       are going to make the issue look much more black and white from the perspective of the Romney
       campaign.
   6) It will be easier to move covertly to secure chemical weapons if we are actively and openly working with
       relatively well-organized groups on the ground.

That's as succinct as I can make it. It's time to act.

Best,

AM



Message from the Free Syrian Army to the World: "We're fighting for a democratic and peaceful nation,
but we need your help."

Last week, an extraordinary event occurred inside Syria that went largely unnoticed by almost everyone with
exception of nine individuals and a few informed people abroad. The nine commanding generals of the Military
Councils of the Free Syrian Army (FSA) --- the de facto opposition to President Bashar al-Assad' s regime --
signed a "Declaration of Values" that would please the likes of Jefferson, Mandela and Liu Xiaobo. Pressed by
the international media over abetting certain extremist factions including al-Qaeda, the FSA fighters are hitting
back and telling the world that not only are they deeply misunderstood, but that they are fighting for fundamental
human rights including liberty, justice and peace and against the barbarity and sectarianism that Assad's regime
is inflicting upon the Syrian people. None of the nine commanders claim to run perfect military councils, nor
have they denied that pockets of extremist groups are fighting on the side of the opposition. But what they will
also say is that a political vacuum in Syria, the probability of which is increasing over time, will only mitigate
shaping the future of the country, including removing undesirable elements of sectarianism and extremism. Either
the international community provides the relevant capabilities, assets and intelligence to support the FSA or
history will record that the world stood idle while both Syria and perhaps the wider region descended into turmoil.
The declaration below is more than agreeable words - it is a plea from embattled freedom-loving soldiers to
rational, fair-minded nations that their support is essential to end the bloodshed and bring about a lasting
peace. Maybe it's time that we stop shrugging our shoulders and understand what they have to say:

                                                  Free Syrian Army

                                                Declaration of Values

We the Commanders of the Military Councils of the Free Syrian Army, and representing the General Council of
Syria, hereby affirm this Declaration of our Values:

        • We believe in a free and democratic Syria where all Syrian citizens, regardless of their ethnicity,
        creed, religion, or class, shall live in liberty, justice and peace;

        • We believe in a pluralistic, multi-ethnic society which honors and upholds freedom of expression,
        thought and conscience;

        • We believe in free association and assembly. No Syrian citizen shall be forced into a political
        association;



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795370 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795370 Date: 11/30/2015




       o We believe that the Rule of Law shall be honored by the Governing bodies of Syria and reign
       supreme throughout the nation;

       o We believe that the Governing bodies and civil authorities shall protect its citizens from persecution,
       fear and cruel or unusual punishment;

       o We wekome peace and security along our regional borders and we look forward to political
       partnerships and alliances in the Middle East and beyond;

       o We believe that the Free Syrian Army military structure shall be guided by the decisions of a
       democratically elected civilian Government;

       • We will fight to end the tyranny and dictatorship of the Assad regime and we welcome our
       international allies and partners to join us in this Revolution for Freedom.

Signed by the nine Commanders of the Military Councils of the Free Syrian Army




Brian Sayers

Director of Government Relations



Syrian Support Group

1000 Connecticut Ave NW

Suite 900

Washington DC 20036

o: 202 787 1050

C:




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795370 Date: 11/30/2015
