      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                RELEASE IN
                                                                                                PART B6



From:                              Sullivan, Jacob 1 <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent                               Tuesday, April 12, 2011 3:56 PM
To:
Subject:                           FW: 4/11 FTA Target? Bader/Asia policy; Libya; Budget Wars




FYI


From: Campbell, Kurt M
Sent: Tuesday, April 12, 2011 1:47 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Fw: 4/11 FTA Target? Bader/Asia policy; Libya; Budget Wars

In case you had lingering doubts ....


From: Steinberg, James B
Sent: Tuesday, April 12, 2011 06:20 AM
To: Campbell, Kurt M
Subject: Fw: 4/11 FTA Target? Bader/Asia policy; Libya; Budget Wars

Really makes you feel good about public service


From: Chris Nelson [mailto
Sent: Monday, April 11, 2011 07:21 PM
To: Steinberg, James B
Subject: 4/11 FTA Target? Bader/Asia policy; Libya; Budget Wars




                                        The Nelson Report                            Er.




               NSC'S BADER LEAVING FRIDAY, RUSSELL STEPS UP
               CHINA POLICY LEAD STAYS WITH NSC/DONILON
               NSC, VIA MCDONOUGH, KEEPS KOREA, JAPAN
               USTR EXPECTS COLOMBIA TO CAP HILL 'IN WEEKS'
               THE BUDGET COMPROMISE...actually, many details uncertain
               OBAMA'S BIG SPEECH WEDNESDAY ON FY'12
               FRENCE ROLE IN COTE D'IVORIE A "MESSAGE" TO GADDAFI?
               'PERSPECTIVE' Dean Cheng on integrated China policy




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015




       SUMMARY: for the past several months, the question on NSC Senior
       Director for Asia Jeff Bader was not if he would step down for the private
       sector, but when. Now the answer is official...this Friday, April 15.

       The questions behind that question for months have centered on
       who/where will China policy be formulated and enforced, what's up with
       Korea policy, especially toward North Korea, and who will be the lead on
       Japan?

       In brief, informed sources firmly maintain that the answer to all three is
       "right where It's been all along, at the White House and the
       NSC." Tonight's headlines give you the "bulletin".

       On the Korea policy Item most under public discussion...food aid to the
       North.. Itdoesn't sound like any decision to change US policy is coming
       anytime soon, despite WFP's findings, and anything Jimmy Carter might
       come out with. Details, below.

       On Friday night's "last hour" deal between the President, and the Speaker,
       with the Senate Majority Leader in attendance, most analysts agree that
       It's a big win for Boehner, a critical win/save for Obama, but also
       something of a work in progress, since it turns out that "thousands" of
       budget details remain to be determined, yet the House is supposed to vote
       on Wednesday, followed on Thursday by the Senate.

       And Obama has now set a Wednesday speech to do what the White House
       had been under severe criticism for agt doing up to this point.. .setting out
       clear details and desired bottom lines on the tough questions. According
       to the pre-speech briefings underway, the President, it is claimed, will call
       for major cuts in defense, he'll reach out to the Republicans with calls for
       major cuts in Medicare and Medicaid, and he'll try to keep the very, very
       antsy Democratic base happy with a call to end the Bush tax cut on "the
       wealthy", defined as those making more than $250,000 a year.

       The White House calculates (hopes) that the Democratic base will come to
       see Obama's plan as courageous in the face of the House Republican
       budget of chairman Ryan, which proposes draconian reforms on Medicare
       and Medicaid, including basically dumping the costs down onto the states
       with no serious plan to deal with rising costs, and continues the GOP
       argument that revoking the Bush tax cut is a "hike", and therefore
       unacceptable.

       Whether all this proves to be premature is a question worth asking, since
       the real T-Parties/GOP freshman reaction to Friday's budget deal remains
       to be quantified, and some curmudgeons remember that the first
       "agreement" between then-President Clinton and then-Speaker Gingrich
       was defeated.

       On balance, most observers feel the Frosh won't want to pull the rug out
       from under Boehner with the real fights only now getting started...but
       there's still some tough talk from the Frosh about holding the line now in
       preparation for the Debt Limit fight, itself seen by the budget radicals as
       an essential first step in fighting Obama (and Boehner?) on FY'12.

       The White House today tried to do an "oops, never mind" on then-Sen.
       Obama's famous vote against extending the Dept Limit back in 2006,


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015




       saying he now understands why that was a mistake to charge the Bush
       White House with "shifting the burden of bad choices today onto the backs
       of our children and grandchildren. America has a debt problem and a
       failure of leadership, Americans deserve better."

       Likely his words back then will be liberally thrown at him now, hence the
       decision today to confront it with a mix of humility and panic, spokesman
       Carney calling refusal to extend the Debt Limit "Armageddon-
       like...devestating...dangerous...catastrophic...ca iamitous".

       On what's increasingly looking like a nasty stalemate in Libya, unless
       some deus ex machina event somehow removes Gaddafi, observers say
       the increasingly aggressive international military role being played by
       France, under President Sarkozy, is intended to let Gaddafi know that as
       went (today) the former Cote d'Ivoire dictator/war criminal, so too will
       Gaddafi if he won;t leave voluntarily.

       This tid bit is fascinating, and way out of our geographical comfort zone,
       but comes from sophisticated, if cheerfully cynical source Richard Medley,
       so we cheerfully pass it along...with a couple of more of his thoughts on
       this, below. Meanwhile, Sec St Clinton today reacted with caution to the
       Libyan rebels rejection of the Africa Union's cease-fire proposal which
       would have allowed Gaddafi to stay around.

        Don't close any doors to stopping the fighting, seems to be the implied US
        message.

        -0-

        FTA SCHEDULE GETTING CLEARER? With the following, courtesy of The
        Washington Trade Daily, we should hear shortly from Speaker Boehner
        (perhaps thru Ways & Means chair Camp) that the informal "hold" has
        been lifted on starting with Capitol Hill on the KORUS implementing
        legislation.

        WASHINGTON TRADE DAILY Alert — Moving the FTAs

        The US-Colombia free trade agreement could be ready to go Congress "In a matter of
        weeks," Deputy US Trade Representative Miriam Sapiro said today.

        The Obama Administration wants to work with Congress on a timeline for moving the
        three FTAs -- with Panama and South Korea -- along with other trade initiatives important
        to the White House. Those include renewal of the expired Andean and Generalized
        System of Preferences trade programs, expanded Trade Adjustment Assistance benefits
        and permanent normal trade relations for Russia. "We don't want to leave any single
        one behind" she told reporters following remarks to the NDN.

        KORUS is ready for Congress and Panama is expected to complete the last step it needs
        to take - approval if a tax information exchange
        agreement very soon, she said.

        Details in tomorrow's WTD

        -o-
        LINKING LIBYA AND COTE D'IVORIE—Sec. St. Hillary Clinton today reacted
        "with caution" to a rejection of the Africa Union's cease-fire proposal by


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015




       Libyan rebel leaders, who objected to anything allowing Gaddafi to remain
       in power. Clinton leaves later this week for more NATO foreign ministers
       meeting on Libya, and then on to South Korea and Japan.

       Reuters reports speculation that Clinton's mission in Seoul is part of a
       "diplomatic flurry that seems to be designed to resume talks on ending
       North Korea's nuclear programs", adding "A South Korean nuclear envoy
       Is in Washington this week to meet top officials, including Deputy
       Secretary of State Jim Steinberg and Stephen Bosworth, the US Special
       Representative for North Korea policy."

       We'll discuss the Korea aspect below.

       On Libya, bservers speculate that Clinton and the President don't want to
       preclude anything which might produce a cessation of hostilities, given the
       pressure Obama Is under from domestic critics of US over-extension in
       "three wars".

       Meanwhile, this from Loyal Reader (and former Sen. Byrd colleague)
       Richard Medley, Medley Global Advisors, to his clients this morning, on the
       increasingly aggressive role of France in the Ivory Coast, as a possible
       "preview" of more to come in Libya:

       "Whether the French turned over Gbagbo or "let" Quattara's forces
       capture him is irrelevant. Today they showed a willingness to move and
       move powerfully when it was time to end a fruitless stand-off.

       Hello Tripoli. Discussions with several senior officials at State, the NSC,
       and important diplomatic posts in Europe paint a picture of an
       administration that hopes the defection of Musa Kusa, as well as the
       outreach by former Deputy Foreign Minister (now Foreign Minister) Obeidi
       and Sail al Islam Khadafy indicate a fracturing regime.

       They recognize, however, that it may take a while for that to
       happen. After all, Gbagbo held out for six months of intense military and
       diplomatic pressure, despite walking out of the compound looking like
       Gandhi after being on the Atkins' Diet.

       We are in the middle of that process with Khadafy, although defections,
       etc., are running hotter now. The dictator and his regime want to stay in
       place in Tripolitania. The threat of a prolonged stalemate and a de facto
       partition of the country into a rump Tripolitania and rump Cyrenaica (this
       reflects long-standing divides in Libya since the time of the Ottomans) is a
       very real prospect but US and French officials sincerely believe today's
       strong action will ring a bell..."

        -0-

        NSC ASIA POLICY...we can confirm that NSC Senior Director for Asia Jeff
        Bader will formally leave the White House staff this Friday, April 15. He'll
        take a two week personal break, then start work at the Brookings
        Institution on May 2.

        Bader's successor (as long ago reported by Josh Rogin, aive credit where
        it is due!) will be his deputy for Korea, career State Department Japan and
        Korea expert Danny Russell.


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015




       Bader's immediate plans are to think about writing a book, presumably
       about China policy, and to contemplate various private consulting options.

       Since the likelihood of Bader's retirement and the promotion of Russell
       first hit the gossip mill, there have been additional senior foreign and
       defense policy officials also on the move, including Deputy Secretary of
       State Jim Steinberg at the end of April, to be replaced, the Senate willing,
       by Under Secretary Political Bill Burns, and Lt. Gen. Wallace "Chip"
       Gregson, Asst. Sec. East Asia at DOD, apparently to be replaced by Obama
       intimate, former NSC staffer Mark Lippert...although sources lately say
       that one is not (yet?) 100%.

       Also leaving DOD is Gregson's Principal DAS, Derek Mitchell, slated for the
       long-vacant Burma Special Envoy position, which also requires Senate
       confirmation. Sources agree Mitchell is a popular choice, and substantive
       opposition Is not expected. The gossip mill on his replacement as PDAS
       has to date been useless.. if you know something, you know what to do on
       that, as well as Lippert.

       -0-

       The Bader move has long been under (until now) private discussion in the
       policy commentariat, and it's no secret that the China constituency has
       been increasingly anxious that with each departure, the cadre of
       established, senior "China people" in the Obama Administration gets
       smaller and smaller.

       The "announcement" of Bader's imminent departure, via a carefully placed
       item in Saturday's New York Times, coming on the heels of the Steinberg
       and DOD changes noted above, has naturally stimulated intense discussion
       of who (both people, and beauracracy) will now be in charge of which
       aspects of Asia policy.

       Let's mention, in order, China, Korea and Japan policy, but first, on the
       continued overall primacy of the NSC:

       With the rise of the enormously respected Bill Burns from
       UnderSecState/Political to Deputy, and with A/S EAP Kurt Campbell, a
       seasoned Asia hand, remaining in place, there has been much speculation
       that the White House might be ceding the lead on China policy to State,
       since there will be no senior career "China hands" on the NSC.

       Such speculation is wrong, we are reliably, and indeed, firmly informed, as
       it manages to overlook the increasing involvement of National Security
       Advisor Tom Donilon directly on China policy at the highest levels. Most
       recently, it is noted, Donilon accompanied Bader to Bejing to "advance"
       the Obama/Hu Summit here in Washington.

       Further, it is argued, Obama's close comrade from the Campaign, Deputy
       National Security Advisor Denis McDonough, not only will remain in the
       White House, but will continue his role of recent months in "rigorously
       chairing the Deputies meetings on both Korea/N. Korea and Japan policy".

       (See the next section on Korea policy per se.)



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015




        And Russell, of course, is a highly respected career FS0 NE Asia expert,
        with language, on both Japan and Korea, sources note, adding that in
        recent months he has had increasing "face time" with the President, in
        addition to building working relationships with McDonough and Donlion.
        That he has won their confidence is clear, through his coming promotion,
        It is noted.

        Finally, in terms of assumed tectonic shifts in the balance of power
        between State and the White House, an observer of the turf wars endemic
        to Washington notes, even with all the changes underway, "not since the
        days of Henry Kissinger have you had a situation where State called the
        play on China, not the White House, and I can tell you that Isn't going to
        change under Obama!"

        OK, fair enough, but the US-China "engagement calendar" helps explain
        the quite frankly expressed (If always "on background") concerns about
        the practical implications of the departures of Bader and Steinberg, known
        primarily for their years of personal China expertise and high-level
        contacts.

        It was certainly made very clear in public that A/S EAP Campbell carried
        the major sherpa's load in negotiating the final details of the Obama-Hu
        "Joint Statement" on policy across the board, although, of course, final
        approval came from Obama/McDonough/Bader.

        With the Security & Economic Dialogue coming up so soon, on May 10,
        concerned observers, and critics, ask who will be carrying the load for the
        "Security" part, given that, of course, Treasury's Geithner will continue to
        have the financial/economic portfolio in hand. ..see Friday's decision to
        again delay the Currency Misalignment Report to Congress?

         One frankly skeptical non-Administration China hand worries as follows:

        "Chris,

        In the next three months, we have:

               1. Human rights bilat.
               2. S&ED talks on May 9-10
               3. Central Military Commission "senior member" Chen Bingde visit (to
                  US)
               4. VP Biden visit (to China)
               5. Presumed Hu successor Xi Jinping visit (to US)

         In the midst of this, we've got changes at DOD, DOS, AND the NSC?? Then,
         the newbies are ALL non-China experts? And finally, the bureaucracies are
         ALL going to have to adjust SIMULTANEOUSLY? Was this by design, or just
         accident? And anyhow, given the calendar, why couldn't POTUS get ANY of
         them to delay their moves/departures?"

         -0-

         KOREA POLICY...we noted at the top of Reuters Libya piece its speculation
         that Clinton to Seoul is part of a "diplomatic flurry designed to try to
         resume talks on ending North Korea's nuclear programs".



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015




       Presumably the anonymous State Department source who said something
       nice about Jimmy Carter's planned mission helped feed this impression.
       Frankly, from our conversation with Administration policy-makers on this,
       we urge not to exaggerate either the situation, or the missions or either
       Carter or Clinton.

       As we Just reported, above, there is not going to be any dimunition of
       Korea policy control by the White House insofar as Deputy National
       Security Advisor McDonough is concerned, and with soon to be Sr. Director
       Russell's professional specialty, his views on Korea policy will continue to
       be those most immediately at hand.

       Substantively, on food aid: despite some characteristically optimistic, or
       humanistically phrased Congressional testimony by State's Campbell;
       backed-up by Steve Bosworth, that the US "isn't going to let anyone
       starve", we do not detect any lessening of the fundamental skepticism of
       why It's a good thing to resume food aid to the DPRK under current
       circumstances.

       "We are not in any hurry" is said, if privately, time and time again.

       And as Bosworth and Campbell both were careful to explain to Capitol Hill,
       the humane instincts of the American people will be filtered through the
       very practical constraints imposed by the history of what the White House
       sees as a demonstrable history of diversion of food assistance from needy
       women and children to Kim regime supporters, especially the military.

       We've spent much of the past week running the pros and cons of resuming
       food aid to N. Korea, so need not repeat the arguments tonight.

       The bottom line: until or unless a fully reliable verification regime is
       agreed to and is up and running in the DPRK, Obama policy is going to
       remain in place, we'd argue, even If the S. Korean government changes Lts
       mind about the situation, which seems highly unlikely without some
       overall improvement in N/S relations (the preconditions for which are well
       known).

       Finally, even if It's decided to try to forge ahead with N. Korea, this White
       House is fully aware of the practical problems encountered, dating from
       back in the Clinton Administration, when it tried to get money from
       Congress for N. Korea, even If to support a nuclear freeze
       agreement. With Republicans now firmly in control of the House, this
       situation is back in play, in full force.

       -0-

       JUDGE MORRIS/GLOBAL BUSINESS DIALOGUE...TODAY'S TTALK...

        REFLECTION ON A GREEN LIGHT

        "We've been working on getting a green light for this [the FTA with the United
        States] to go to Congress for five years, and we got that green light today."

        Juan Manuel Santos
        April 7 2011

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015




        "So today, I am very pleased to announced that we have developed an action plan for
        labor rights in Colombia... .Now there's obviously a lot of work to do to translate this
        action plan into reality."

        Barack Obamq,
        April 7, 2011

        Context: On Wednesday, April 6, the White House issued a very positive
        statement on the pending free-trade agreement with Colombia. The statement
        explained that the Obama administration has been working hard with the
        Colombian government to resolve outstanding issues and said that:

               "The result is an agreed "Action Plan Related to Labor Rights" that will lead
               to greatly enhanced labor rights in Colombia and clear the way for the
               U.S.-Colombia Trade Agreement to move toward Congress."

        On Thursday, April 7, President Santos called on President Obama at the White
        House, which provided the opportunity for a joint press briefing. Today's quotes
        were taken from that briefing.

        Comment: Unquestionably, last week's announcements- the action plan, the
        press briefing, all of it - were a major step forward in the life of this long-drawn
        out agreement. To recap, it is an agreement that was first discussed in 2003,
        signed in 2006, and submitted to Congress by President Bush in 2008, only to be
        dispatched to a diplomatic holding pen where it has languished ever since.

        Our impression is that many if not most of the American supporters of this
        agreement believe that, at last, the deal is done. Yes, Congress needs to act, but
        the votes are there and it is simply a matter of time - and presumably not much
        time - before the agreement is approved and implemented. And such an
        interpretation probably comports well With the President's intentions. In the
        same press conference, for example, President Obama said he was looking
        forward to attending the Summit of the Americas next year in Cartagena,
        Colombia. That will be a pretty awkward meeting if the U.S.-Colombia FTA isn't
        up and running by then.

        Not everyone is sanguine about the future of this deal, however. According to a
        recent Wall Street Journal article, the people of Colombia still only give the
        agreement a 50 percent chance of being approved by the U.S. Congress. And
        presumably those who find the deal inadequate - organizations like the AFL-CIO
        and political leaders like Rep. Sander Levin (Dem. - Michigan) are prepared to
        fight against it.

        Exegesis. One way to look at all of this is to ask questions of the text from last
        Thursday's remarks by the two presidents. When President Obama said there is a lot
        of work to do, just how much work did he have in mind and over what time period?
        When President Santos said, "We got that green light today," it sounded as if he
        meant that the last obstacles facing the agreement had been cleared away. And
        indeed, that's probably what he did mean, and he may have been
        right. Alternatively, this agreement's journey may be far from over, with more
        obstacles, more intersections, more red lights still ahead.



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015




        SOURCES & LINKS:

        Two President Talk To The Press takes you to White House transcript of the
        statements issued by President Obama and President Santos last Thursday.

        Doubts in Bogota is a link to the Wall Street Journal article that discusses
        Colombia's reaction to the most recent developments.

        Fact Sheets is a link to April 6 White House statement mentioned above,
        including the Action Plan and other fact sheets.

        No Good Enough Yet is a link to the statement by the Ranking Member of the
        House Ways and Means Committee, Sander Levin of Michigan in response to
        these most recent developments.

        -0-

        "PERSPECTIVE"...Loyal Reader Dean Cheng, of the Heritage Foundation's
        Asia Studies Center, like most of us, has been worried about/thinking
        about recent trends in Chinese policy across the board. Dean says this
        piece, while published today, was prepared before last Friday's State
        Department Annual Report on Human Rights...the substance of which on
        China he would have mentioned, and praised:

        China's Crackdown and America's Response: Supporting
        Liberty in Distant Places

        The Heritage Foundation, WASHINGTON, April 11, 2011

        As the "Jasmine Revolution" continues to unravel traditional power structures in the
        Middle East, Chinese authorities have been cracking down on dissidents and activists on a
        scale not seen in over a decade. On the eve of the next round of Strategic and Economic
        Dialogue talks, and with much less experienced Asia team members for the U.S.-many of
        whom have no China experience-there will be great pressure to overlook these harsh
        measures. But doing so would not help the dissidents but instead betray American ideals.
        Reasons for the Crackdown
        Western media has noted the arrest of Ai Weiwei, an internationally recognized artist.
        But other reports indicate that a host of activists, human rights lawyers, and dissidents
        have been detained. Reports suggest that at least 20, and perhaps between 50 and a
        hundred people have been arrested or have otherwise disappeared.ill
        Part of this effort is almost certainly in reaction to developments in the Middle East. Very
        clearly, the Chinese authorities are worried that the winds of popular discontent and
        demands for political reform will blow through China. This is likely exacerbated by
        possible similarities in the domestic situation in China and parts of the Middle East. These
        include increasing frustration with corruption and growing disparities between urban and
        rural populations. Both of these are likely factors in the mounting number of "mass
        incidents" reported throughout China, now likely exceeding 100,000 a year.
        Less widely recognized is the issue of urban unemployment. In the Middle East, there is a
        large population of underemployed, educated youth in the cities. Officially, this is much
        less of a problem in China, where urban unemployment at the end of 2010 was only 4.1
         percent. Yet Chinese articles nonetheless document a similar phenomenon of

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015




       underemployed and unemployed youths congregating in cities such as Beijing, Nanjing,
       and Chongqing. Often referred to as "ants," they are believed to number anywhere from
       a million to 3 million.al Like the urban youth in Tunisia and Egypt, they constitute
       potential tinder for any kind of popular movement against government controls-educated
       yet dissatisfied.
       The current crackdown may be further motivated by the upcoming plenary meeting of
       the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). It is reported that this meeting may determine the
       makeup of the next Politburo Standing Committee, the true Chinese leadership.
       Instability in the streets not only may disrupt the plenum but would potentially also
       Introduce unpredictable factors into the various factions' maneuvering for power and
       advantage. For all the involved parties, there is likely to be great interest in limiting the
       potential for embarrassing incidents.
       Don't Get Your Hopes Up
       Several recent Chinese publications provide additional food for thought regarding this
       crackdown. The Twelfth Five Year Plan (2011-2015) shows that Beijing will spend more
       on internal security forces than on the military.21 In addition, the 2010 Chinese defense
       white paper, which was released only last week, prominently notes that a major task of
       the Chinese military is to "maintain social harmony and stability." 1_41 The People's
       Armed Police, part of the Chinese armed forces, is given this task on a day-to-day basis,
       but it is important to remember that the People's Liberation Army is the armed wing of
       the CCP. There should be no doubt that, if necessary, the Party will use every available
       means to enforce its will.
       Meanwhile, Global Times, part of the People's Daily newspaper system published by the
       CCP, editorialized that Ai Weiwei's arrest was not for his dissidence but for his violation
       of Chinese laws.151 The editorial highlights a growing trend in Chinese suppression of
       dissidents: the aggressive use of the law as a rationalization for punishment. As one
       Chinese official warned foreign journalists who were assaulted by police, for those who
       seek to make trouble for China, the law is not a shield and offers no protection.M
       This attitude of rule by law rather than rule of law should disabuse those optimists who
       had looked to Wen Jiabao's speeches as presaging some kind of fundamental political
       reform or even the stirrings of democracy. That even high-profile dissidents can be legally
       punished simply for pushing the limits highlights how concepts of "legal warfare" apply
       not only internationally but domestically.
       As long as the CCP remains in power, there will be little meaningful movement toward
       democracy. The CCP has little incentive to cede power. Indeed, recent events in the
       Middle East only underscore, from the Party's perspective, that loss of power ultimately
       leads to exile and at worst to civil war-a very zero-sum view. Belief that democracy is
       "just around the corner" is, of course, foolish. But, as Wu Bangguo emphasized at the
       recent National People's Congress, "We will never simply copy the system of Western
       countries or introduce a system of multiple parties holding office in rotation."Elj
       Recommendations
       The U.S. should:
          • Retain the Tiananmen Square sanctions. Leaving aside the national security
              implications of the Tiananmen sanctions, it is important that the leadership
              in Beijing recognize that its actions have consequences. In particular, when a
              government turns its guns on its own people, it must know that this will be
              deemed unacceptable behavior and that it will not change simply with the
              passage of time. In this regard, Washington should also persuade its allies to
              keep those sanctions in place. Otherwise, they would have little meaning and
              less impact.
          • Link ideals and individuals. Supporting human rights is not only a matter of
              speeches and resolutions-it has individual faces as well. Foreign attention is


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015




               often the only protection for many dissidents. It is also one of the most
               powerful means of assuring them that their struggle is not forgotten or
               Ignored. American officials from the President to the Secretary of State to the
               Ambassador and embassy staff should not shy away from championing
               dissidents in their official dialogues, private discussions with Chinese officials,
               and public statements.
           • Support the study of legal warfare as a weapon of future conflict. Some
               Western scholars look at China's efforts to create a judicial system-and
               especially a national code of laws-as somehow presaging a shift from Party
               rule to the rule of law. But Chinese actions make clear that the law will be
               increasingly used as an instrument of justifying various measures by the
               state, not as a means of ensuring justice. Just as the American military in the
               1930s began to prepare for future conflicts by developing naval and land-
               based aviation, American policymakers today should be supporting efforts at
               studying the potential for legal warfare, both offensively and defensively.
               Military lawyers should incorporate the study of foreign-and especially
               Chinese-laws and legal warfare into their training.
       What Does the U.S. Stand For?
       The exceedingly dim prospects for democratic reform in China does not mean that the
       United States should abandon its support for it. Support for democracy worldwide is a
       fundamental American tenet, elemental to American ideals and principles. Both rhetoric
       and action are necessary.
       Dean Cheng is Research Fellow in Chinese Political and Security Affairs in the Asian
       Studies Center at The Heritage Foundation.
       -0-

       THAT'S IT FOR TONIGHT...




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015




                                 The Nelson Report
                        Samuels International Associates, Inc.
                                   202-223-7683
                           www.samuelsinternational.com




  This email was sent to steinbergjb@state.gov by cnelsonOsamuelsinternational.com
  Update Profile/Email Address I Instant removal with SafeUnsubscribeTM I Privacy Policy.
  Samuels International Associates, Inc. I 1140 Connecticut Avenue NW I Suite 950 I Washington I DC I 20036




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780569 Date: 11/30/2015
