      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794675 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                        RELEASE IN
                                                                                                        PART B6


From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Tuesday, June 5, 2012 6:27 AM
To:                                'monica.hanle)
Subject:                           Fw: USCoPs Readout



Pls print.

     Original Message
From: Reines, Philippe I [mailto:reinesp@state.gov]
Sent: Sunday, June 03, 2012 10:40 AM
To: H
Cc: Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>; Valmoro, Lona J<ValmoroU@state.gov>
Subject: USCoPs Readout

MS-

As Director Sullivan does with his Policy Planning peers, I'm going to start meeting with my PA counterparts around the
world. We're kicking off the new initiative with today's first ever US-Sweden Communications Planning Summit
(USCoPs).

Overall, I'd describe our discussions as a constructive tour d'horizon of communications issues of mutual concern. But
talks are going longer than anyone expected, so I want to give you a readout in case I don't see you until Armenia:

• On adopting a global standard for what font and type should be used on all official press releases and statements: Our
opening gambit was Tahoma 10 pt. The Swedes are pretty hard over against it, they feel it's "belligerent" and contrary
to the spirit of their neutrality. They also believe it is too aligned with Microsoft. They're countering with Comic Sans MS
as a compromise. My gut is that we'll end up with Calibri. Stay tuned.

• On the # of press conference questions: we are in vigorous agreement that the current standard of 2+2 is antiquated
and needs to be updated with a new regime. Our idea is aggressive, and might violate the 1954 Convention on Media
Inquiries (held on the margins of that year's Trilateral Commission meeting in Vaduz) - which is considered more of an
entente than a bona fide accord - but we're focusing on a formula that takes into account population, translation
equipment, local issues, freedom of the press, podium height, Jake's anxiety, and other relevant factors. As an example,
in the case of Sweden, rather than your press conference today with Bildt being 2+2, it would have been .3+.7; at the
other end of the spectrum, China would rate 37+92. Obviously there are still some kinks to work out.

• Devices used to record avails and interviews: All agree this is a moot point, as only Sony and Olympus manufacture
recorders, so there are no national interests at stake.

• Not sure how, but Guinea-Bissau got wind of our meeting, so going forward we're expanding to USC0P5+193-190
(USC0P5+3 for short). Format will be PIR+7.

We were hoping to end the talks with a joint communique, but having a hard time coming to an agreement. Not on the
content or wording - we are in lockstep on that front. But returning to my first bullet above, we can't settle on a font.
I'm not giving up so easily and will continue to hope against hope - but unless I agree ex gracia, we might end up going
home empty handed.

But I'll do better with the Yerevanians!



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794675 Date: 11/30/2015
