UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796336 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL




     COHASSET, Mass. - Priscilla B. (Dewey) Houghton, wife of former U.S. Rep. and
     Corning Incorporated Chairman and CEO Amory "Amo" Houghton Jr., died Friday, July
     6, 2012, at home.
     She was 87.
     Priscilla Houghton endured a long struggle with lung cancer but stayed very active
     leading and advocating arts programs for children in Cohasset, Mass. and Corning, N.Y.,
     where the couple resided
     "She was, for me, the woman for all seasons," Amo Houghton said.
     Amo and Priscilla Houghton married in 1989, just after Amo was elected to the first of
     his nine terms as a Southern Tier congressman. Their marriage was the second for each of
     them.
      "She was the ideal partner in politics," Amo said. "She, a Democrat in spirit; I, a
     Republican. Our goal was to bring both sides together — in Washington, back home in
     New York and on foreign trips."
     Priscilla Houghton was an arts consultant, producer, playwright/lyricist and writer who
     published nine musicals. A native of Massachusetts, she was the founder of the Charles
     River Creative Arts Program in Dover, Mass., which was designated by the National
     Endowment for the Arts as a model multi-arts program for young people. The program
     has since been duplicated in 40 other communities across the country.
     "She believed the arts could be a transformative experience and could change the lives of
     at-risk young people," said Lee Baldwin, a long-time friend and Corning resident.
     In 2002, Priscilla Houghton received the Elmira/Corning Board of the NAACP
     President's Award for her work with the Urban Improv program, which promotes conflict
     resolution in public schools.
     "Priscilla gave unselfishly of herself to encourage and enable emerging artists in the
     Corning arts community. A talented artist, her enthusiasm and good humor inspired all
     who knew her to 'be the best that they could be.' Priscilla was a woman of courage and
     compassion who made a difference in Corning and in the lives of all she touched," said
     musician Mary Lu Walker, a long-time friend and Corning resident.
     Priscilla Houghton was an ardent supporter of lung cancer research, serving on the board
     of Lung Cancer Alliance, Washington, D.C.
     Along with her husband, survivors include three children, Priscilla, Talbot Jr., and Peter;
     and several grandchildren and great-grandchildren.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796336 Date: 11/30/2015
