UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772724 Date: 11/30/2015




                                         MACK McLARTY
                                             WASIIINCTON, D.C.           RELEASE IN PART B6




            October 11,2010

            Secretary Hillary Clinton
            U.S. Department of State
            2201 C Street,
            Washington, DC 20520

            Dear Madam Secretary,

            I hope this letter finds you well, with fall fully underway. You continue to
            lead the State Department with extraordinary skill And effectiveness, and to
            represent our nation to the world in the best possible way. You've been
            getting universally high marks, even from some who are inclined to be
            critical, and that's a testament to the confidence you've restored in U.S.
            diplomacy. Donna and I are proud of atidl for you. We know how hard you
            work every day.

            Madam Secretary, I'm writing to revisit an issue you and I had discussed
            when you first took up your new job: specifically, the appointment of a
            Special Envoy for the Americas.

             As you recall, during his campaign, President Mama promised he would
             reinstate the position. And while you and I both. know that envoy positions
             are not guaranteed to be successful, I do believe they have merit. Senator
             Mitchell is doing an excellent job as you continue to work to move the Middle
             East Peace Process forward. During my time as Special Envoy, I felt I was
             able to assist President Clinton in advancing his agenda—not only in terms of
             hemispheric relations, but regarding broader thematic issues like trade (ie
             jobs), security, energy and the environment, and integration and dooperation.
             Of course your efforts during your time as First Lady were very affirming and
             important to the President's agenda and my efforts and I will always be
             mindful and grateful for your support and engagement.

             Obviously, a ,great deal depends on the talent and temperament of the
             individual him- or herself But part of what prompts me to reach out today is
             the likelihood that              May soon be available for new opportunities.
                    vould bring a tremendous range of expertise and assets to the job of
             Special ,Envoy for the Americas. As a former              he understands core
             issues like trade, jobs, education, and immigration, as well as the importance
             of the gowing Hispanic constituency in the United States, Foreign leaders




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772724 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772724 Date: 11/30/2015




            would respect and value the close and trusting friendship he shares with
            President Obama. He speaks fluent Spanish, thanks to his service as a
                                       And his political skills would prove valuable in
            navigating the vaned interests, agendas, concerns, and personalities that make
            up the Latin American and Caribbean landscape.

            To that last point, I do believe this is an important moment in our dealings
            with the hemisphere. As you well know, the region is not a monolithic,
            homogeneous bloc—but, rather, a group of diverse and distinct countries with
            disparate concerns. Last month, Moises Naim wrote a pointed column in El
            Pais .called "While Washington Sleeps," in which he criticized the United
            States tbr what he described as a lethargic and unimaginative policy toward a
            region Made up of fast-growing economies, Where China's influence is
            deepening, and where a new group of leaders is taking their countries through
            demoeratic elections. At a time when our nation is still grappling with wars
            on the other ,side of the globe, a Special Envoy for the Americas could help
            keep relations in our own neighborhood on track. I know first-hand how
            Much the leaders in the hemisphere appreciate the kind of personal
            engagement and attention that a dedicated Envoy can provide.

            I'm aware that you've been reaching out to experts like 'Strobe and Jose
            Villarreal, and I commend you for your efforts. You have a full plate—
            indeed, hill to overflowing—and you are doing an excellent 'ob. This is
            simply a case where I believe an opportunity exists, for         to serve
            the country, the president, and you; and for our nation to revitalize its
            engageinerit with our closest neighbors.

            Please know that I stand ready to be supportive hovvever I can,


                                                     Personally,




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772724 Date: 11/30/2015
