      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791338 Date: 11/30/2015
                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL




From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Wednesday, July 18, 2012 10:08 AM
To:
Subject:                         FW: more




From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Wednesday, July 18, 2012 9:49 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Laszczych, Joanne
Subject: more


FIRST LOOK - PEOPLE magazine on newsstands Friday (cover: "Tom's Shattered World"), and online
now, "Anthony Weiner, 'I Feel Like a Different Person ': For the first time, new parents talk about saving
their marriage after he resigned from Congress in scandal," by PEOPLE Washington correspondent Sandra
Sobieraj Westfall (first photos of former Rep. Anthony Weiner, 47, and Human Abedin, deputy chief of staff to
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, with their baby, Jordan, 6 months): "Today Weiner, 47, says that 'I've had
enormous regrets about what I put Huma through, how I let my constituents down. But it's not like I sit all day
replaying it in my mind. With a baby, it is pretty easy to put things into perspective. ... I can't say absolutely that
I will never run for public office again, but I'm very happy in my present life. I'm not doing anything to plan a
campaign. ... The only next dramatic steps I'm planning on are Jordan's first.' ...

"[His marriage] not only stayed intact, but appears to have thrived. That's a big reason the usually press-
shy Abedin, 37, has invited a reporter into their home. 'I'm proud to be married to him ... My husband did a
really stupid thing. It was an extremely painful time. But there was love and a commitment to this marriage. ...
It took a lot of work to get where we are today, but I want people to know we're a normal family.' Weiner says
he sought professional counseling but won't go into detail except to say that it helped. Abedin concurs:
'Anthony has spent every day since then trying to be the best dad and husband he can be.'

"That includes doing all-repeat all-the laundry, and keeping things going when his wife goes to Washington
for her work at the State Department. He has done some paid consulting from home, but has otherwise lain low.
... He gave interviews about the recent Supreme Court health-care decision and reads The New York Times to
his son, but says, 'I'm not watching C-SPAN3 in the middle of the night, regretting how my life has turned out.
... I'm still trying to sort out exactly.where I am in the public consciousness. ... You wonder if my name was
Mitchell whether the scandal would have been as bad." http://bitly/LXfjG3




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791338 Date: 11/30/2015
