UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795115 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                 RELEASE IN
                                                                                 FULL

                                   The Dorothy Rodham Center Proposal


  According to the 2010 US Census Bureau, DC has a population of 601,723 of whom 50.7% are Black,
  38.5% White, 9.1% Hispanic or Latino origin, and 3.5% Asian. In comparison to national Census data,
  DC has approximately four times the percentage of Black residents, twice the percentage of Hispanics and
  half the percentage of Whites. The Black and Hispanic residents of DC bear a disproportionate burden of
  poverty with approximately 25% of Blacks and 16% of Hispanics living below the poverty lines,
  compared to 8% of Whites.

  In DC, socioeconomic disparities correlate closely with health care disparities. Black and Hispanic
  residents of DC are more likely than Whites to live in a Health Professional Shortage Area (HPSA) and
  Hispanic residents are the least likely to have medical insurance of any kind. DC has taken several steps
  to provide health care to its neediest individuals: it has a highly developed community health center
  system with more than 30 community health center sites across DC and it offers the DC HealthCare
  Alliance program, which provides coverage to those ineligible for Medicaid up to 200% of the federal
  poverty level. The existence of the Alliance program means that, in 2008, only 9.8% of the DC population
  was uninsured compared to 15.8% of the national population.

  Unfortunately, many health care providers in DC do not participate in Alliance because its reimbursement
  rates and contractual rules are more restrictive than Medicaid. As a result, many patients covered by
  Alliance continue to face access barriers and are therefore under-insured. In addition, the growing
  national shortage of primary care providers is felt acutely here in DC. Approximately 20% of DC
  residents report no usual source of care. DC has a total of 9 Medically Under-Served Areas (MUAs)
  involving 86 census tracts, and the DOH estimates that 45% of the DC population resides in a MUA. In
  2008, the RAND Corporation estimated a primary care visit shortfall in DC of between 225,000 and
  253,000 visits for medically vulnerable populations.

  On top of these socioeconomic and access challenges, DC must confront several notable health
  challenges. Most prominently, DC suffers from the highest prevalence of HIV/AIDS in the nation. Within
  DC, 3.2% of residents over age 12 have HIV. More than 75% of persons living with HIV/AIDS in DC are
  Black, with a disproportionate burden of disease among Black male adults (prevalence of HIV in this
  population is 7.1%). Data from the DOH reveals a ten-year survival rate of 67% among Blacks -
  strikingly lower than the 90% rate among Whites and Hispanics in DC.




  The George Washington University's Internal Medicine Residency Program has 105 residents. There are
  three tracks: Preliminary, Categorical and Primary Care (PC). There are 10 residents in the preliminary
  track that spend a year in Internal Medicine before going to residencies such as Radiology,
  Ophthalmology, Anesthesiology and Dermatology. The majority of the residents are in the 3 year
  categorical track, many of whom go on to do fellowships in sub-specialties such as Cardiology and
  Infectious Disease. The Primary Care Track, also 3 years, is one of the oldest programs of its kind in the
  country having been around for over 30 years. There are 5 graduates a year from the Primary Care track
  and previous alums have gone on to work in the DC Prison health system, various city wide community
  based clinics that serve the under and uninsured. Most notably, Dr. Ray Martins who completed this
  program several years ago is now the Medical Director of Whitman-Walker Health which serves
  Washingtonians living with HIV/AIDS.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795115 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795115 Date: 11/30/2015




  Despite the success of the PC program at attracting residents to needy communities, GW currently offers
  no opportunities for longitudinal community-based training to its categorical residents — the residents who
  constitute nearly 90% of GW's internal medicine residency program. Numerous categorical residents
  have expressed a desire to serve the uriderserved.

  In addition, many medical students enter medicine with the idea of working in under-served areas and
  with vulnerable populations. However, the reality of medical school loans prohibits many from realizing
  these early ambitions. Furthermore, the residency training model has tended to emphasize hospital based
  rotations and has historically offered few opportunities for young doctors to work in community based
  settings.

  To that end, the GW Internal Medicine (IM) Program has already put into place various electives to help
  give residents in training these opportunities.

  Community Health Elective—Briefly, the purpose of this elective is to introduce residents to pertinent
  topics in community health, to expose residents to the practice of medicine in a community setting, and to
  develop physician leaders in community health This is a 2-week elective which will combine both
  morning didactics and afternoon clinical experiences in community health settings throughout the
  Washington, DC area. Please see below for the lecture schedule and full list of course objectives.

  http://www.gwmed.com/j oomla/index.php?option=com_content&view=article &id=96&Itemid=108


  Health Policy Elective

  The Residency / Fellowship Rotation in Health Policy (RFHP) is a special offering of the Department of
  Health Policy, made possible through the combined resources of the School of Public Health and Health
  Services and the School of Medicine and Health Sciences, as well as a generous gift from Harold and
  Jane Hirsh. The RFHP is offered to George Washington residents from all disciplines who are interested
  in an intensive, short-term health policy fellowship as part of their graduate medical education experience.

  The goal of the RFHP is to provide residents with an understanding of U.S. health policy and its
  implications for medical practice and health care in the U.S. The program, sponsored by the nationally
  ranked Department of Health Policy, is not available in any other U.S. graduate medical education setting
  and capitalizes on GWU's Washington D.C. location and the extraordinary health policy resources
  available in this city,

  The RFHP faculty is drawn from many disciplines and includes a number of individuals who are national
  experts in their respective fields. By the end of the rotation, participants will have received a basic
  grounding in key aspects of U.S. health policy and law through intensive seminars designed to build
  knowledge across the many fields of health policy, including health care access, financing, regulation,
  quality, disparities, education and workforce policy, public health protection, and critical fields of health
  law. Participants will also witness health policy making first-hand, through field trips to a variety of
  health policy-making settings including the Congress, federal agencies, professional associations, and
  local health delivery sites. In these settings, participants will have the opportunity to meet with policy
  professionals involved in many of today's critical debates and decisions. Finally, participants will learn
  and 'apply fundamental principles of health policy analysis in simulations designed to mirror real-world
  challenges in health policy.

  http://www.gwmed.com/j oomla/index.php?option=com content&view=article&id---84&Itemid=97




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795115 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795115 Date: 11/30/2015




  Residents as Young Educators (RAYES)

  Residents are expected to teach their patients, students and each other, but more often than not, have not
  had formal training in educational theory. The purpose of this course is to help residents recognize
  principles of adult learning theory and apply them to opportunities across the course of their residency
  training.
  The Residents as Young Educators curriculum is designed to provide a theoretical and empirical
  framework on which to build foundational concepts of adult learning. Through readings, didactics and
  personal teaching experiences, residents will integrate the principles of adult learning theory
  longitudinally and in various settings throughout their residency.
  The curriculum provides the opportunity to design and lead educational events based on the principles of
  adult learning. The curriculum provides opportunities to instruct fellow residents on a topic and to obtain
  feedback from fellow residents and faculty members on the design of a future learning event.




  What would the role of The Dorothy Rodham Center be?

   1) The RAYES program would be expanded to allow residents, and eventually medical students, to co-
  teach in partnership with the Association of Black Cardiologists (ABC) a 12- module curriculum that
  ABC has already developed to educate DC residents on Cardiovascular Health. Mr. Andre Williams,
  executive director of ABC has stated that by working with physicians in training, ABC will be able to
  reach many more community leaders through this innovative, culturally relevant curriculum. This train-
  the-trainers initiative will give the young doctors experience and exposure to help prepare them to
  become engaged members of their communities. This will provide the community with needed tools to
  educate its members on heart disease, hypertension, kidney failure, diabetes and how to effectively treat
  and manage these chronic illnesses.

  2) The Department of Health through Ms. Fay Van Hook, Program Manager of the Community Health
  Administration's Cardiovascular Health Program, has expressed tremendous interest in partnering with
  GW's Dorothy Rodharn Center. The DOH is already in the process of conducting a needs assessment by
  performing a questionnaire of 10,000 homes in the District of Columbia on a wide array of health
  concerns. This will allow for the creation of a database that can measure current health parameters and
  then track them as various initiatives are implemented. This work will allow for a sharing of information
  across various institutions in the city in a collaborative model to impact positively on health outcomes.


   3) DOH is also very interested in involving trainees, including medical students, in helping staff their
   clinics. There is a model that has already been implemented with great success in Miami and Dr. Joan St.
   Onge has shared her ideas and experience below:


   Medical student involvement with the Department of Health in Washington DC could happen in a number
   of different venues. First, there is the opportunity of involving the students from the first year in the
   clinical arena. In this model, the students would attend clinic with a faculty preceptor on a biweekly
   basis, rotating with didactic sessions focused on clinical skills, communication skills and medical ethics.
    This model has been developed and implemented on the University of Miami Regional Campus in Palm



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795115 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795115 Date: 11/30/2015




  Beach County. ** It requires dedicated faculty time in the clinics and to develop and facilitate the
  didactics. The second possibility is to have the interested students identify mentors within the public
  health arena, either in the clinical sites or in the administration, and work with that individual toward
  improvement in patient care. The student, working alone or in groups, would study the administration of
  patient care, propose quality improvement projects, implement these, and study the effect of these.
   Another aspect of involvement of the students would be through volunteer opportunities such as health
  fairs, and outreach programs into the community for education and health improvement. These volunteer
  opportunities would be open to all students in the area, and could incorporate faculty, community groups,
  high school students as well as the general public.


  4) The Department of Medicine is in the process of hiring a research coordinator who will help with grant
  writing to apply for HRSA, CMS as well as private funding to help support the work that the center will
  be undertaking to educate future doctors on community health.

  5) Working to expand the Health Service Corps program which allows medical school loan debt
  forgiveness in exchange for physician service, after training is complete, in a designated under-served
  area. Currently this program is only open to primary care specialties. The Rodham Center would work to
  pilot a program in DC which would extend loan forgiveness to other specialties such as cardiology to help
  address the disparities in care which require extra attention such as cardiovascular mortality.


   6) The new Health Care Law will fine hospitals with high re-admission rates in certain circumstances. A
   small example of this might be a patient with kidney disease who is admitted for pneumonia, gets
   discharged, and gets re-admitted to the hospital because their dialysis center was closed. To that end, Ms.
   Kim Russo, COO of GWU Hospital, has agreed to donate several dialysis machines to sections of the city
   that are across the Anacostia River. In doing so, she would help to encourage other area hospitals to
   follow suit and make donations that would help support the infrastructure of needed specialty clinics
   throughout DC.

   In summary, there has been a lot of excitement about the Rodham Center as a place to bring together the
   educational and policy interests of the OW Internal Medicine Residency in partnership with the School of
   Public Health, DC's Department of Health, Association of Black Cardiologists, as well as the Medical
   School.



   It is my personal hope that we can share ideas across the city and across the country, especially with other
   academic institutions serving urban populations. Dr. Mark Henderson, of the University of California—
   Davis, has already implemented an educational program through HRSA funding that has trained under-
   represented minority physicians to serve in their communities.

   The Rodham Center would create a website to house the described curriculum and would provide
   templates of successful projects so that they could be used by others in the country. Eventually, we would
   plan on having invited conferences with workshops on an annual basis.


   The Dorothy Rodham Center has already brought people under the same roof with a similar vision of
   providing excellent care for all of the citizens of the District of Columbia.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795115 Date: 11/30/2015
