      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793763 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                      RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                      B6



From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Sunday, November 11, 2012 10:16 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: Diplomats still in Benghazi say they had long questioned U.S. reliance on local
                                   militia (McClatchy)




From: Kennedy, Patrick F
Sent: Sunday, November 11, 2012 09:38 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: O'Connell, Andrew M; Johnson, Brock A; Boswell, Eric 3
Subject: RE: Diplomats still in Benghazi say they had long questioned U.S. reliance on local militia (McClatchy)

Cheryl

Before the attack, Egypt, Turkey, Sudan, Italy, Tunisia, France and the UN had rep there

France and the UN pulled out after 9/11

But the question being posed has a false premise, i.e. that the US depended on foreign militia while the others
depended on their own resources

The US had tertiary dependence on the militia, as our primary and secondary reliance was on first the DS personnel and
the second on the QRF

The others did not have an internal second

Regards

pat


From: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Sunday, November 11, 2012 7:19 AM
To: Johnson, Brock A
Cc: O'Connell, Andrew M; Kennedy, Patrick F
Subject: Re: Diplomats still in Benghazi say they had long questioned U.S. reliance on local militia (McClatchy)

Do we know who still has a dip presence there today?


From: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Saturday, November 10, 2012 03:35 PM
To: Johnson, Brock A
Subject: Re: Diplomats still in Benghazi say they had long questioned U.S. reliance on local militia (McClatchy)

Thank you


From: Johnson, Brock A
Sent: Saturday, November 10, 2012 01:12 PM

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793763 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793763 Date: 11/30/2015



To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Fw: Diplomats still in Benghazi say they had long questioned U.S. reliance on local militia (McClatchy)




From: Brock Johnson [mailto:
Sent: Saturday, November 10, 2012 01:10 PM
To: Johnson, Brock A
Subject: Diplomats still in Benghazi say they had long questioned U.S. reliance on local militia (McClatchy)


Diplomats still in Benghazi say they had long questioned U.S.
reliance on local militia
By Nancy A. Youssef
McClatchy Newspapers


 On the day of the attack, U.S. officials had spotted a police officer taking photos of the compound from a villa
 under construction across the streets. This was the view the officer would have had of the compound.

 - Nancy A. Youssef /MCT

Even before the deadly Sept. 11 attack on the U.S. consulate that killed Ambassador Christopher Stevens and
three other Americans, diplomats from other nations and Libyan security officials had questioned the wisdom of
a U.S. decision to rely primarily on members of a local militia to protect its compound here.
Diplomats here told McClatchy that while it's customary to depend on local forces to protect diplomatic
missions, only the United States of the 10 or so foreign missions here allowed the local militia to be the first line
of defense. The others said they instead depended on military forces from their own country to provide security.
"A few months ago, there was a small attack here and the Libyans fled," said a diplomat from a European
nation who asked that he not be further identified so that he could speak candidly about his assessment of
security here. "After that, I decided to only use special forces" from his own country.
"We never considered using the brigades," he said, referring to the 17th of February Brigade, the local militia
that was considered the primary security force for the U.S. mission. "We assumed the United States had a
special relationship with the brigades."
Said another diplomat who requested anonymity for the same reasons: "I would never depend on the brigades."
The diplomat said he believed U.S. officials were unaware of the extremist links of those who were guarding
them. "The mistake of the Americans was not following the trail of Islamic radicals," he said.
For some, the cost of supplying security made operating in Benghazi prohibitive. The British, for example,
brought in their own troops and also hired Libyans to provide security, according to Khalid al Hadar, who owns
the compound that the British used as their offices here. But after a June attack on the British ambassador's
convoy, the British withdrew from Benghazi. A British official told McClatchy that the realization that security
would require a larger — and more expensive — British force in Benghazi helped fuel that decision.
Hadar said the British still check in periodically on their compound, where a shot-up bulletproof windshield
from the June ambush still sits in what was the consulate's carport.
Who was responsible for determining how the United States protected its consulate here remains unclear two
months after Stevens' death. According to the State Department, the ambassador, in consultation with deputies
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793763 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793763 Date: 11/30/2015



and security advisers, makes all security decisions, though they can be overruled from Washington. At a hearing
of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee last month, Eric Allan Nordstrom, who served as
the chief security officer at the U.S. Embassy in Tripoli from September 2011 until July, testified that he had
requested additional security.
Charlene Lamb, the deputy assistant secretary for diplomatic security, defended the security procedures that had
been taken in Benghazi, telling the hearing that there were five American security guards — the number
recommended by Nordstrom — along with Libyans in Benghazi when the attack took place.
"We had the correct number of assets in Benghazi at the time of 9/11," she said.
It is unknown what Stevens' own position on security in Benghazi was. A Western diplomat here said the trip
was Stevens' first extensive visit to Benghazi since he'd assumed the ambassador's post in May. The diplomat
said that when he heard the attack begin about 9:30 p.m., he assumed "that Chris was long gone."
The diplomat expressed surprise that Stevens hadn't been evacuated at the first sign of trouble. "We used to
take training from the Americans" on diplomatic security, he said.
How the U.S. vetted its local security force in Benghazi may be among the questions to come up Thursday
when the Senate Intelligence Committee holds a closed hearing on the attack. Witnesses expected to appear
include Director of National Intelligence James Clapper and Matt Olsen, director of the National
Counterterrorism Center. David Petraeus, who resigned Friday as director of the CIA after acknowledging an
extramarital affair, had been scheduled to appear but will be replaced by Acting CIA Director Michael Morrell,
according to Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., the committee's chairwoman.
On Wednesday, during a ceremony honoring Stevens, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said that the
administration has, in the wake of the 9/11 attack, dispatched a joint State and Defense Department task force
"to review high-threat posts to determine whether there are other improvements we need in light of the evolving
security challenges we now face."
Diplomats here, however, say they believe one such improvement had become obvious in the months after a
NATO air campaign helped topple the government of longtime Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi: Don't expect
local forces to protect you when they can't even protect themselves against local extremists and terrorists
groups in a city now defined by reprisal attacks. In the past week alone, two police stations here were bombed
and a police colonel's patrol car was destroyed in front of his house; extremist groups seeking to wrest control
of the city are the suspected culprits.
According to two guards who were at the compound that night, a four-member team from the 17th of February
Brigade's VIP protection unit was assigned to provide security inside the compound and serve as a quick-
reaction force. The 17th of February guards lived in a house closest to the front gate. According to the guards,
they tried to fend off the attack of as many 100 men that night, shooting repeatedly at them.
But 17th of February brigade leaders say they never considered themselves responsible for consulate security,
and Najib Muftah, 25, a co-founder of the brigade's VIP unit, denied that his group was in charge. "How could
four people secure a consulate?" he said.
Consulate security that night was a hodge-podge of local groups, in addition to a handful of Americans,
including Stevens' bodyguard. Outside, members of Libya's newly formed police force stood guard, sitting in
their parked vehicles. In addition, as many as five unarmed Libyans who worked for the Blue Mountain Group,
a Wales-based contractor, were stationed around the perimeter to watch for suspicious activity and search
visitors to the compound.
But as a rowdy caravan of attackers came barreling down the road leading to the consulate, the police officers
parked on the other side of the street from the consulate fled, according to a 31-year-old private security guard
who was there that night. The security guard asked not to be named for fearing he would be targeted for
working with Americans.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793763 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793763 Date: 11/30/2015




Earlier in the day, somewhere between 4 a.m. and 6 a.m., a member of the Blue Mountain Group reported that
he had seen one of the police officers photographing the inside of the compound from the upper floor of a villa
under construction across the street, according to the security guard, whose story confirms previous accounts.
But while reporters going through the consulate location in recent days discovered memos that suggested the
consulate had complained to Libyan authorities about the incident, Interior Ministry officials in Benghazi said
they were never contacted by U.S. officials.
Salah Daghman, the newly named deputy minister of interior for Benghazi, said that in any case it would be
unlikely that members of his police force would have challenged the Islamist group suspected of leading the
Sept. 11 attack. He described his men as "afraid of Ansar al Shariah."
"Everyone has a gun, he said. "Benghazi is not secure."
Members of the 17th of February Brigade first formed a "VIP protection" unit shortly after the anti-Gadhafi
uprising began in Febraury 2011. A group of about 50, they were trained by Qataris to protect the cavalcade of
politicians and diplomats who came to Benghazi, which was then the capital of rebel-controlled eastern Libya.
"If anything happened to the envoys that came to support the Libyan people, people would have believed
Gadhafi claims that we are all al Qaida," Muftah said. Among the foreign visitors the brigade's VIP unit
protected was French President Nicolas Sarkozy, who made a stunning visit here after Gadhafi's government
collapsed.
Stevens, who had been a special representative to the rebel government during the civil war, used the protection
unit as well, but not so much for security but as guides in the city, Muftah said. After the war, the brigade
continued to provide escorts as the U.S. formalized its presence here; most likely, Muftah said, because it was
the strongest force in Benghazi.
In addition, the brigade had a base less than a mile from the consulate that could provide additional forces if
needed, as it did Sept. 11. "And we had good relations with the United States," Muftah said.
Once the rebel goverment moved to Tripoli and nations began to reopen embassies there, the United States
kept working with the brigade, as many of its troops were incorporated into the newly formed Libyan army.
Once Benghazi had a trained and running police force, the Americans asked for police forces to be stationed
outside the consulate, said Fawzi Waniss, the head of the Benghazi Supreme Security Committee, the group
with responsibility for melding Libya's many armed organizations into a Unified force.
As the security situation deteriorated, several Libyan officials and the Blue Mountain guards said they urged the
United States to buttress security at the consulate, even as Stevens was wildly popular among residents here.
The Libyans, they said, could not secure themselves from a mounting extremist threat.
"I told them, you should have your own security," Waniss said. "Don't depend on the Libyans."
But others have suggested that the U.S.. officials may have felt such a step was unnecessary because the CIA
had established offices about a mile away and had promised to send security officers to the consulate, if needed.
All of the diplomats interviewed for this story said they were unaware of the CIA station's existence.
That in fact happened on the night of Sept. 11, according to a CIA timeline, which said security officers from
the CIA station, which U.S. officials refer to as an annex, were dispatched 25 minutes after the first reports of
trouble. It took another 25 minutes for the force to reach the consulate, however, because of resistance from
militants.
One diplomat here said that while he appreciated the effort of the CIA guards to render assistance, 25 minutes in
such a situation "is too late."




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793763 Date: 11/30/2015
