      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780734 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                           RELEASE IN
                                                                                           FULL



From:                          Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                          Saturday, April 16, 201111:20 AM
To:
Subject:                       Pascual Energy-related Bid


                                                Carlos Pascual

                                      Experience in Energy Security

Carlos Pascual has over two decades of diplomatic, public policy and academic experience integrating energy
security into the conduct of foreign policy. As U.S. Ambassador in Mexico (2009-2011) and in Ukraine (2000-
2003), Pascual incorporated. energy policies such as the shared exploitation of transnational reserves,
transparency in international transactions, shared lessons in energy efficiency and development of renewable
technologies into binational foreign policy priorities. While working on the White House National Security
Staff (1995-2000), Pascual coordinated U.S. Government agencies to align energy and foreign policy strategies
in the former Soviet countries. Pascual is co-editor of a volume entitled Energy Security, launched the Energy
Security Initiative at the Brookings Institution, and oversaw Brookings' research on the geopolitics of energy
and global climate change policy.

As Vice President and Director of Foreign Policy Studies at Brookings (2006-2009), Pascual created and led the
Brookings Energy Security Initiative. He incorporated a multidisciplinary perspective to energy challenges that
require understanding the intersection of economics, commercial competitiveness, science, politics and
international affairs. Pascual co-chaired with Daniel Yergin, chairman of IHS Cambridge Energy Research
Associates, a semi-annual energy security workshop that became a unique public policy forum, attracting
representative from Congress, Wall Street, energy companies, and environmental nonprofits. Pascual guided
Brookings' international energy research agenda, including topics such as energy and stability in the Persian
Gulf, China's energy future, Russia's use of energy as a foreign policy tool, and the impact of carbon pricing
strategies on climate change. Pascual's article on the intersection of energy security, climate change and
demand for nuclear power continues to be used as a case study in numerous universities (Stanford, Harvard,
Duke). In Power and Responsibility (2009), a book on transnational threats, Pascual outlined an agenda to
reinvigorate international cooperation on climate change, while creating market incentives to develop and
commercialize new forms of clean energy.

In Mexico, Pascual worked with U.S. and Mexican policy leaders to begin negotiations on U.S.-Mexican
cooperation to protect and exploit oil and gas reserves that cut across international boundaries. This is the
first formal step that Mexico has undertaken to consider international participation in the development of its
hydrocarbons sector. Building on a commitment by Presidents Obama and Calderon, Pascual helped launch a
binational Climate Change and Clean Energy forum that is developing a framework for a cross-border
renewable energy market and commercial incentives for energy efficiency. Pascual facilitated innovative new
projects, such as wind power generation using U.S. turbines, financed by EXIM Bank, with the project cash
flow guaranteed through electricity purchases by Walmart to power its stores in Mexico with renewable
energy. Pascual's moderation of a panel on sustainable energy and climate change with the U.S. and Mexican
Energy Secretaries was one of the most widely attended side events at COP 16 in Cancun.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780734 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780734 Date: 11/30/2015




From 1992-2004, Pascual was a leader in the U.S. Government in integrating energy and foreign policy
objectives as the Central European and former Soviet countries charted their course to market
democracies. As U.S. Assistance Coordinator for this region (2003-2004), Pascual guided work and preliminary
negotiations on the creation of a Southern European electricity market and its eventual integration with the
European grid. This measure reduced the vulnerability of individual states to fluctuations in Russian oil and
gas supplies by linking them to a larger market with greater leverage. While serving in USAID (1992-1995),
Pascual incorporated energy efficiency as a core objective in U.S. assistance to the region, thus helping
struggling new states to save billions in avoided energy losses, while promoting the viability of utilities and
private enterprises. U.S. technical assistance during this period produced numerous self-sustaining Energy
Service Companies that continue to commercialize energy efficiency.

As Ambassador in Ukraine (2000-2003), Pascual identified energy issues as a driver in Ukraine's national and
international polices. Working with the IMF and World Bank, Pascual guided the U$. Embassy's contributions
to studies that documented billions in losses in the gas distribution system, eventually leading to the
introduction of competitive contracts for domestic distribution and the elimination of barter in financial
transactions. Under Pascual's direction, the Embassy documented the lack of transparency in gas transactions
between Ukraine and Russia, eventually leading to the breakup of shadow companies and steps toward
greater transparency and stability in contract arrangements. From 1995-2000, Pascual led the U.S.
Government's efforts to coordinate with the G-7 and multilateral banks and to negotiate a multilateral
agreement with Ukraine to close the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, while creating a viable electricity market
in Ukraine. Much of Ukraine's energy potential remains untapped, but Pascual sparked cooperation with
multilateral banks, the EU and the USG to outline opportunities for future development, including alternative
oil pipelines from the Caspian Sea to Central Europe, privatization of transnational gas pipelines, methane gas
commercialization from coal mines, and offshore oil and gas potential.

Serving on the National Security Staff (1995-2000) and as a principal coordinator of the Gore Chernomyrdin
Commission (GCC), Pascual helped guide energy policy in Russia, Ukraine and Eurasia to support the viability
and competitiveness of the newly independent states. From 1997-2000, Pascual co-chaired the interagency
working group that developed a multiple pipeline policy for the exploitation of Caspian reserves, eventually
leading to the completion of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline. Pascual supported the work of the GCC to increase
contractual transparency and reliability for oil and gas investments in Russia. At times, these efforts required
marshalling strong opposition to Russian commercial practices. Under Vice President Gore's leadership,
Pascual worked with U.S. interagency counterparts to introduce the development of carbon markets as a
mainstream issue in U.S. foreign policy.

    Ambassador Pascual firmly believes that development of reliable and sustainable energy supplies, and
managing the geopolitical competition created by finite hydrocarbon resources, are among the most
important foreign policy challenges faced by the United States. Success in this area is critical to boosting
economic competitiveness in the United States, promoting stability and security in a multi-polar world, and
ensuring the sustainability of the planet.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780734 Date: 11/30/2015
