      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790767 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Saturday, June 2, 2012 1:07 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Embassy Cairo Mubarak Verdict Reaction Sitrep - June 2, 2012 - 1745



FYI


From: Abbaszadeh, Nima
Sent: Saturday, June 02, 2012 12:36 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3; Macmanus, Joseph E (S)
Cc: S_SpecialAssistants
Subject: Embassy Cairo Mubarak Verdict Reaction Sitrep - June 2, 2012 - 1745




From: Storsve, Alison B
Sent: Saturday, June 02, 2012 12:01 PM
To: SES_DutyDeputies; D(B); D(N); P; S_SpecialAssistants; PA FO Group
Cc: SES-O_SWO; NEA-FO-DL
Subject: Embassy Cairo Mubarak Verdict Reaction Sitrep - June 2, 2012 - 1745

Colleagues,

Please find below Embassy Cairo's initial readout of local reaction to the Mubarak verdict. The Embassy notes reaction
has been largely negative, and the verdicts, exonerating all but Mubarak and his former interior minister for the deaths
of demonstrators in 2011 and dismissing corruption charges due to the expiration of the statute of limitations, might
solidify support for Muslim Brotherhood candidate Morsy in the June 16-17 presidential election runoff.

Thank you, regards,

Alison Storsve
Senior Watch Officer
State Department Operations Center
+1-202-647-1512



(SBU) The June 2 verdicts in cases against former President Hosni Mubarak, his sons Alaa and Gamal, former
Minister of Interior Habib Adly, and other Mubarak associates have provoked widespread shock and
condemnation among opponents of the former regime and political activists; it is not yet clear whether this
outrage is widely held in Egyptian society. For critics, the verdicts — exonerating all but Mubarak and Adly for
the deaths of demonstrators in 2011 and dismissing corruption charges due to the expiration of the statute of
limitations — cast doubt on just what the January 2011 revolution accomplished, and may be instrumental in
solidifying support (in the form of protest votes) for the Muslim Brotherhood's Mohammed Morsy in
presidential election runoffs, scheduled for June 16 and 17. As of 1700 today, only a few thousand
demonstrators had collected in Cairo, Alexandria and elsewhere, but these numbers may grow as the heat
(temperatures exceeded 100 degrees today) dissipates.

 Reaction Negative

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790767 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790767 Date: 11/30/2015




(U) Reaction to the verdicts, in which the former President and his last Minister of Interior were sentenced to
life in prison for their "complicity in crimes of murder" but not convicted of charges of exploiting their
positions due to the expiration of the 10-year statute of limitations, has been swift and largely negative. The
Muslim Brotherhood (MB) issued a statement calling the verdict "shocking to the families of the martyrs," and
accusing certain "bodies" of hiding evidence in the case. The statement added that "the verdict means that only
the head of the regime and the Minister of Interior have been toppled; the rest of the entire regime still
exists." In a phone call with Egypt's Mehwar channel on June 2, one-time liberal presidential candidate Ayman
Nour said he would now endorse the Freedom and Justice Party's Mohammed Morsy in the upcoming
presidential runoff, and called on others to do the same. Through its spokesman, the Salafist Nour Party called
the outcome of the trials "shocking" predicted the verdict would "certainly" be to the advantage of
Morsy, adding that people could now see which of the two remaining presidential candidates would protect the
revolution. Former presidential contender Mohamed el-Baradei said the verdict was proof that efforts by the
former regime to "abort" the revolution were onging. "The old regime is trying itself," he said. Former
presidential candidate Abdel Monem Aboul Fotouh said the verdicts, including the acquittal of Mubarak's sons
were "an acquittal of the authority of the corruption and oppression that still rules Egypt." Egypt's April 6
movement said the rulings were a call for a "second revolution" in the Egyptian street. For his part, presidential
candidate Ahmed Shafiq said the verdict proved no one was above the law, adding: "Those rulings certainly
disprove any claims that a presidential candidate can reproduce a ruling system that has ended."

Protests Beginning

(U) As of the afternoon of June 2, political forces and activists, including former presidential candidate
Hamdeen Sabbahy, had called for protestors to meet in front of Cairo's Supreme Justice Court and in Tahrir
Square that evening. The MB also called for protests. Several thousand protestors have already arrived in
Tahrir Square chanting slogans against the verdict, and all entrances to the square have reportedly been blocked
to vehicular traffic. Thousands of demonstrators have rallied in Alexandria, and other areas of the country were
also participating in the protests, according to international news sources.

Former President Transferred to Prison

(U) For the first time since his ouster, former President Mubarak was transferred to prison (Cairo's Torah
Prison), where local and international news sources report he tearfully resisted departing the helicopter he was
transported in, and may have suffered a heart attack or other serious health crisis upon arrival there. According
to local television station Al Nahar TV, Mubarak' s sons, Alaa and Gama, will remain in detention to undergo
another trial, in which they were accused of profiteering in the Egyptian stock market.

Legal Experts: Strong Grounds for Appeal

(SBU) Local and international TV commentators, as well as Embassy legal contacts, believe that Mubarak and
Adly have strong grounds to challenge their convictions. Experts observed that, in the absence of direct
evidence that Mubarak or Adly ordered security forces to fire on protestors, the court based its conviction on the
argument that Mubarak and Adly should have intervened to stop the violent response to demonstrations. This
may be too weak to stand up to appeal.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05790767 Date: 11/30/2015
