     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795481 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                            RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Friday, September 21, 2012 4:05 PM
To:
Subject:                          FW: Libyans march against Islamist militias in Benghazi




From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Friday, September 21, 2012 3:48 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Libyans march against Islamist militias in Benghazi




Libyans march against Islamist militias in Benghazi
By Peter Graff and Suleiman Al-Khalidi

BENGHAZI, Libya Fri Sep 21, 2012 2:23pm EDT

(Reuters) - Thousands of Libyans marched in Benghazi on Friday in support of democracy and against the
Islamist militias that Washington blames for an attack on the U.S. consulate last week that killed four
Americans including the ambassador.

The "Rescue Benghazi day" demonstration called for the government to disband armed groups that have refused
to give up their weapons since the NATO-backed revolution that toppled Muamrriar Gaddafi last year.

Marchers headed for a main square where a much smaller counter demonstration of hundreds of supporters of
hardline Islamist group Ansar al-Sharia were waiting.

"It's obvious that this protest is against the militias. All of them should join the army or security forces as
individuals, not as groups," medical student Ahmed Sanallah, 27, said. "Without that there will be no prosperity
and no success for the new Libya."

The late afternoon demonstration had a cheerful atmosphere as families marched with small children on their
shoulders.

Fighter jets and helicopters roared overhead in a show of official support for the demonstration, which has been
enthusiastically promoted by the city's authorities.

"Those military battalions that want to impose their ideology on the people of Libya will be confronted," Saleh
Gaouda, a member of new ruling national congress, said.

"This city wants to go back to stability and participate in building the state."

In a sign of the cheerful atmosphere, one car had a giant cardboard model of Benghazi's landmark lighthouse
strapped to the roof. As the sun set and the crowd began to disperse, someone shot fireworks into the air.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795481 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795481 Date: 11/30/2015




"DEFEND BENGHAZI"

Although the main demands of the marchers did not mention the attack on the U.S. consulate, it seems to have
provided a strong impetus for the authorities to rally support behind the country's weak government.

U.S. ambassador Christopher Stevens was well liked in Libya, and many people who were angered by an anti-
Islamic film made in the United States consider the attack on the embassy to have been excessive. Some
placards in English, intended for international news cameras, read: "We demand justice for Stevens" and "Libya
lost a friend".

"I am out today to defend Benghazi. Killing the ambassador is a completely separate thing," 26-year-old Amjad
Mohammed Hassan, a network engineer, said. "I don't give a damn about the killing of the ambassador because
the Americans offended the Prophet. I am just here for Benghazi."

Benghazi, 1,000 km (600 miles) from Tripoli across largely empty desert, is controlled by various armed
groups, including some comprised of Islamists who openly proclaim their hostility to democratic government
and the West.

Some of these have been identified by local people as being among those who were at the consulate protest last
week. U.S. officials have described the violence as a "terrorist attack".

One group linked to the attack is Ansar al-Sharia, which has denied involvement in the violence.

Abu Al-Qaa, a demonstrator at the Ansar al-Sharia counter demonstration, said Stevens "was preparing for the
entry of American troops into Libya".

"The will of the Prophet was to expel infidels from Muslim lands so that Muslims prevail. Terrorizing your
enemy is one of Islam's tenets."

He said he had fought against American troops in Iraq where he was arrested and sent back to Gaddafi's Libya
and jailed for three years.

One banner at that demonstration read: "Day to rescue Benghazi or day to rescue America?"

In southern Libya, at least six people were killed and 12 injured in clashes between security forces and a local
group, a security official and a resident said on Friday.

Security forces were sent to the town of Brak, 700 km (400 miles) south of Tripoli, on Wednesday to stop a
group broadcasting songs about Gaddafi on the radio, the official said. The security forces, made up of former
rebel fighters, came under attack upon arrival.

(Additional reporting by Omar Al-Mosmary and Ali Shuaib; Editing by Giles Elgood)




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795481 Date: 11/30/2015
