UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775252 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL



                                     Statement by J. Brian Atwood

                                Reflections on the Future Role of the DAC

    I was privileged to represent a DAC member nation as the director of a major donor agency for
    over 6 years in the 1990s. These were productive years for the DAC as we established
    development goals for the 21st Century, enhanced partner-nation ownership, confronted the
    challenge of tied aid and began to develop a consensus on the indicators that would enable
    results measurement. I benefited greatly from the insights and analyses of my counterparts, and
    from the creative and professional support of the DAC Secretariat. The global development
    community was a much less complex structure in that period, but even then the challenges
    represented by political and economic change were beginning to bring new issues and actors
    onto the stage.

    In the intervening period, I have followed the evolution of development thinking and the
    contributions of the DAC in creating and encouraging adherence to the sound principles
    contained in the Paris Declaration and the Accra Agenda for Action and in continued support for
    the Millennium Development Goals. I have appreciated the excellent contributions made by
    DAC Chairs Jean-Claude Faure, Richard Manning and Eckhard Deutscher as they have sought to
    advance the agenda of effective development cooperation.

    Despite all the DAC has contributed to development thought, the organization today stands at a
    crossroads. It risks losing influence unless it can define its place in a dynamic and growing
    assistance environment that includes new donors, "vertical" single-issue initiatives, new nation-
    state groupings such as the G-20, a multiplicity of private actors and a diversification of
    development finance. As our colleague Jean Michel Severino has written, the sum of all this
    "hyper-collective action" does not add up to the results impact it should achieve. Few of the new
    players adhere to standards of development policy that the DAC has promulgated and espoused.
    Developing nation partners are also finding wide-ranging partnerships outside the DAC rubric.
    As the number and kinds of participants in development cooperation expand, the DAC goal
    should be to encourage and yet inform the evolving relationships.

    These are formidable challenges requiring something more than business as usual at the DAC.
    The reflection exercise recently undertaken addressed this circumstance, describing the problem
    well. However, the challenge is to move the organization to the next level as a vital part of the
    new environment, to focus on its strongest attributes, and to effectively communicate and
    implement its principles. This will require the active participation of the leadership of DAC
    member states, acting as often as possible in concert at the policy level. Policy initiatives should,
    in turn, be backed by sound research and quality analysis based on empirical evidence.

    The Need for Consensual Leadership

    The DAC carries great weight as a source of objective information and analysis based on best
    practice. It is the conscience of a large and growing community concerned about the
    implications, moral and otherwise, of poverty. While it does not itself carry out programs, the
    DAC can incubate new ideas and test their merit. Some of these innovations will become best
    practices, in turn enhancing the prospect that the Millennium Development Goals will be
    attained. These breakthroughs then become institutionalized knowledge and lead, as they have in
    the past, to the refinement of sound development principles.


                                                      1

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775252 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775252 Date: 11/30/2015




   Dialogue with emerging donors has begun and this activity should be accelerated. Emerging
   donors may or may not wish to formalize their relationship with the DAC in the immediate
   future, but this should not inhibit the mutual understanding that can come through the sharing of
   experiences. These donors are injecting impressive amounts of new resources into partner
   nations. Many bring to their efforts recent experiences of their own development, which can
   helpfully inform the policies and practices of DAC members. Gaining a better appreciation of
   this and the impact of remittances is vitally important in comprehending the full scope of the
   development resources in play.

    Whether any party, sovereign or not, changes its operational behavior after being informed by
    principles promulgated by the DAC, is a function not only of the merit of the principle, but also
    the effectiveness of the communication. It is vital that the DAC as an institution create the
    capacity and the will to influence — and also learn from — the thinking of political leaders who
    possess the authority to affect change. This can only be achieved if there is a strong consensus
    among the members and a willingness to give a clear voice to global development policies and
    goals. As Chair, I would seek to build consensus among the members, promote the DAC's work
    in relevant forums, and bring the DAC's collective knowledge to a wider audience.

    The DAC's Comparative Advantage

    In this dynamic global environment, the DAC should strive for selectivity. I am confident that
    the organization can continue to be the intellectual leader of the development community if it
    chooses its platforms wisely and effectively communicates its substantive message.
    Development thought that embraces concepts such as sustainability, partner ownership, good
    governance and civil society participation have passed through the crucible of ground truthing
    and scholarship. There is no better repository of the accumulated knowledge of development
    practice.

    The principles and action plans of the Paris Declaration and Accra Agenda are reflections of this
    knowledge base. Focusing in particular on the principles of ownership and mutual accountability
    will ensure that the DAC has a seat at the table whether the topic is the global financial system,
    gender equality, world hunger, infectious disease, innovations in science and technology, or post-
    conflict security. The Paris/Accra principles and development thinking in general should be
    considered and applied in the broader policy context.

    The upcoming High Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness in Busan, South Korea is an excellent
    platform for advancing these principles. This broadly attended gathering represents a global
    learning moment, an opportunity to engage representatives of partner nations, new donors,
    related ministries and directors of narrower sector programs, along with representatives of civil
    society, to grapple with tested concepts of development. This forum is only one step in a process
    that should substantially strengthen globally-accepted standards of better management of the
    universe of aid assets and a deeper understanding of the remaining obstacles to implementation
    of the principles. The success of this meeting relates in part to our capacity to achieve consensus
    policy positions among DAC leaders on effectiveness issues.

    The Importance of Policy Coherence

    Development ministries and agencies can play an important role in helping their respective
    nations achieve a greater degree of policy coherence. Finance, trade and environmental policies,
    for example, when informed by and formulated in conjunction with development strategies, can
    contribute to economic growth and sustainable development.
                                                    2

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775252 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775252 Date: 11/30/2015




    Armed with the collective knowledge provided by collaboration within the DAC and partner-
    nation field programs, development ministries can influence thinking within their own
    governments, multilateral organizations and partner states. The policy impact of individual
    ministers and agency leaders is enhanced when they are advocating a position that is strongly
    supported by DAC colleagues. Development cooperation to achieve economic growth objectives
    is linked inextricably to global finance and trade policies.

    As the challenge of poverty becomes even more salient among high-level policymakers, there is
    much more demand for the expertise DAC-member institutions can provide. Partnering with
    other OECD committees and directorates will assure that there is a more synergism between
    development and related policy areas.

    The Achievement of Development Goals

    The Millennium Development Goals, an outgrowth of the DAC' s work, continue to have broad
    support across the spectrum of new and traditional donors and partners. The MDGs represent the
    world's commitment to poverty alleviation through development cooperation. These goals, in my
    view, impose a moral obligation: to their dedicated pursuit, and to the use of the most effective
    means to measure the impact of our progress. This will require the application of sound principle
    and innovation. And, just as the DAC had an important role in establishing the current goals, it
    can provide a valuable contribution to the identification and development of plans for achieving
    post-2015 development objectives.

    As is the case with even the most compelling international agreements, the MDGs and the
    Paris/Accra principles are more easily formulated and stated than implemented. We have all
    experienced the political obstacles and pressures that can stand in the way:

       • Explaining the detrimental effect of directives from capitals on the ability of field
         missions to respond to country needs is easier than removing them.
       • Gaining an appreciation of the imposition of multiple reporting requirements on the
         ministries of a partner government is easier than changing the methods of donor agency
         auditors and inspectors general.
       • The merit of making local purchases is easy to explain, but difficult to implement when
         aid programs are promoted on the basis of donor-country sources for purchases.
       • Acquiring empirical evidence and measuring results has become a publicly-supported
         mandate, but refining systems so that they are cost effective and inform policymakers in a
         timely fashion is a difficult challenge.

    During my tenure at USAID, we introduced broad development goals, established strategic-
    objective teams at the mission level, developed indicators by sector and introduced systems to
    measure results and evaluate programs. The development community has made great progress in
    these areas, but there are still political hurdles to overcome. The gathering of empirical evidence
    even when goals and indicators are well defined is difficult. These issues are worthy of further
    study. The organizational relationship (or relative independence) of an evaluation unit to an aid
    agency is also an issue for further review.




                                                     3

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775252 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775252 Date: 11/30/2015




    Mutual Accountability

    A key challenge for the DAC and its members is to promote more transparency and mutual
    accountability when critical analysis can be used as a rationale for budget cutting. Yet, there is
    no real choice. Citizens and political leaders are demanding that programs produce results.

    A deeper appreciation of what transparency and accountability can achieve is essential. For
    example, a particular intervention arguably could be counter productive in broader sustainability
    terms even if its purpose is humanitarian in nature. Such an intervention could be rationalized
    and redirected in light of details about the impact of the intervention on the overall development
    objective (country-wide or sector-wide). A recent analysis of global health data showed that
    external assistance for a particular disease likely resulted in overall reductions in government
    allocations for primary care and infrastructure. This revealed tendency to divert external
    assistance should lead to the creation of criteria that would preserve sustainability and enhance
    mutual accountability.

    The pursuit of the mutual accountability goal will lead to more emphasis on the capacity of
    partner countries to plan, execute, and collect accurate data and make targeted investments. This
    will, in turn, require more scrutiny of the full range of relationships between partner nations and
    bilateral and multilateral donors. Better data and transparency is needed on both sides of the
    partnership. The OECD can play an important role here.

    I note, for example, that the DAC, the Fiscal Affairs Committee and the Center for Tax Policy
    have begun to collaborate on tax policy. This is not only important in the effort to create a more
    equitable formal economy with predictable revenue streams; it can lead to more transparent and
    accountable budgetary allocations, thereby reducing the potential for diversions of ODA. This
    type of analysis may lead also to more harmonization and consistency in the data-collection
    systems used by multilateral organizations.

    Peer Review and ODA Volumes

    Given the need to pursue Paris/Accra principles with more vigor, the peer review process should
    look into these issues even more deeply with an eye toward helping DAC members and others to
    better accommodate these objectives, and, if necessary, overcome any lingering resistance within
    governments. I welcomed the critical analysis of my DAC colleagues when I directed USAID
    and was able to leverage the good advice within my government. The same is true of the DAC's
    traditional role of tracking the volume of ODA. Timely, accurate and well-publicized annual
    volume reports can help to mobilize support for the growing aid volumes that will be essential
    for the development results we all seek.

     Post-Conflict Assistance

     The role of transitional assistance in post-conflict scenarios and participation by development
     agencies to prevent state failure in weak and fragile nations remain important topics. The work of
     various commissions on aspects of post-conflict transitions has been instructive. These would
     include the UN Secretary General's Peace Operations Panel on which I served and the
     International Network on Conflict and Fragility (INCAF) which has developed useful OECD
     principles for engagement in fragile states. The relationship among humanitarian relief,
     transitional assistance and long-term development—the phases of a post-conflict continuum—
     requires continued study to create and preserve institutional knowledge.

                                                       4

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775252 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775252 Date: 11/30/2015




   Concluding Comment


   It is the responsibility of the DAC Chair to serve the member states and to enhance the
   contribution they can make individually and collectively to the development mission. I recognize
   that ministerial-level leaders wish to be engaged in policy deliberations of global import, and that
   they are very busy people. Our primary task will be to understand their interests and to create a
   compelling action agenda. Doing this well can have the effect of better positioning the DAC
   within a dynamic global environment. I will endeavor to consult widely, both to inform myself
   and the organization, and to build consensus. I believe that my experience as a diplomat, a
   politically-appointed government official, and dean of a prominent academic institution will
   enable me to marry the worlds of scholarship and political action to advance the development
   mission. I would welcome this challenge.

   September 28, 2010




                                                    5
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775252 Date: 11/30/2015
