       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794179 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Friday, February 24, 2012 2:25 PM
To:                                'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                           Fw: Serbia-Kosovo



Pis print for me.
     Original Message
From: PIR
To: Evergreen
Subject: Serbia-Kosovo
Sent: Feb 24, 2012 9:57 AM

 Update -

 • The Kosovo-Serbia deal is done (Ashton announcement at bottom)

 • Your written statement went out widely immediately after the deal was announced

 • We are incorporating the topline message on the deal at the bottom of your avail remarks (so you're addressing it on
 camera)

 • Working with Caroline to get you on the phone w/VOA as soon as practicable later today. One snag, the VOA expert
 EUR & Thaci prefer is home sick. We're identifying a plan B.



• Joint statement of High Representative/Vice President Catherine Ashton and Commissioner .ttefan Fate on the
  agreements reached in the latest round of Belgrade-Pristina dialogue

 Brussels, 24 February 2012

  We welcome the agreements reached today on regional cooperation and on the implementation of the integrated
 management for crossing points (IBM). These agreements are a major step forward. They are important not just for
 Serbia and Kosovo but for the stability of the region and thus for the EU. All EU Member States have given their support
 to the UN General Assembly resolution of September 2010 launching the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. The
 objective of this dialogue is to help both parties achieve progress on their path to Europe. In this context, High
 Representative/Vice President Ashton stated that "I want to congratulate both parties on these two substantial
 agreements. One puts into operational form the agreement on integrated management of crossing points. The other
 consolidates regional cooperation and ensures that everyone is properly represented. Both are further steps along the
 European path." As regards Serbia, these agreements on regional cooperation and IBM are particularly welcome in view
 of the deliberations in the Council next week regarding candidate status for Serbia. As regards Kosovo, this is important
 as it makes Kosovo a full participant in its own right in regional meetings and events and will allow for further progress
 to contractual relations with the EU. Kosovo will thus follow the same European course as all others in the Western
 Balkans, in line with its European perspective. In this light, the Commission proposes to launch a feasibility study for a
 Stabilization and Association Agreement between Kosovo and the EU. Commissioner Rile underlined that "The deal
 demonstrates a commitment on both sides to their common European future. Today's agreement also reinforces
 regional cooperation, good neighborly relations and the Enlargement agenda in the Western Balkans region".

 ###


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794179 Date: 11/30/2015
