      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773886 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             Hanley, Monica R <HanleyMR@state.gov>
Sent:                             Saturday, June 23, 2012 2:17 PM
To:
Subject:                          Re: UPDATED Amr call sheet



They are reaching out now.

    Original Message
From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Saturday, June 23, 2012 02:15 PM
To: Hanley, Monica R
Subject: Re: UPDATED Amr call sheet

I'm ready now.

    Original Message
From: Hanley, Monica R [mailto:HanleyMR@state.gov]
Sent: Saturday, June 23, 2012 02:14 PM
To: H
Cc: Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Subject: UPDATED Amr call sheet

Also in your binder from last night if you still have that. Let us know when you are ready to connect.

The Secretary's Call Sheet for Egyptian FM Mohamed Kamel Amr




Purpose of Call: Foreign Minister Amr asked to speak to you about recent events in Egypt. This is an opportunity to
affirm that the U.S. government has remained resolutely neutral throughout Egypt's election process, and reiterate the
necessity of a fair and transparent election result and transfer of power to legitimately elected leadership.

•     As we have stated throughout Egypt's transition, the United States supports a fair and transparent process. We do
not support any particular candidate and want to see the election results honored. The United States wants a strong
relationship with a stable, prosperous, and democratic Egypt, and we stand ready to work with any Egyptian
government that emerges from a free, fair, and legitimate election process.

•    Some reports speculate the PEC (Presidential Election Commission) might announce Shafiq as the winner, and
others speculate it might call for a re-vote in some districts. Whatever the outcome, it needs to be well-documented
and well-supported. An outcome that is in appearance or in reality manipulated will be dangerous and destabilizing. If
there is a re-vote, you should invite credible international observers to Egypt to observe every stage of the new
elections.

•    The whole world is watching the ballot counting process closely and it is important that it be recognized as credible
and transparent, untainted by manipulation. The Egyptian people must view the results as legitimate. We are
concerned that if the results are not perceived as credible, Egyptians could take to the streets, which raises the
possibility of violence, including the use of force against demonstrators.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773886 Date: 11/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773886 Date: 11/30/2015




•    Protecting the Rights of All Egyptian Citizens: Regardless of who is declared the winner, we expect the president to
lead an inclusive democratic process where the rights of all Egyptians — women and men, Muslims and Christians, are
respected. All have a stake in Egypt's future, and it is important that all be reassured that their rights will be protected.

•    Respecting the Peace Treaty with Israel: As you're well aware, we believe it is in Egypt's strategic interests to honor
the peace treaty with Israel. These obligations will be ever more difficult should there be ongoing instability.

Background: The Egyptian Presidential Election Commission (PEC) stated June 20 that the official election runoff results
would be announced Sunday, June 24 instead of Thursday, June 21, as previously reported, to allow the PEC time to
investigate more than 400 appeals lodged by the two candidates. On June 22, Islamist and revolution/youth parties and
organizations participated in an open-ended sit-in in Tahrir Square to protest the dissolution of parliament and the
SCAF's supplemental constitutional declarations, which, as stated, significantly weaken the authorities of the new
president and ensure a privileged role for the SCAF in protecting their interests in the constitutional process. There is a
widespread perception among Egyptian liberals and Coptic Christians, both in Egypt and the United States, that the U.S.
government favors Morsi and is pressuring the SCAF to declare him the winner.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773886 Date: 11/30/2015
