      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796896 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, September 27, 2012 1:49 PM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: lsakson/Corker Letter
Attachments:                       9-26-12 McKeon et at to POTUS.PDF




    Original Message
From: Blumenfeld, Joshua R
Sent: Thursday, September 27, 2012 01:33 PM
To: Reines, Philippe I; Adams, David 5; Kennedy, Patrick F
Cc: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: RE: lsakson/Corker Letter

Hi Philippe,

Attached is the McKeon letter.

Thanks,
Josh

    Original Message
From: Blumenfeld, Joshua R
Sent: Thursday, September 27, 2012 1:25 PM
To: Reines, Philippe I; Adams, David S; Kennedy, Patrick F
Cc: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: RE: lsakson/Corker Letter

Yes, attached are 1) the Corker-Isakson letter; the 2) McCain-Graham-Ayotte letter. We don't yet have the 10
Republican House Members letters, but are tracking it down now.

    Original Message
From: Reines, Philippe I
Sent: Thursday, September 27, 2012 1:18 PM
To: Adams, David S; Blumenfeld, Joshua R; Kennedy, Patrick F
Cc: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: lsakson/Corker Letter

H Friends -

Do we have the full letter reference in this article?



GOP Lawmakers Demand Details Of Deadly Attack On U.S. Consulate In Libya By Ernesto Londolio The Washington Post
Thursday, September 27, 2012

Republican lawmakers demanded Wednesday that the Obama administration disclose details about the Sept. 11 attack
on U.S. compounds in eastern Libya that killed an ambassador and three other government employees.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796896 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796896 Date: 11/30/2015




The requests for information about the assault, including any cables about security written by slain Ambassador J.
Christopher Stevens, underscored the extent to which the incident has become a political liability for the White House
during the final stretch of President Obama's reelection campaign.

Lawmakers are asking whether the administration overlooked warning signs about the threat level in Libya, and some
have suggested the security at the U.S. installations in Benghazi was inadequate.

Senior administration officials, including Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and Director of National Intelligence
James Clapper, have briefed Congress. But details on the events in Benghazi are still being assembled.

After initially describing the attack as a spontaneous act of mob violence in response to a video that disparaged Islam,
administration officials in recent days have begun to suggest it was a well-planned terrorist attack.

Clinton mentioned the Benghazi assault Wednesday during a speech at the U.N. General Assembly about the rise of
extremist militants in North Africa. Clinton did not specifically ascribe the attack to al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, the
African offshoot of the terrorist organization, but she said the violent deaths of American officials underscored the
importance of defeating the group.

"With a larger safe haven and increased freedom to maneuver, terrorists are seeking to extend their reach and their
networks in multiple directions," Clinton said, according to an official transcript of her remarks. "And they are now
working with other violent extremists to undermine the democratic transitions underway in North Africa, as we
tragically saw in Benghazi."

U.S. counterterrorism chief Matthew Olsen told the the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
last week that analysts are exploring whether al-Qaeda's African branch played a role in the attack. Investigators are also
looking for evidence linking the assault to leaders of Ansar al-Sharia, a loose coalition of hard-line militants with a strong
presence in Libya.

Republican congressmen took the administration to task for what they called contradictory statements about the
Benghazi raid and initial information portraying it as a protest that turned violent.

"This seems like a pre-9/11 mindset — treating an act of war solely as a criminal matter," a group of 10 congressmen
wrote Wednesday in a letter to the president, referring to the 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States.

Sens. Johnny Isakson (Ga.) and Bob Corker (Tenn.), GOP members of the Foreign Relations Committee, sent a letter
Tuesday to Clinton expressing concern about the "lack of security preparations made despite a demonstrable increase in
risks to U.S. officials and facilities in Benghazi." The senators asked to see any relevant cables that Stevens wrote in the
days before he was killed.

The State Department has launched a type of probe called an accountability panel. The FBI is conducting a separate
criminal investigation into the incident. Citing the inquiries, administration officials have provided few new details about
the Benghazi raid in recent days. U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Susan Rice made the most extensive remarks
about the attack four days after the deaths. Her early accounts have come under scrutiny because they suggested that
U.S. government officials did not believe the assault had been well planned or coordinated.

"We look forward to a timely response that explains how the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations could characterize
an attack on a U.S. consulate so inaccurately," Sen. John McCain (Ariz.) and three fellow Republican senators wrote
Wednesday in a letter to Rice.

###




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796896 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796896 Date: 11/30/2015




                              (ogre            of the niteb6tates
                                       jpottOe of Repretentatibto
                                           aOington, )113C 20515




                                            September 25, 2012



     The President
     The White House
     Washington, D.C. 20500

     Dear Mr. President:

             We are writing to express grave concern about the events surrounding the terrorist attack
     in Benghazi, Libya on September 11, 2012, that led to the murder of the United States
     Ambassador to Libya, Christopher Stevens, and three other U.S. Government personnel. We
     profoundly regret the loss of lives and seek to ensure all necessary steps are being taken to bring
     the perpetrators to justice and prevent similar future attacks. While we appreciate your
     willingness to provide the House of Representatives with an interagency briefing last week,
     many of the members' questions were left unanswered. To that end, we are seeking additional
     information regarding the intelligence leading up to the attack, the security posture of our
     embassy, the role former Guantanamo Bay detainees may have played, as well as the way
     forward in Libya and, indeed, the region.

              We are also disturbed by the public statements made by members of the Administration
     that would lead the American public to believe this attack was a protest gone wrong, rather than
     what it truly was — a terrorist attack on the United States an the anniversary of 9/11. Decades
     after al Qaeda attacked our embassies in East Africa, which catalyzed a series of events that led
     to the attacks on 9/11, it appears they executed a highly coordinated and well-planned attacked
     against us again. Clearly, the threat from al Qaeda and affiliated groups has metastasized; yeewe
     do not appear to be learning from the past. For example, although brave Americans were once
     more murdered by terrorists, it seems our response is to rely on a late-to-the-scene FBI
     investigation. Media reports indicate investigators were prevented from arriving in Libya until
     more than a week after the attack, but it is not clear that they have gone to Benghazi and have,
     therefore, been unable to secure valuable information, such as the Ambassador's journal. The
     FBI has expertise in these situations, and they have a role to play. However, this seems like a
     pre-9/11 mindset — treating an act of war solely as a criminal matter, rather than also prioritizing
     the gathering of intelligence to prevent future attacks. Moreover, given that violence in the
     region continues unabated, what actions are we undertaking to deter terrorists from capitalizing




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796896 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796896 Date: 11/30/2015




    The President
    September 25, 2012
    Page 2

    on the successful Benghazi attack, or launching similar attacks elsewhere in the region or in the
    homeland?

            Thank you for your consideration of these concerns. We place significant weight on our
    constitutional responsibility to conduct appropriate oversight even when Congress is not in
    session and stand ready to return to Washington. Therefore, we respectfully request a joint
    briefing to respond to the questions enclosed, as classified Attachment A, at the earliest
    opportunity and would appreciate your commitment to continue to keep Congress informed even
    as the FBI investigation proceeds.


                                                 Respectfully,



    Harold Rogers                                        Howard P. "Buck" McKeon
       irman                                             Chairman
          ittee o             ons                        Committee on Armed Services



    Ilearia Ros-Leht                                     Lamar Smith
    Chairman                                             Chairman
    Committee                                            Committee on the Judiciary



    Mike Rogers                                          Frank R. Wolf
    Chairman                                             Chairman
    Permanent Select Committee on                        Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce
    Intelligence                                            tice, Science an Related Agencies



     .W. Bill Young                                       ay Granger
    Chairman                                             Chairwoman
    Appropriations Subcommittee on                       Appropriations Subcommittee on State,
    Defense                                              Foreign Operations, and Related Programs




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796896 Date: 11/30/2015
