        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792126 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                            RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                            Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivan.11@state.gov>
Sent:                            Thursday, August 30, 2012 2:18 PM
To:
Subject:                         FW: UNSC/Syria - Amb Rice's remarks - Final Draft
Attachments:                     8-30-12 SER SC Syria Ministerial remarks final draft.DOC

Importance:                      High



fYi

 From: Ryu, Rexon Y
Sent: Thursday, August 30, 2012 12:29 PM
To: Sherman, Wendy R; Jones, Beth E; Pittman, H Dean; Sullivan, Jacob J; Shapiro, Jeremy; McDonough, Denis R.;
Rhodes, Benjamin J.; Pomper, Stephen; ssimon@nss.eop.gov; Ford, Robert S; Hof, Frederic C
Cc: Lasensky, Scott B; Ahmed, Salman (USUN); Pan, Michael (USUN); Singh, Priya (USUN); Lakhdhir, Kamala S;
'Kristie_A._Canegallo             ; Zeya, Uzra S; Duffy, Thomas M
Subject: UNSC/Syria - Amb Rice's remarks - Final Draft
Importance: High

All — Attached and below is the final draft statement for Amb Rice's remarks during this afternoon's UNSC session on
Syria. These reflect her review and edits. We would appreciate any final comments from you as soon as possible. We
aim to finalize the remarks by 2:30pm. Many thanks.

Rexon




(SBU) BEGIN ELEMENTS:

Thank you, Foreign Minister Fabius, for convening this important meeting. We gather at a somber hour—less
than a week after some of the bloodiest days since the Syrian regime began its crackdown almost 18 months
ago. The United States is outraged by the summary executions and shelling that killed hundreds of Syrians in
Daraya late last week and by the aerial attacks on hospitals, bakeries, and breadlines in Aleppo. For a year and a
half, this regime has waged a vicious, unrelenting campaign of terror and bloodshed against its suffering people.
Bashar al-Asad and those who still stand by him are now responsible for the deaths of more than 20,000 Syrians
and the wounding of tens of thousands more. They have forced hundreds of thousands of civilians to flee for
their lives.

Despite the appalling environment on the ground and the clear obstruction by the Syrian government, we are
working with others to minimize the agony of the Syrian people. The United Nations, international
organizations, the United States, many countries around the world, and Syrian and other humanitarian
organizations are rushing vital aid to hundreds of thousands of civilians in urgent need. We commend the
humanitarian workers who are risking their own lives to save others, and we grieve for those who have made
the ultimate sacrifice. All parties, especially the Syrian government, must allow safe, full, and unfettered access
for humanitarian workers so they can save lives that today hang in the balance.

The United States strongly supports the full and immediate implementation of the Syria Humanitarian Response
Plan, which was agreed by OCHA and the Government of Syria. Less than half of the $180 million needed to
address humanitarian needs within Syria has been provided. The UN's Revised Syria Regional Response Plan,
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792126 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792126 Date: 11/30/2015




which assists neighboring countries hosting refugees, is underfunded as well. My government is pursuing every
avenue to provide humanitarian relief to those affected by the violence in Syria. Just this year, the United States
has provided nearly $82 million to the UN and other relief agencies for the Syria humanitarian crisis. Our aid
has fed the hungry and bound up the wounds of Asad's victims. We are helping protect internally displaced
people and refugees, working to save children from malnutrition and disease, and helping ensure adequate
water, sanitation, and hygiene. Our assistance is also enabling humanitarian coordination and logistics support
to relief agencies.

We are deeply grateful to fellow member states that have already made important donations, and we urge all
members to increase their contributions to meet the shortfalls. We also urge Member States to coordinate
closely with the UN to avoid creating parallel humanitarian response systems. We appreciate especially the
generosity of Turkey, Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq, and other countries that have opened their borders to civilians
fleeing violence and persecution, and we stand ready to continue to provide support as needed. We call on all
countries to facilitate safe passage for those seeking to flee. The United States is deeply concerned about the
spillover of Syria's violence to its neighbors, especially Lebanon, where the Lebanese government and security
forces are working to manage outbreaks of violence.

But this is not, at root, a humanitarian crisis. It is a political crisis caused by the cruelty and callousness of the
Asad regime. No amount of humanitarian assistance will end the bloodshed and suffering. That day will come
only once Asad has departed and a peaceful, Syrian-led transition to democracy has begun. This remains our
goal—and should be the goal of all nations of good will. We welcome the appointment of Joint Special
Representative Brahimi and fully support his efforts to end the violence and pave the way for a political
transition.

In parallel, the United States and our partners will continue to work with the Syrian opposition and engage all
segments of society to help the Syrian people achieve a government that represents all of its citizens, promotes
their human rights, respects the rule of law, and responds to its people's aspirations. We are proud to help train
civil society activists and to provide Syrians with equipment that lets them communicate securely with one
another, to reach out to the outside world, and to document the regime's atrocities. We encourage the
opposition's efforts to unite the population behind a common transition plan that offers a viable and safe future
for all Syrians. We will continue to expand and intensify these efforts and we will not rest until the Syrian
people are free to realize their aspirations to govern themselves and live without fear.

Even as the conflict rages, we condemn in the strongest terms unlawful killings by any side. We cannot and
will not turn away from atrocities and systematic violations of international law. Those responsible for
massacres of civilians will be held accountable. We welcome pledges by Free Syrian Army leaders that forbid
their soldiers from harming civilians, mistreating prisoners, or killing captured combatants, and we will watch
to see that these admirable promises are implemented. We also reiterate our demand that the Syrian
Government refrain from using or transferring any chemical or biological weapons. It is incumbent upon the
Syrian Government to ensure the safety and security of all such weapons and stockpiles.

Mr. President, we have heard today about the suffering of the innocent and the cruelty of the guilty. My country
was founded on the belief that governments derive their just powers from the consent of the governed. The
Asad regime has manifestly lost whatever consent, if any, it ever had. The question is not whether it will fall;
the question is when, and at what price.

The primary responsibility for ending the carnage rests with Asad and the clique around him. But the rest of the
international community, and especially our fellow Council members, have responsibilities of their own.
Unfortunately, a few members of the Security Council continue to prevent this body from responding
effectively. This is reprehensible. Yet, even at this tragically late hour, it does not have to remain this way. The
Syrian people fully understand which countries have rallied to their legitimate cause and which countries have
protected a doomed and desperate regime. It may not be too late to chart a wiser course—one that limits the
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792126 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792126 Date: 11/30/2015




harm to regional security, staves off the risk of civil strife, and produces a new, responsible Syrian government
that will defend all of its citizens. Indeed, one day not far away, Asad will lose his bloody grip on the Syrian
people and this Council will have to step up to help the Syrian people heal the wounds of war and rebuild their
battered country.

END ELEMENTS.


SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792126 Date: 11/30/2015
