       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791655 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL



From:                               Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS@state.gov >
Sent:                               Saturday, July 28, 2012 10:26 PM
To:
Subject:                            So Africa



You are going to be with Graca Machel on your trip to South Africa, I wanted to make sure you knew about the
commitment of the Elders to make ending child marriage their top priority. Last year they kicked off a campaign called
"Girls, Not Brides." Graca has become an eloquent spokesperson for the cause. Last year when Bishop Tutu appeared at
CGI, he also spoke about it. As you know, there are millions of girls whose childhoods are forever snatched away and
who become the women who are mired in poverty and reduced to the lowest status in society. It is estimated that 1 in 3
girls are married in the developing world and almost 50% in sub-Saharan Africa.

We have been planning that for Girls Day in October, you would speak to the pressing global challenge to "value the girl"
and announce new commitments to girls education and ending child marriage. We already have a $20m commitment
from the Ford Foundation for you to announce, that would go to global organizations to raise the status of girls. This is a
top priority for the Ford Foundation. We also have significant commitments to keep girls in secondary school and are
working to grow this. Around the same time, TuTu and others from the Elders will be in NY to highlight this global
undertaking under the sponsorship of UNICEF. They have offered to come to DC the day to their NY event to join you for
your announcement.

We are hoping that there might be a chance in Johannes burg to hold an event with Graca to highlight this issue,
preferably at a girls school which is the best
way to keep her from being "married." Another Elder, Mary Robinson, will also be in S Africa at the same time and it
might be possible to have Bishop Tutu. Regardless, I wanted you to know about the Elders campaign, if you don't
already.

Also, as you know, Durbin has led the effort to pass the child marriage bill in the Senate and it's pending in the House.

On another note, everyone seems to be planning the next chapter of your life and deciding what you should do. Just a
heads up that Swanee
Is sending you a letter outlining three areas that are her priorities in the hope that they will be yours. I already told her
that you are in no position to decide these things now but she and others will be bombarding you with their ideas.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791655 Date: 11/30/2015
