     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798122 Date: 11/30/2015

                                                                                             RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Monday, January 21, 2013 3:03 PM
To:                                'abedinh@state.gov'
Subject                            Re: Inez statement



It's good to go.

    Original Message
From: Abedin, Huma [mailto:AbedinH@state.gov]
Sent: Monday, January 21, 2013 12:36 PM Eastern Standard Time
To: H
Cc: Hanley, Monica R <HanleyMR@state.gov>
Subject: Inez statement

She's passed away. Can we put this out? It was the version inez had seen.

I was deeply saddened to learn of the passing of my dear friend, Inez McCormack. For decades, Inez promoted peace
and reconciliation in her beloved Northern Ireland and around the world. She challenged women and men to find a way
to put aside their differences, move past hurt and anger, and work together to end violence and build a fair and lasting
peace. It was a tremendous challenge, but Inez met it with joy.

Inez used to say that true leadership isn't a final destination. It's a process. And it starts with the simple act of stepping
up when the opportunity arises. From her early days as a community organizer and trade union leader, she stepped up
again and again — always with her trademark smile.

When sectarian conflict was tearing Northern Ireland apart, she brought a diverse group together to find a way toward
peace. She also understood that it wasn't just about stopping the killing; it was about supporting the living. So once the
Good Friday Agreement was signed, she stayed to help mend communities.

People called her a hero. She'd say, "I'm just a crazy woman who thinks Catholics are the same as Protestants."

Until her final days, she never stopped promoting peace, human rights and equality. She traveled the world encouraging
young women to be agents of change in their communities and countries.

I recently visited Northern Ireland and saw the legacy of her work. There is more we must do to build lasting peace and
prosperity in communities, but we have come so far in part because of her insistence on a seat at the table for women
and others who have been marginalized.

Of all her accomplishments, her daughter and grandchildren made her proudest. My thoughts and prayers go out to her
husband Vinny, daughter Anne, son-in-law Mark, granddaughter Maisie, grandson Jamie, the people of Northern Ireland
and all those who are better off because of her. Let us recommit ourselves to her vision of a just and equal society, and
honor her legacy by joining together in common cause.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798122 Date: 11/30/2015
