UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773896 Date: 11/30/2015
                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL




    DRAFT: Schwerin — New Statesman v7
    06/23/12 @ 1:30pm in Washington
    2440 words
    Global Leadership in a Changing World
    By Hillary Clinton

    When I touched down in Beijing last month for the fourth round of the U.S.-
    China Strategic & Economic Dialogue, I knew I was stepping onto the
    diplomatic high-wire. Every trip to China is complicated, reflecting a
    bilateral relationship that is as complex and crucial as any in the world, but
    this was different. We had a full agenda of sensitive issues to discuss like
    cyber-security and the South China Sea, yet the world's attention was
    increasingly focused on the fate of a blind human rights dissident who had
    sought refuge in the American embassy. Suddenly, an already delicate trip
    had become an outsized test of the U.S.-China relationship.

    Throughout history, the rise of new powers usually has played out in zero-
    sum terms. So it's not surprising that the emergence of countries like China,
    India, and Brazil has raised questions about the future of the global order the
    United States, the United Kingdom and our allies have helped build and
    defend. Against this backdrop, those few days in May took on even greater
    significance: Could the United States and China write a new answer to the
    old question of what happens when an established power and rising power
    meet?

    When I became Secretary of State in early 2009, there were questions about
    the future of America's globalleadership. We faced two long and expensive
    wars, an economy in free-fall, fraying alliances, and an international system
    that seemed to be buckling under the weight of new threats.

    A lot has changed in three years. Under President Obama's leadership, the
    United States has ended the war in Iraq and begun a transition in
    Afghanistan; we have revitalized American diplomacy, strengthened our
    alliances, and reengaged with multilateral institutions; and while the
    economic recovery is not as strong as anyone would like, we have pulled
    back from the brink and are headed in the right direction.

    New powers continue to play a greater role on the world stage. But this is
    not 1912, when friction between a declining Britain and a rising Germany


    1
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773896 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773896 Date: 11/30/2015




    DRAFT: Schwerin — New Statesman v7
    06/23/12 @ 1:30pm in Washington
    2440 words
    set the stage for global conflict. It's 2012, and a strong America is working
    with new powers and partners to update an international system designed to
    prevent global conflict and promote global prosperity.

    Along with trusted allies like the United Kingdom, the United States is
    leading in new ways that fit a new time — a time of complex challenges and
    scarce resources. And we are prioritizing our investment in the areas of
    greatest opportunity and consequence. This begins by understanding the
    current international landscape and the demands it places on American
    leadership.

    Today, the great powers are at peace and no totalitarian empire threatens the
    world, as it did during World War II and the Cold War. But we face new
    and different challenges. The financial crisis, climate change, international
    terrorism, these are threats that spill across borders and defy unilateral
    solutions. At the same time, political and technological changes are
    allowing huge numbers of people around the world to influence events like
    never before. And new players, from those emerging economic powers to
    non-state actors like corporations and cartels, are reshaping the international
    landscape.

    So the geometry of global power is becoming more distributed and diffuse
    even as the challenges we face become more complex and cross-cutting.
    That means that building coalitions for common action is becoming both
    more complicated and more crucial.

    Still, amidst all this change, two constants remain. First, a just, open, and
    sustainable international order is still required to promote global peace and
    prosperity. And second, American leadership is as essential as ever.

    For the United States, our traditional alliances in Europe and East Asia
    remain the bedrock of our global leadership. The United Kingdom and other
    allies are our partners of first resort, working side-by-side on everything
    from stopping Iran's quest for nuclear weapons to protecting civilians in
    Libya to achieving an AIDS-free generation. We have worked together for
    decades to shape the global order and to defend its core principles, and the
    future of that order depends on the enduring strength of our partnership.


    2
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773896 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773896 Date: 11/30/2015




    DRAFT: Schwerin — New Statesman v7
    06/23/12 @ 1:30pm in Washington
    2440 words

    Yet as strong as our traditional alliances are, we also recognize the need to
    work with new partners. Because new regional and global centers of
    influence are quickly emerging — not just India and China but also countries
    like Turkey, Mexico, Brazil, Indonesia, South Africa, as well as Russia.
    These are complicated, multi-dimensional relationships and aligning our
    interests isn't always easy — we're seeing just how difficult it can be on
    Syria. But we've also had successes, like maintaining broad-based pressure
    on Iran and North Korea. For the United States, the United Kingdom, and
    our allies, working with these new players in the years ahead, encouraging
    them to accept the responsibility that comes with influence, and integrating
    them more fully into the international order is a key test for our diplomacy.

    We will need to work together to renovate the global architecture to better
    reflect the dynamics of today's world. International rules and institutions
    designed for an earlier age may not be suited to today. But there are
    principles that are universal and that must be defended: fundamental
    freedoms and human dignity;, an open, free, transparent, and fair economic
    system; the peaceful resolution of disputes; and respect for the territorial
    integrity of states. These are norms that benefit everyone and that help all
    people and nations live and trade in peace.

    The international system based on these principles helped fuel, not foil, the
    rise of emerging powers such as China and India. Those nations have
    benefited from the security it provides, the markets it opens, and the trust it
    fosters. As a consequence, they have a real stake in the success of that
    system. And as their power grows and their ability to contribute increases,
    the world's expectations of them will rise as well.

    So the rise of new powers doesn't have to be a threat to the global order built
    and defended by the United States, the United Kingdom and our allies. In
    fact, it's in part the result of that order— of the stability and prosperity we
    foster around the world.




    3
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773896 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773896 Date: 11/30/2015




    DRAFT: Schwerin — New Statesman v7
    06/23/12 @ 1:30pm in Washington
    2440 words
    A zero-sum approach will only lead to negative-sum results. So the United
    States has devoted significant diplomatic effort to building stronger
    relationships with these emerging powers, and to encouraging them to
    engage more fully in an international system that provides incentives for
    cooperation and disincentives for sitting on the sidelines. We look to our
    allies to join us in this effort.

    Our aim is to strengthen mature and effective regional and global institutions
    that can mobilize common action and settle disputes peacefully; to build
    consensus around rules and norms that help manage relations between
    peoples, markets, and nations; and to establish security arrangements that
    provide stability and build trust.

    To understand how this can work, consider the East Asia Summit, which
    brings together the leaders of all the key nations in the Asia-Pacific to
    grapple with the region's biggest challenges and pursue comprehensive
    solutions, whether it's on nonproliferation, disaster response, or maritime
    security. Until last year, no U.S. President had ever attended. But the
    United States has spent recent years deepening our engagement all across the
    region and in particular with its multilateral institutions. So President
    Obama decided to participate this past November, and we quickly saw the
    value of an institution like this.

    The South China Sea connects many of the nations of the Asia-Pacific, some
    of whom have competing claims on its waters and islands. Half the world's
    merchant tonnage flows through the South China Sea, so the stakes for
    maritime security and freedom of navigation are high. The United States has
    no territorial claims there, and we do not take sides in those territorial
    disputes. But we have always been a seafaring nation, and we have an
    abiding interest in protecting the seas and respecting international law and
    promoting the peaceful resolution of disputes that arise out of navigation.

    Trying to settle complex disputes like this bilaterally, one-on-one, is a recipe
    for confusion and even confrontation. There are just too many overlapping
    claims and interests. But when President Obama joined his fellow leaders at
    the East Asia Summit, they were able to come together and support a region-
    wide effort to protect unfettered access to the South China Sea, work toward

    4
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773896 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773896 Date: 11/30/2015




    DRAFT: Schwerin — New Statesman v7
    06/23/12 @ 1:30pm in Washington
    2440 words
    developing a code of conduct, and respect the legitimate interests of all
    claimants to ensure that disputes are settled through a consensual process
    based on established principles of international law.

    Recent renewed tensions in the South China Sea only underscore the
    importance of pursuing such a multilateral approach.

    The productive discussion at the East Asia Summit was a reminder that, for
    certain issues, there's no substitute for putting the relevant players in the
    same room and letting giving them a chance to begin to exchange ideas and
    work towards sorting out problems. In cases like this one, smaller countries
    can be sure their voices are heard. And larger countries, which have a
    significant stake in broader regional stability and security, can pursue
    solutions to these complex challenges. That's what an effective international
    architecture permits.

    With this in mind, the United States has made it a priority to reengage with
    regional institutions and partners, including increasingly effective
    organizations like the Arab League and the African Union. Just a few years
    ago, some of these institutions lacked both capability and credibility. That's
    changing fast. And this presents a real opportunity to bring nations together
    to promote regional stability and security in hotspots like the Horn of Africa.
    The United States, the United Kingdom, and our allies need to work together
    to seize this opportunity and build stronger relationships with these
    emerging institutions.

    There's also a lesson here about what it takes to lead and to solve problems
    in today's complex world. It is no longer enough to be strong. Great powers
    like the United States and the United Kingdom also have to be smart and
    persuasive. The test of our leadership going forward will be our ability to
    mobilize disparate people and nations to work together to solve common
    problems and advance shared values and aspirations.

    To meet that test, the United States, the United Kingdom, and our allies will
    have to use the power of our example as well as the example of our power.
    We will have to lead with purpose, guided by our core democratic values

   5
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773896 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773896 Date: 11/30/2015




    DRAFT: Schwerin — New Statesman v7
    06/23/12 @ 1:30pm in Washington
    2440 words
    and the belief that our interests are advanced by widening the circle of
    peace, prosperity, and opportunity. We will have to lead with partnership,
    based on a principle of mutual responsibility, mutual respect, and mutual
    interest. And we will have to lead with pragmatism, keenly focused on
    results that benefit our people and all people.

    I call this kind of leadership Smart Power, and putting it into practice
    requires us to adapt and innovate. That means using technologies like
    twitter and SMS to reach beyond embassy walls and engage directly with
    people, from civil society advocates in Russia to farmers in Kenya to
    students in Colombia. It means leveraging new groups of nations to work on
    specific issues like the new Global Counterterrorism Forum that we
    launched last year, or our new coalition on climate and clean air that is
    specifically targeting the short-lived pollutants that account for up to 30
    percent of global warming. And means finding new partners in the private
    sector and using the power of markets to solve strategic problems in entirely
    new ways.

    This last point is especially important because our security today depends on
    decisions made not just in diplomatic negotiations and on the battlefield, but
    also in financial markets and on factory floors. Most emerging powers are
    gaining influence less because of the size of their armies than because of the
    growth of their economies. So we too are working to harness the tools of
    global economics to advance our strategic aims abroad, and to use
    diplomacy to create jobs and strengthen our economy at home.

    My experiences as Secretary of State are also helping me see even more
    clearly the link between standing up for human dignity abroad and ensuring
    national security at home. It's no coincidence that many of the places where
    we see the most instability and conflict are also places where women are
    abused and denied their rights, young people are ignored, minorities are
    persecuted, and civil society is curtailed. Those aren't just symptoms of
    instability — they actually undermine societies. And by the same token, it's
    also no coincidence that many of our closest allies are countries that
    embrace pluralism and tolerance, equal rights and equal opportunities.
    These are not Western values, they are universal values. So it is in our
    interest to help those who have been historically excluded become full

    6
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773896 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773896 Date: 11/30/2015




     DRAFT: Schwerin — New Statesman v7
     06/23/12 @ 1:30pm in Washington
     2440 words
     participants in the economic and political lives of their countries. And it is
     in our interest to support citizens working for democratic change, whether
     they're in Tunis or Rangoon. Otherwise, we'll keep facing the same cycles
     of conflict and volatility.

     In particular, empowering women and girls around the world is crucial to
     seizing long-term opportunities for promote peace, democracy, and
     sustainable development. We know that when women have the opportunity
     to contribute, they can drive social, political, and economic progress not just
     for themselves, but for entire societies. That's now a cornerstone of foreign
     policy for America and many of our allies, and a guiding principle for all our
     diplomats and development experts around the world.

     Even as we seek out new partnerships and new ways of solving problems,
     there will continue to be times when the United States will and must act
     boldly, directly, and alone. For example, to pursue a terrorist like Osama bin
     Ladin. Such occasions will be rare, and we will turn to them only as a last
     resort, but we take seriously our responsibilities as a global leader and our
     responsibilities to the American people. And we believe that leadership
     includes going it alone when we have to. But that is no contradiction. In
     fact, our ability and willingness to do what is required, alone if necessary,
     makes us a more credible partner and negotiator.

     All of this — the changing international landscape, the shifting demands on
     America's global leadership, and our efforts to revitalize diplomacy for the
     21' century -- was on my mind as I arrived in Beijing on that tense day in
     May. And it gave me confidence as we negotiated our way through the
     week. In the end, the relationship we've worked so hard to build with China
     proved more durable and dynamic than many feared. Both countries stayed
     focused on our shared agenda and engaged candidly on a wide-range of
     critical issues. And today, that blind dissident is safely studying law in New
     York, surrounded by family and friends.

     America and our allies have come through a long decade of war, terrorism,
     and recession. And these continue to be difficult days for many of our
     citizens. But as I travel the world, nearly everywhere I go I see evidence

   7
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773896 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773896 Date: 11/30/2015




    DRAFT: Schwerin — New Statesman v7
    06/23/12 @ 1:30pm in Washington
    2440 words
    that our leadership is still respected and required. Yes, this is because of our
    military and our material might, but it's also because of our commitment to
    fairness, justice, freedom, and democracy.

    America's record may not be perfect, but the United States consistently over
    history seeks to advance not just our own good, but the greater good. There
    is no real precedent in history for the role we play or the responsibility we
    have shouldered -- and there is no alternative. That is what makes American
    leadership so exceptional and it is why I am confident that we will continue
    to serve and defend a peaceful and prosperous global order for many years to
    come.

                                             ###




    8
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773896 Date: 11/30/2015
