   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796958 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL


From:                             H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                             Saturday, November 24, 2012 9:53 PM
To:                               Oscar Flores
Subject:                          Pls print for me




Why U.S. troops must stay in Afghanistan By Kimberly Kagan and Frederick W. Kagan, Published: NOVEMBER 23, 7:25
PM ET
 Aa
Kimberly Kagan is president of the Institute for the Study of War. Frederick Kagan is director of the Critical Threats
Project and a scholar at the American Enterprise Institute.

Will the United States continue to conduct counterterrorism operations in South Asia? That question is central to any
discussion about U.S. troop presence and mission in Afghanistan. The answer can be yes only if we pursue and support
the current strategy, retaining roughly 68,000 troops in Afghanistan into 2014 and about half that number thereafter.

Amateurs can discuss imaginary, over-the-horizon "light footprint" strategies. Professionals must consider logistics.
Physics and military reality dictate the minimum number of troops needed to have any U.S. presence in Afghanistan
without inviting calamities worse than the events in Benghazi, Libya. The presence of U.S. forces in Afghanistan alone
permits counterterrorism operations in Pakistan. It's this simple: Either we keep the necessary number of troops in
Afghanistan or operations against al-Qaeda and its affiliates in Afghanistan and Pakistan cease.

The principal terrorist concentrations in South Asia are in Pakistan's federally administered tribal areas. Al-Qaeda and
affiliated groups have sought safety in Afghanistan primarily in Konar and Nuristan provinces. U.S. forces could target
terrorists without maintaining a ground presence in three ways: using armed Predator drones, special mission units or
precision-guided munitions dropped from manned aircraft. Without bases in Afghanistan, the tyranny of distance rules
out the first two options; the requirement for accuracy and certainty rules out the last.

North Waziristan is more than 600 miles from the nearest coastline; the other sanctuaries are farther. The U.S. Air Force
reports that armed Predator drones have a range of about 1,150 miles — not enough to get to Waziristan and back
again from the coast, much less to orbit and observe a target. Special mission units would have to parachute from
transport aircraft because no helicopter in the U.S. inventory can fly that far. But they could not return because aircraft
cannot land in the mountains of Eastern Afghanistan or in Pakistan. Manned aircraft can drop precision weapons on
targets in Afghanistan, but they fly too fast to loiter over potential targets. Their bombs hit precisely what they are
aimed at, but fast-moving aircraft cannot ensure that the target was actually there. There is no over-the-horizon solution
to targeting terrorists in South Asia.

Bases in Afghanistan obviate all these problems. U.S. forces operating from Khost, Jalalabad and Kandahar can strike
targets in Afghanistan (or Pakistan) with Predators and special mission units. Such operations have been critical to the
success of counterterrorism operations in this region, including the killing of Osama bin Laden (Abbottabad is about 150
miles east of Jalalabad, 750 miles from the Indian Ocean).

The minimum U.S. footprint to sustain counterterrorism operations requires bases near Jalalabad, Khost and Kandahar
to reach known terrorist havens (Khost and Jalalabad are less than 100 miles apart but are separated by a 10,000-foot
mountain range). Each base requires an airstrip to fly Predators and move supplies by air. Each must also have aircraft
ground crews and support the special mission units.

Base security and support impose serious troop requirements. These bases are in dangerous places, and we surely will
not entrust the protection of U.S. personnel to local forces as we did in Benghazi. Securing the perimeter would require

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796958 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796958 Date: 11/30/2015




at least two companies of soldiers (alternating guard duty) and a company-size quick-reaction force — a battalion, in
other words. Each base must also have the helicopters needed to move around and conduct operations — at least a
combat aviation battalion — and a field medical facility able to handle severe trauma. That adds up to one combat
brigade (3,500 soldiers) and one combat aviation brigade (5,000 to 6,000 soldiers).

That's about 10,000 troops — without counting the supply or command and control of these forces. Even if we supply
each base directly by air from outside Afghanistan, with no facility near Kabul, each base still needs logistical elements,
probably at least 3,000 to 5,000 combat service support troops. The most idealized version of the limited
counterterrorism footprint, therefore, is around 15,000 troops. At that strength we would not be able to advise, enable,
support or rely on the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF). Since they, like our NATO allies, depend on U.S. enablers
such as reconnaissance, helicopters, medevac and route-clearance packages, most of their operations would cease.

Thus this footprint would not allow our troops, our allies or the Afghans to maneuver. At best our troops and bases
would become isolated islands focused on protecting themselves and irrelevant in the fight against al-Qaeda. At worst
they would take losses much greater than we suffered in Benghazi.

This minimum counterterrorism footprint requires basic stability near our long-term bases to have any effect. The ANSF
must sustain that stability but can only do so supported by U.S. advisers and enablers. Advising the three Afghan
National Army corps and Afghan National Police zones around the bases requires at least three advise-and-assist
brigades — one per corps and zone — plus support units. Such brigades are smaller than combat brigades, about 1,500
each. They must, in this concept, be located with our counterterrorism forces to avoid having to secure additional bases.

Now we're up to around 21,500 troops total, without a central headquarters near Kabul or any reliable means of moving
by road between our bases. In the real world, neither of those conditions makes sense. Adding up the security forces for
a base near Kabul, a theater headquarters, route-clearance packages, theater logisticians and other ancillary units is
likely to push the requirement above 30,000.

At that level U.S. forces in Afghanistan could do nothing beyond the minimum necessary to allow us to continue
counterterrorism operations in South Asia: no nation-building, no effort to affect the Afghan political process or help the
Afghans secure presidential elections in 2014, no development assistance; only defensive operations against the Taliban
and other insurgent groups from three bases.

Moving toward this long-term posture in 2013 will likely ensure its failure. As we fall below 68,000 troops, we will have
to withdraw from important terrain and lose the ability to maneuver. Our forces won't be able to operate in most of
southern Afghanistan, conduct offensive operations or help the ANSF consolidate and mature. We must create basic
stability in 2013 that the ANSF can sustain to set conditions for any long-term U.S. counterterrorism operations. Doing so
requires two things this White House appears to want to avoid: keeping U.S. force levels where they are for the next two
years; and implementing a serious political strategy aimed not at our enemies but at the people we need to be our long-
term partners.

The United States can stabilize Afghanistan if it maintains around 68,000 U.S. troops in Afghanistan into 2014, dropping
to over 30,000 thereafter (about what we have in Korea). The idea that the war is inevitably lost is a convenient mask
behind which decision-makers hide to deflect responsibility for pulling out troops who are making a real difference.

We have argued that the current defeatism about Afghanistan is overdrawn and unfounded. But it is more important for
Americans to internalize a simple fact: We must either stabilize Afghanistan at this minimum level or abandon the fight
against al-Qaeda and its allies in South Asia. Any alternative "light footprint" strategy is a dangerous mirage.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796958 Date: 11/30/2015
