     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793846 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                         Sidney Blumenthal <
Sent:                         Thursday, November 15, 2012 12:45 PM
To:
Subject:                      H: Wash Post: "go-between for Central Command officers with Lebanese and other
                              Middle Eastern government officials." S



ht-tp://gawker.com/5960211/petraeus-pal-jill-kelley-loaned-800000-to-her-unstable-twin-sister


Petraeus' Pal Jill Kelley Loaned $800,000
to Her 'Unstable' Twin Sister
OfJohn Cook
Well, it looks like David Petraeus got himself wrapped up with some real fine folks when he
befriended the Khawam family. Jill Kelley (nee Khawam) is the financially troubled Tampa socialite
who went to the feds complaining of harassing emails from an anonymous tormentor who turned out
to by Paula Broadwell. Her twin sister, Natalie Khawam, is the bankrupt lawyer that a D.0 judge has
called "unstable," who has been repeatedly accused of lying to state and federal courts, and who, with
her sister, regularly took Petraeus' wife on shopping trips. Just a couple regular gals!
Kelley now finds herself at the center of two scandals: The Petraeus affair, and an investigation into
hundreds of "flirtatious" emails between her and Petraeus' former deputy, Gen. John Allen. It's
exceedingly unclear at this point precisely why Kelley was involved in Petraeus' life. She was initially
described in press reports as an unpaid liaison between the State Department and officials at Tampa's
MacDill Air Force Base, the headquarters of Central Command. That was lated revised to "unpaid
social liaison," apparently a reference to the parties she and her husband, Tampa surgeon Scott
Kelley, frequently hosted for CENTCOM brass at their $1.2 million mansion. According to the
Washington Post, Kelley—whose parents are immigrants from Lebanon—also acted as a "go-between
for Central Command officers with Lebanese and other Middle Eastern government officials."
Indeed, she seems to have been a regular on the diplomatic circuit: Rep. Peter King (R-N.Y.) told CNN
yesterday that he had met her once or twice at British embassy events. And when she called 911 from
her home over the weekend to complain about reporters hanging out on her lawn, she claimed to be
an "honorary consul general" who is due "diplomatic protection."
She is also deeply in debt. Kelley and her husband are currently facing foreclosure on two multi-
million dollar real estate investments, as well as a lawsuit related to unpaid credit card debt. That's
the sort of sticky financial situation that makes people vulnerable to exploitation by foreign agents,
which is one reason it's so weird that Petraeus was so close to the Khawam family.
The Kelleys also, according to the Huffington Post, ran a charity purportedly devote to cancer patients
that spent most of its money on "parties, entertainment, travel and attorney fees" before going out of
business.
 While all the available evidence suggests—for now—that Kelley is little more than a social climber
 attracted to power, her twin sister is a different story. Natalie Khawam lives with her sister and
 brother-in-law in Tampa. She's an attorney specializing in whistle-blower lawsuits. But by all
 accounts, her personal and professional lives are a mess. She filed for bankruptcy in April of this year,
 claiming $3.6 million in debt against $349,000 in assets. Among the debts: an $800,000 "personal
 loan" from her sister and brother-in-law.
 She is engaged in a nasty custody battle with her ex-husband Grayson Wolfe, a former Bush
 Administration official who served in the Coalition Provisional Authority in Iraq and "Director of
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793846 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793846 Date: 11/30/2015




Broader Middle East Initiatives and Iraqi Reconstruction at the Export-Import Bank of the United
States," according to his LinkedIn profile.
Khawam is currently involved in nasty litigation with Barry Cohen, a Tampa lawyer who briefly
employed her. She sued him in July, claiming sexual harassment and unpaid compensation. But
according to the Tampa Bay Times, she stopped pursuing the litigation, and Cohen struck back:
        Since her filing, Cohen has delved into Khawam's past: He's uncovered court documents
        from a bankruptcy. He also unearthed a searing, 19-page child custody order from a
        Washington, D.C., superior court judge calling her out in 2011 for a lengthy "history of
        abusing the litigation process" and a "willingness to say anything, even under oath, to
        advance her own personal interests."
        In court documents, Cohen also claims that Khawam "fraudulently omitted Rolex
        watches, sable mink furs and a diamond ring" from a list of her assets in an April
        bankruptcy.
        On top of that, Cohen has filed a motion for dismissal and requested sanctions against
        Khawam for a bad-faith filing.
In addition to accusing her of abusing the litigation process, the judge in that custody case called
Khawam "psychologically unstable."
Which makes it, again, downright weird that both Petraeus and Allen submitted letters to that judge
testifying to Khawam's qualifications as a mother. "My wife and I have known Natalie for
approximately three years, getting to know her while serving in Tampa, Florida, through our
friendship with Dr. and Mrs. Scott Kelley," Petraeus wrote in a letter dated September. "Natalie
clearly dotes on her son."
Petraeus and Allen are not the only powerful Florida players that Khawam and her sister cultivated:
She also, according to the Daily Telegraph, once dated (plainly gay) former Gov. Charlie Crist.
To recap: The CIA director and the commanding officer in Afghanistan were both closely involved
with a pair of twin Lebanese sisters, one of whom was a self-appointed diplomatic official who hosted
lavish parties for American military officers and loaned six-figure sums to family members while
defaulting on her own debt payments and running fake charities, the other of whom accumulated
millions in debt, allegedly lied to state and federal courts, and was described by a judge as unstable.
The daughters' financial difficulties may well be inherited: Their parents filed for bankruptcy in
Pennsylvania in 1990.
 [Image via AP]




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793846 Date: 11/30/2015
