    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798044 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                           B6


From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Saturday, January 26, 2013 9:47 AM
To:
Cc:                              Sullivan, Jacob J; Reines, Philippe I; Verma, Richard R
Subject:                         Fw: Heads Up on WP Outlook Piece




From: jamesfranklinjeffrey            [mailto:jamesfranklinjeffrey
Sent: Saturday, January 26, 2013 09:42 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Fw: Heads Up on WP Outlook Piece

Oops already out in on-line. Sorry thought it would appear tomorrow. See below. (Title is not what I gave them
and stupid as I state explicitly at the end that being in Benghazi was the right policy call). Jim

How to Prevent the Next Benghazi
By James Jeffrey
Washington Post
Saturday, January 26, 2013

For most of America's history, our diplomacy was based on establishing rapport with foreign leaders,
negotiating military alliances, promoting trade and reporting back to Washington on key developments, all
while watching out for our citizens abroad. But since World War II, and particularly under Presidents Obama
and George W. Bush, our approach has expanded: Our diplomats now move beyond host government offices to
work directly with populations to help mediate conflicts, press economic development and serve shoulder to
shoulder with the military in the fight against terrorism.

This new type of mission, dubbed "expeditionary diplomacy," is hands-on and often effective. But, as we saw
with the Sept. 11, 2012, attack on the Benghazi outpost that killed Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens and three
other Americans, it can also be very dangerous. In hearings this past week before Senate and House committees,
Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton reiterated her conviction that direct-to-the-population diplomatic
work is essential for U.S. security. But to make sure the risks of expeditionary diplomacy are worth the rewards,
we need a clear, formal framework for deciding when these missions should be undertaken, avoided or rolled
back.

Clinton alluded to this when she promised the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that her department would
review "where, when and whether" before deploying our diplomats. Likewise, an independent review led by
Ambassador Thomas R. Pickering and Adm. Mike Mullen of what happened in Libya noted the need, at times,
for "downsizing, indirect access and even withdrawal." However, the Foreign Service's culture of courage will
routinely answer Clinton's three W's with "everywhere, always and of course."

I've experienced these dilemmas firsthand. For example, during my time as deputy chief at the U.S. Embassy in
Baghdad, I lost a civilian officer in 2004 when he ignored instructions to travel with an escort as he helped his
Iraqi government colleagues deliver services to their people.

After the Vietnam War, the military faced a similar choice in deciding when and where to use force overseas. In
the 1980s, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and then-Lt. Gen. Cohn Powell drafted an informal but

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798044 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798044 Date: 11/30/2015




influential guide, which became known as the Powell Doctrine, that informed our decisions in Kuwait, Bosnia
and Kosovo. It calls for military action only when key U.S. interests are at stake; says we must state clear,
achievable objectives for every mission and devote the necessary resources to them; cites the need for
congressional and popular support; and cautions that war should be a last resort.

Of course, deploying State Department officials in expeditionary missions is not the same as sending troops into
combat, but the 1979 hostage-taking at the U.S. Embassy in Tehran and the Benghazi attack last year show the
risks of getting diplomatic operations wrong. Thus, a modified version of the Powell Doctrine could be a good
guideline for deciding where, when and whether to deploy our brave diplomats. It would ensure that their risks
and potential sacrifices are in the service of important - and achievable - foreign policy goals.

What would such a doctrine look like? How would it be applied?

First, recognize that even with the best security and abundant resources, expeditionary diplomacy is risky.
Stevens had requested more security for his Benghazi office, but lower-level workers at the State Department
blocked the request, which did not make it to Clinton or other senior officials. Such bureaucratic screw-ups
need to be fixed - fast - building on the proposals made by the independent review and Clinton's commitments
to Congress.

Even with good security, we will sometimes lose people. During the successful campaign to wrest much of
Baghdad's Sadr City from Iranian surrogate control in 2008, a State Department provincial team lost five
personnel, despite U.S. Army security. But they were making a crucial contribution to the U.S. surge in Iraq,
and taking risks under those circumstances is necessary.

Second, given the risks, get involved only when key U.S. interests are at stake. This is easy to say but harder to
implement, as we usually consider any territory critical, especially if our enemies contest it. But, as with
Somalia, some places are not worth the risks of permanent diplomatic deployment. Iraq, once U.S. troops were
committed there, became a key national interest, justifying our considerable State Department losses in Sadr
City and elsewhere.

Third, require that any expedition - be it keeping a post open under fire or putting people in the field - be
effective enough to be worthwhile. That is, can we make a difference by showing the flag, helping dig a well or
working toward conflict resolution - and will local partners work with us? The record of international
development and conflict resolution in poor nations is spotty, thus our engagement in a given place is not
automatically worth it. And not all people want to engage us, particularly in the Islamic world. In Iraqi
Kurdistan and among the Northern Alliance in Afghanistan, we found people eager to cooperate with us on
security and accept our help. But in places such as Mali and Yemen, we show the flag in defended embassies
but are careful about roaming outside.

Fourth, where expeditionary missions make sense, be sure to get enough resources. Many an expeditionary
meeting I attended ended with the local partner saying something like: "Great chat, but what will you do for
us?" In Iraq, our civilians were backed by billions of dollars in aid money, giving Ambassador Ryan Crocker,
for example, the leverage to press Iraq to bring in international oil companies. Today, Iraq is the second-largest
OPEC oil exporter and should provide 45 percent of the world's new crude supplies this decade - helping calm
global oil markets and gas prices, and facilitating our oil embargo of Iran.

Fifth, as stressed in Clinton's 2010 Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review, leverage other
institutions and capabilities - such as local governments, the U.S. military, other countries' missions,
international agencies and nongovernmental organizations - to ensure that a mission is as effective as possible
and has adequate resources. "Made in America" doesn't always work best. In Iraq, after U.S. forces left in 2011,
we ratcheted back our security but still had to work with Iraqis on their ground. For the first time in Iraq, the
embassy relied on local government forces to secure landing zones.
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798044 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798044 Date: 11/30/2015




Finally, review the situation constantly, not just within the organizations directly involved but at the White
House and the Pentagon, to account for ever-changing realities. For example, in Iraq in 2011, with the situation
stabilized somewhat and the U.S. military gone, our interests were not as vital as when we faced a raging
insurgency and had 170,000 troops deployed. Accordingly, Clinton directed us to reconfigure our mission,
working only in crucial areas such as Basra and Irbil.

Our civilians overseas will bravely do whatever we ask of them. But we must make sure we task them only with
what is necessary so their sacrifices are worth it. I believe that standard was met in Benghazi, given the stakes in
Libya and our relationship with the population. But if we are not careful, that might not be the case next time.

Ambassador James F. Jeffrey, a distinguished visiting fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy,
retired in June after 43 years of government service, including as an Army officer in Germany and Vietnam and
35 years in the Foreign Service, including three in Iraq.
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T

From: "Mills, Cheryl D" <MillsCD@state.gov>
Date: Sat, 26 Jan 2013 04:37:35 -0500
To: <jamesfranklinjeffrey
Subject: Re: Heads Up on WP Outlook Piece

Dear Jim:

Many thanks - both for the heads up and the context. I really appreciate it.

Was this in the end an interview or a piece you authored?

If the latter, can you send me a copy today?

Thanks!

Best

Cdm


From: James jeffrey [mailto:jamesfranklinjeffre)
Sent: Friday, January 25, 2013 10:37 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Heads Up on WP Outlook Piece

 WP approached me to do a piece on follow up post Secretary's Benghazi testimony. This is not something
 I volunteered for but it was clear they would find someone to do it, and I didn't like the tack they were
 taking, so anyway I've learned tonight they'll run my piece in Outlook. It's basic theme is not how to
 fix security but rather, even if security is fixed expeditionary diplomacy is inherently risky, so how do we
 cope with risk versus benefits. I used her "when, where, whether" as a starting point and proposed
 a Powell doctrine-like template to judge whether dangerous field deployments make policy sense, based on
 my experiences in Iraq and elsewhere.

 Here is the problem. I am as I should be very complimentary about the Secretary and her actions
 and testimony, and specifically endorse the Benghazi mission as meeting policy criteria for
 taking risks. But I do posit that sometimes it doesn't make sense to send people out. You will
 remember I had a bit of a disagreement with Ann Marie Slaughter at the Jan 4 FAPB meeting.
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798044 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798044 Date: 11/30/2015



I had a much more in depth conversation with her afterwards and it's clear that she does not
agree with my views on criteria for sending people out. To the extent you
and the Secretary agree with Ann Marie you may see this piece as critical of expeditionary
diplomacy. It's not; I've risked my life practicing it. But having lost over 100 personnel
KIA and WIA (and two ARBs judging me) in my time in Iraq (and a son going back
to Afghanistan on Department assignment this summer) I feel very strongly that we have
to be prudent. If the media ask me if there is any daylight between me and you all I will
cite the Pickering Mullen ARB and the Secretary's testimony and say absolutely not.
(I will pass this on to Toria tomorrow as I don't have her email address. Regards, Jim Jeffrey




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05798044 Date: 11/30/2015
