      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797427 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                         RELEASE IN
                                                                                         FULL


From:                          Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                          Wednesday, January 2, 2013 6:33 PM
To:
Subject:                       Fw: Google Exec Chairman to Visit NKorea (AP)




From: OpsNewsTicker@state.gov [mailto:OpsNewsTicker@state.gov]
Sent: Wednesday, January 02, 2013 03:36 PM
To: NEWS-Mahogany; NEWS-NEA; NEWS-Korea; NEWS-EAP; NEWS-DRL; NEWS-Cyber
Subject: Google Exec Chairman to Visit NKorea (AP)



SEOUL (AP) - Google's executive chairman is preparing to travel to one of the last frontiers of cyberspace:
North Korea.

Eric Schmidt will be traveling to North Korea on a private, humanitarian mission led by former New Mexico
Gov. Bill Richardson that could take place as early as this month, sources told The Associated Press on
Wednesday. The sources, two people familiar with the group's plans, asked not to be named because the visit
had not been made public.

The trip would be the first by a top executive from U.S.-based Google, the world's largest Internet search
provider, to a country considered to have the most restrictive Internet policies on the planet.

North Korea is in the midst of what leader Kim Jong Un called a modern-day "industrial revolution" in a New
Year's Day speech to the nation Monday. He is pushing science and technology as a path to economic
development for the impoverished country, aiming for computers in every school and digitized machinery in
every factory.

However, giving citizens open access to the Internet has not been part of the regime's strategy. While some
North Koreans can access a domestic Intranet service, very few have clearance to freely surf the World Wide
Web.

It was not immediately clear who Schmidt and Richardson expect to meet in North Korea, a country that does
not have diplomatic relations with the United States. North Korea has almost no business with companies in the
U.S., which has banned the import of North Korean-made goods.

Schmidt, however, has been a vocal advocate of providing people around the world with Internet access and
technology.

As Google's chief executive for a decade until 2011, Schmidt oversaw Google's ascent from a small California
startup focused on helping computer users search the Internet to a global technology giant making inroads into
mobile phone markets as well as mapping.

Google now has offices in more than 40 countries, including all three of North Korea's neighbors: Russia, South
Korea and China, another country criticized for systematic Internet censorship.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797427 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797427 Date: 11/30/2015




After being accused of complying with China's strict Internet regulations, known as "the Great Firewall of
China," Google pulled its search business from the world's largest Internet market in 2010 by redirecting traffic
from mainland China to Hong Kong. The company maintains other businesses in China, but a recent
transparency report shows Google's services there sporadically are blocked.

Since stepping aside as CEO, Schmidt has served as Google's executive chairman, largely responsible for the
company's external relationships with policymakers, business partners and governments around the world.

And in recent months, Schmidt had been working with Jared Cohen, a former U.S. State Department policy and
planning adviser who heads Google's New York-based think tank, on a book about the Internet's role in shaping
society. "The New Digital Age" is due to be published in April.

Schmidt's message: The Internet and mobile technology have the power to lift people out of poverty and
political oppression.

"The spread of mobile phones and new forms of connectivity offer us the prospect of connecting everybody," he
said in commencement speech at Boston University in May. "When that happens, connectivity can
revolutionize every aspect of society: politically, socially, economically."

The Richardson-Schmidt trip comes at a delicate time politically. In December, North Korea defiantly shot a
satellite into space on the back of a three-stage rocket last month, a launch Pyongyang has hailed as a major step
in its quest for peaceful exploration of space.

Washington and others, however, decry it as a covert test of long-range ballistic missile technology designed to
send a nuclear-tipped warhead as far as California. The UN. Security Council quickly condemned the launch,
and is deliberating whether to further punish Pyongyang for violating bans on developing its nuclear and missile
programs.

The visit also follows North Korea's announcement that an American citizen of Korean descent has been jailed
in Pyongyang on suspicion of committing "hostile" acts against the state. Conviction could draw a sentence of
10 years of hard labor under North Korea's penal code.

Kenneth Bae, identified in North Korean state media by his Korean name, Pae Jun Ho, is the fifth American
detained in North Korea in the past four years. The exact circumstances of his arrest were not clear. The Korean
Central News Agency said he was taken into custody in Rason, a special economic zone in the far north near
China and Russia, while on a tour of the area.

Richardson, a former U.S. ambassador to the United Nations who often serves as an envoy to countries that do
not have diplomatic relations with the United States, will try to meet with North Korean officials, and possibly
Bae, to discuss the case, the sources said.

Richardson has been to North Korea at least a half-dozen times since 1994, including two trips to negotiate the
release of Americans detained by North Korea. His last visit to Pyongyang was in 2010.

Also leading the trip is Kun "Tony" Namkung, an Asian affairs expert who has made numerous visits to North
Korea over the past 25 years. Namkung also serves as a consultant to the AP.

North Korea and the U.S. fought on opposite sides of a brutal, three-year battle on the Korean Peninsula before
signing a truce in 1953. The Korean Peninsula remains divided by a heavily fortified border, and the U.S.
stations 28,000 troops in South Korea to protect the ally.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797427 Date: 11/30/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797427 Date: 11/30/2015



However, even before late leader Kim Jong Il's death a year ago, North Korea indicated interest in repairing
relations with Washington.

Last year, a group of North Koreans even paid a visit to Google headquarters in Mountain View, California.




NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797427 Date: 11/30/2015
