     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796048 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                         RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                         B5


From:                            Hanley, Monica R <HanleyMR@state.gov>
Sent:                            Monday, November 26, 2012 4:04 AM
To:
Cc:                              Huma Abedin
Subject:                         REVISED Amr Call Sheet (7:30am call)



Revised call sheet reflecting a phone conversation Ambassador Patterson had with Egyptian National Security Advisor-
equivalent Dr. Essam Haddad today. Also forwarding a copy of a letter from Haddad. (And previously sent you Toria's
Statement on the Decrees)



The Secretary's Call Sheet for
Egyptian FM Mohamed Kamel Amr

(SBU) Purpose of Call: To express our concern over the decisions and decrees announced by President Morsi November
22, particularly those that give him the power to rule largely by decree until a new parliament is in place.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796048 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796048 Date: 11/30/2015




(SBU) Background: President Morsi's November 22 decree removes judicial oversight of any presidential decisions from
the time he assumed power until a constitution and parliament are in place; reopens all investigations into the killing of
protestors during the revolution, including new trials for defendants who were previously acquitted (a broadly popular
measure, except among the judiciary); declares that the public prosecutor will be appointed by the president for a fixed,
four year term; prevents the judiciary from dissolving the Constituent Assembly and the Shura Council and extends the
work of the committee drafting the constitution by two months; and authorizes the president to take any measures he
sees fit in order to "preserve the revolution."


(SBU) The decree was immediately criticized by opposition groups and spurred country-wide demonstrations both for
and against President Morsi. Opposition politicians accused Morsi of acting as a "pharaoh" and a "dictator," and several
parties, including those led by Mohammed al-Baradei and Amr Musa, announced the formation of a "National Front" to
fight the President's declarations. The Front said it would also coordinate on demonstrations. Egyptian judges declared
a strike in all courts to protest what they see as the President's expanding his powers at the expense of theirs. Previous
clashes between secularists and Muslim Brotherhood (MB) supporters have turned violent, and protestors attacked MB
headquarters in Alexandria, Port Said, and Ismailiya November 23. The National Front condemned these attacks and
called for peaceful protests. Media reported that protests had begun across eight governorates; media report more
than 300 injured in all. In Cairo's Tahrir Square, police used tear gas to control the demonstrations. President Morsi
appeared before a crowd of supporters in front of the Presidential Palace November 23 to deliver a 45-minute defense
of the decree. The Department Spokesperson issued our statement on the decrees (attached) November 23; the offices
of the UN Human Rights Commissioner and EU High Representative Ashton Affairs also criticized the decree.

(SBU) Ambassador Patterson spoke with Egyptian National Security Advisor-equivalent Dr. Essam Haddad November
25. Haddad had sent a letter earlier that day registering concern with the Department's statement on the decrees and
explaining Morsi's declaration was necessary to support Egypt's transition.


(SBU) Embassy Cairo reported clashes continued November 25 in front of the embassy's north perimeter. Most of the
protestors clashing with police appeared ti be under the age of 20 with no clear political agenda. Rocks and fumes from
tear gas reached the embassy compound, and an embassy perimeter guard booth was set on fire by a Molotov. Police
tactics for the most Part were ineffective in pushing the protestors away from the embassy, but police trucks
successfully reestablished the original barricade line. Embassy personnel were dismissed early and all shuttles departed
safely from the compound. RSO engaged on-site commanders, and the DCM contacted senior officials at the MOI and
MFA to express concern over clashes so near to our facility.


###




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796048 Date: 11/30/2015
