    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792935 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
Sent:                             Sunday, August 12, 2012 7:14 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Instant analysis


The below is better than anything I've seen from Cairo.

From: Benaim, Daniel
Sent: Sunday, August 12, 2012 07:04 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Fw: Instant analysis

From one of the smartest guys around on egyptian institutions.

From: Hawthorne, Amy W
Sent: Sunday, August 12, 2012 06:50 PM
To: Benaim, Daniel
Subject: Fw: Instant analysis

Good factual summary.



From: Nathan Brown [mailto
Sent: Sunday, August 12, 2012 06:16 PM
Subject: Instant analysis

This is an instant analysis of Morsi's moves--it's rough and unedited but should be polished and posted on
Carnegie's website tomorrow. If you see any egregiousness error you want to save me from (or even some
misleading claim), by all means let me know.



President's Morsi's Ramadan Surprise



On 12 August 2012, Egyptian President Muhammad Morsi took a series of dramatic steps that reconfigure
Egypt's political landscape for the present and that will shape how it is redesigned. A series of personnel and
constitutional changes have shifted the balance of political forces in Egypt. Two of the country's most powerful
institutions—the presidency and the military—still seem very firmly in control; they also seem to be working
together. But the effects of the decisions have the presidency swapping junior partner roles with the military.

In the following question-and-answer commentary, Nathan J. Brown, nonresident senior associate at the
Carnegie Endowment, explains the significance of the decisions:

1. What did Morsi do?



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792935 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792935 Date: 11/30/2015




President Morsi:

•   Appointed Mahmud Makki, a prominent judge, as his vice president;

•   Made a series of personnel changes in top military positions; and

•   Issued an addendum to Egypt's governing March 2011 interim constitution. The new addendum:

              o Revokes a previous addendum issued by the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF)
              in June that placed the military beyond civilian oversight; gave the SCAF a legislative role;
              allowed the SCAF to appoint a new constituent assembly if the current one is unable to complete
              its job;

              o Transfers authorities that the SCAF had assumed over the past year and a half to the
              president (thus giving the president absolute legislative authority, for instance);

              o Allows the president to appoint a new constituent assembly if the current one is unable to
              complete its job;

              o Maintained the new transition sequence decided by the SCAF in June, in which a new
              constitution will be written and ratified and then parliamentary elections will be held. (In a
              sense, the same sequence will be followed; what has changed is that the sequence is based on the
              president's say-so rather than on the SCAF's).




2. Can he do these things?

The short answer is: Yes, he just did. The long answer is only a bit more complicated.

Morsi's authority to appoint a new vice president was uncontested; the only requirement was that he find an
individual (or a group of individuals) who have the legal qualifications to succeed the president.

Morsi's authority over the military appointments was far less clear but is likely to stick. The SCAF's June 2012
addendum to the constitutional declaration seemed to take much of that authority away. But over the past week,
he had taken a series of steps that symbolically asserted his authority—apparently with the acquiescence of the
SCAF (these included some less dramatic military personnel changes and convening a meeting of the SCAF
which Morsi himself chaired, in apparent contradiction of the June 2012 addendum).

Observers traded impressions about whether these steps were merely symbolic or if they portended a shift of
authority to the presidency. The 12 August decisions seem to resolve that debate. And the way in which the
various personnel involved have quickly accepted the changes suggest that regardless of the ambiguous nature
of presidential authority, there will be no resistance to the move.

Finally, on the new addendum to the constitutional declaration, again Morsi will likely have his way, though a
strong challenge on legal grounds is possible.

Last month, a Cairo court ruled that all constitutional actions taken by the SCAF between Mubarak's ouster and
Morsi's election were beyond judicial challenge—there was a revolutionary situation, the court opined, and the
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792935 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792935 Date: 11/30/2015




actions taken by the SCAF were not reviewable by the courts. Implicitly no such revolutionary situation exists
right now. And the legislative process—such as it was—was claimed in various ways by both the president and
the SCAF. So a court could easily rule that Morsi's constitutional edict carries neither revolutionary legitimacy
nor the SCAF's imprimatur.

This would be an argument that would have a strong basis in precedent but a weaker one in politics. The
administrative courts or the Supreme Constitutional Court could refuse to honor Morsi's addendum. But unless
there is strong opposition from a powerful political force (and the most likely such opponent, the SCAF itself,
seems instead to be going along), a court taking such a move would be bold indeed.



3. Were Morsi's moves coordinated with the military?

Yes, to an extent. But it may never be clear how much.

On the appointments, their quick acceptance by those affected suggests at least some advance consultation with
key actors. The terms of the understandings reached are far less clear.

On the constitutional addendum, I was told by a high official in the presidency at the beginning of this month
that drafting was underway and that there was constant contact with the military on the issue. I had the strong
impression there was much less political consultation with civilian actors, at least at that time.



4. Where does this leave Egypt now?

 After Morsi's inauguration, the political system was headed by a forced marriage between a president from the
Muslim Brotherhood and a committee of generals. Despite the nature of the marriage, there were strong signs
that the two were working out a set of arrangements—based more on quiet understandings than written
constitutional rules—for co-governing the country. At first, the presidency looked to be a bit of a constrained
junior partner in these arrangements.

Now the tables have turned. The same co-governance is in place, but with the president as the more powerful
actor.. Indeed, by cancelling the June 2012 constitutional addendum President Morsi has now legally reinserted
himself as chairman of the SCAF.

There are a host of state institutions that may be resistant to presidential hegemony and that will be anxious to
assert their autonomy. However, such battles may take the form of long-term guerilla warfare rather than
sudden confrontation.

Morsi's selection of a Mahmud Makki, a prominent judge as vice-president—after selecting Mahmud's brother
Ahmed as minister of justice—may be part of a maneuver to outmaneuver judicial opposition. The Makki
brothers were both prominent members of the 2005 judicial reform movement and thus have some credibility in
circles opposed to the old regime. Both were also rumored to have mild Islamist inclinations, though such
rumors are hard to evaluate, since judges rarely disclose their partisan feelings even when they have them.

But the placement of prominent judges in such positions—and the brief floating of a suggestion that the new
justice minister draft a new judicial law to be issued by presidential decree—may be a way of signaling to the
judiciary that accommodation rather than full frontal assault may be a better strategy for a set of judicial bodies
anxious about the presidency and the Islamist rise.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792935 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792935 Date: 11/30/2015




5. Where does this leave the Egyptian transition process?

It seems likely that Egypt's current constitutional assembly will continue in its task.

   Any possible opposition to the assembly will have to think twice about questioning its legitimacy or its
   work, since the body's failure would be followed by an assembly entirely appointed by Morsi. Similarly,
   non-Islamists in the body may calculate that the current assembly—which has been working largely by
   discussion and consensus—is their best bet to produce a document they can tolerate.

   And the administrative courts, currently considering a challenge to the legitimacy of the constitutional
   assembly, had already shown signs of allowing the body to continue in its work; judges are likely to be
   mindful that if Morsi's constitutional addendum stands the choice will be between an assembly with many
   Islamists and an assembly entirely appointed by an Islamist.

   The quick work of the assembly is likely to result in a document resembling the 1971 constitution but with
   some modifications. The draft should be submitted to voters before the end of the year; assuming it is
   ratified, parliamentary elections would follow in a couple months.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792935 Date: 11/30/2015
