UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791917 Date: 11/30/2015




                             Today is a Black Day                                RELEASE IN
                                                                                 FULL

                                    Muhammad Yunus
                                     August 23, 2012




      This day will go down in history as a black day for our nation. Our
 government has taken over a globally admired and Nobel Prize winning
 institution from its rightful owners—rural poor women—and has brought
 the bank under their management control. In so doing, the unique feature
 of Grameen Bank has been fundamentally compromised. It is very difficult
 for me to absorb this sad news.

 What has Grameen Bank done to deserve this sudden stripping off of its
 fundamental character?

 By buying shares with their hard earned income, more than 8.4 million
 women became the legitimate owners of 97% share of Grameen Bank. The
 government owns only 3% of the bank. This bank, which operates with the
 capital of millions of poor women, is essentially a huge cooperative of poor
 women. The bank is self-reliant and operates with its self-generated funds.
 The bank does not take any loans or grants from the government, donor
 organisations or any other institutions. So why is it that this bank, which is
 well-known, highly admired and widely replicated throughout the world,
 has to be converted into a traditional government run enterprise?

 The government says that a "deadlock" has emerged over the issue of
 appointing the next Managing Director (CEO) of the bank. Who has created
 this deadlock? The board of the bank lawfully created a selection committee
 to appoint the next Managing Director as the bank's law requires. Because
 the board proposed my name as the chairman of this selection committee


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791917 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791917 Date: 11/30/2015




 and Dr. Akbar Ali Khan and Khaled Shams as members of the committee,
 the government appointed chairman of the board continued not to accept
 the decision of the board. What a strange situation! The law which governs
 Grameen Bank did not give a veto power to anybody on the board. And yet
 by refusing to accept the decision of the board, the chairman has in effect
 vetoed the board decision in three consecutive board meetings. This
 situation has been termed by the government as a "deadlock". And because
 of this, the Grameen Bank law has now been amended to place the future of
 the bank in the hands of a single person—the chairman of the board of
 Grameen Bank.

 The government has repeatedly stated that it has not taken over the bank
 and has no intention of taking it over. The government has accused me of
 lying and spreading false rumors about this takeover. They keep on
 assuring that the rights of the owners of the bank will remain just as it was
 before. They explain that, the chairman will set up a selection committee
 after consultation with the board. When does one need to consult, and
 when does one vote? When one has the power, one consults with people
 who do not have it. One votes when one has the power to be counted in the
 decision making. By changing the Grameen Bank law, the government has
 taken away the power of voting from the owners and has instead given
 them the passive role of being consulted by the chairman. The selection
 committee, which the chairman constitutes, will propose to the board three
 names of the candidates for the CEO position. Obviously the owners of the
 97% shares will have every reason to suspect that whoever is chosen as the
 CEO, that person will be loyal to the chairman and not to the majority
 owners.

  The government repeatedly claims that the power of the board remains
  unchanged. Yet, the government lets it be known that what the board wants
  will not be allowed to happen. Why is it that the will of the board will not be
  allowed to be carried out within their own organisation? The answer is
  because the government wants it that way. The government has already
  announced that a "Selection Committee" will be set up within one week. Is


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791917 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791917 Date: 11/30/2015




 this the decision of the board or that of the government? The board is not
 even aware of it. And in this "selection committee", there will be no place for
 Yunus. Why? Because the government has decided it to be so. An
 international advertisement will be run for the post of Managing Director
 for Grameen Bank. Is this the decision of the board? Of course not. The
 salary and benefits for the Managing Director will be of an international
 standard; otherwise qualified persons will not be interested in the post. Is
 this the decision of the board? Of course not. The government has already
 made these decisions and has publicly announced these decisions, before
 the board even has the chance to consider all these issues.

 And yet the government continues to say that the government will not
 interfere with the business of Grameen Bank. If the government feels
 competent in making all these decisions on behalf of Grameen Bank even
 before the law was amended, we can easily imagine what will happen now
 that the law has been amended.

 By changing the law and giving the government a strategic role in selecting
 the Managing Director, it has in effect taken over the management of
 Grameen Bank. There is not a single case in the world where enterprises
 with multiple owners, the minority shareholders, holding only 3% shares,
 are given the responsibility to select a CEO for the enterprise.

 After the cabinet made the decision to amend the law, I had appealed to my
 fellow citizens to impress on the government not to proceed with its
 decision to change the law. And many people of all walks of life have made
 their feelings about this issue known to the government through their
 public statements, meetings and protests, discussions in TV talk shows and
 writing op-eds in the media. Top women leaders, irrespective of their
 political affiliations, have appealed to the government not to proceed with
 their decision preserve the uniqueness of Grameen Bank. I express my
 gratitude and sincere thanks to all of them who stood up for upholding the
 rights of the poor women. My only regret is that the government did not
 listen to any of our appeals.



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791917 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791917 Date: 11/30/2015




 This amendment marks the beginning of the end of Grameen Bank's
 amazing history. From now on, this remarkable bank will come under the
 direct and indirect influence of the government in its management. There is
 no precedent in history, where an institution has gained from such a move
 by the government.

 I am unable to find the language to express my feelings. Through the efforts
 of their entire working lives, thousands of Grameen Bank employees
 transformed a dream into reality. Through their efforts, they have created
 an institution that is unique in the entire world. They, too, are finding it
 difficult to bear their sadness, knowing that the institution that they have
 built with their hard work will soon fall apart. The poor women, who had
 learnt to think of this bank as "our bank", learnt to take pride in their bank,
 will now learn that even though it is still their bank, in reality they have no
 power in making important decisions for the bank. To them, it will appear
 like: The house belongs to me, I live in the house, but I have no say in the
 running of the house.

 But I am an optimist. I do not want to lose my hope. I want to keep the
 flame of hope alive in my heart. Like before, I again request my fellow
 citizens to take steps to remedy this situation. I appeal to the youths of the
 nation to make a commitment, that one day they will make this nightmare
 disappear and full control of the bank will be returned to the rightful
 owners. I hope that the youths who are growing up in the families of the
 owners of Grameen Bank will take a vow that one day they will restore their
 mothers' property to them; their mothers will again have total control over
 their bank with full ownership rights. I hope that someday in the future, a
 government will come to power whose first task will be to hand over this
 bank to its rightful owners with a grand national ceremony. When it
 happens, the bank will be able to go back to its glorious mission at full
 speed. The nation will feel that a wrong has finally been righted. Well-
 wishers of Grameen Bank throughout the world will feel relieved from their
 agony.



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791917 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791917 Date: 11/30/2015




 On this sad day, the only way I can keep my mental peace is to think of that
 happy day.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791917 Date: 11/30/2015
