      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792131 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Hanley, Monica R <HanleyMR@state.gov>
Sent                               Sunday, August 5, 2012 1:30 PM
To:
Cc:                                Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:                           Mbeki Call Sheet




The Secretary's Call Sheet for

African Union High-Level Implementation Panel Chairman, President Thabo Mbeki



Purpose of Call: You are calling President Mbeki to congratulate him on the announcement of an oil agreement
between Sudan and South Sudan. He has been criticized for his style and intent to play a facilitation, not mediation,
role. The announcement of this agreement is the AU Panel's finest achievement, and he and his colleagues worked
tirelessly these last few days, right through last night, to finalize the deal. You should note this announcement is a great
success, and the United States will continue to support his efforts to finalize agreement on the remaining issues.

•    Congratulations on the oil agreement: President Mbeki, I am calling to congratulate you on the monumental
achievement of securing an oil agreement between Sudan and South Sudan. I know this was no easy feat, and you and
your team have persevered over great odds. You should take great pride in this achievement.

•    Congratulations on the possible agreement on humanitarian access: I also wanted to commend you for the
possible agreement on humanitarian access in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. Your intervention on this issue and
commitment to seeing it through has made all the difference.

      We will continue to urge immediate implementation of this agreement as assistance is urgently needed in response
to the worsening humanitarian crisis. We support your efforts to continue to engage the SPLM-N and the Government
of Sudan in political dialogue and on the modalities of implementing the aid.

•    Appreciation for Cooperation: Thank you for the close coordination and cooperation between the AUHIP and the
United States, especially between you and Special Envoy Lyman and his team.

•    These last several months since the passage of the AU Peace and Security Council roadmap and UNSCR 2046 have
proven to be a tremendous challenge but under your leadership, the parties have come to terms with the fact that the
international community is united behind your efforts.



•    Remaining Issues: As we enjoy this victory, I wanted to touch on the importance of maintaining the momentum
you and your team have created; you must not let up on securing agreement on the remaining issues.

     I know the remaining issues will not be easy to resolve, but you should know the United States will do everything
possible to support your efforts to bring the parties closer to agreement, so that both Sudan and South Sudan can enjoy
peace, security, and prosperity as they move forward. I deeply appreciate your leadership on this issue.

Background: Early on the morning of August 4, AUHIP Chairman Mbeki announced Sudan and South Sudan had
successfully reached agreement on oil arrangements which had been shut down since January 2012. This was 24 hours
after the UNSCR 2046 deadline for finalizing agreement, but the parties remained engaged in negations up until and
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792131 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792131 Date: 11/30/2015




through the deadline, into the evening of August 3. On August 4, President Mbeki briefed the AU Peace and Security
Council (AUPSC) on progress made by the parties and work which remains to be done. President Mbeki gave a press
conference August 4 highlighting the agreement. The AUPSC is scheduled to release a communiqué welcoming the deal
the evening of August 4.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792131 Date: 11/30/2015
