       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794439 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Thursday, September 13, 2012 7:08 PM
To:
Subject:                           FW: Rashad Hussein on Al Jazeera, Sept. 13


fyi


From: Korman, Samuel I. (Shai)
Sent: Thursday, September 13, 2012 05:07 PM
To: Smith, Dana S (PA); Fowler, Valerie C
Cc: Dressel, Abigail L.
Subject: FW: Rashad Hussein on Al Jazeera, Sept. 13

Check it out — quick readout from RRU of Rashad's Al interview. I must say, from my seat, it was his best interview of the
day. If you're going to have a best interview, it might as well have been on the biggest show on the biggest network.

From: Thompson, Rebecca B (PACE) [mailto:ThompsonRB2@state.gov]
Sent: Thursday, September 13, 2012 5:01 PM
To: Korman, Samuel I. (Shai); Snipe, Aaron D; Halus, Andrew
Cc: PA-IME Staff; Ernst, Daniel J; Gliha, Ryan M; Caplan, Jared S; Halus, Andrew; Snipe, Aaron D; PA RRU
Subject: Rashad Hussein on Al Jazeera, Sept. 13

All,

Here's Nahla's quick read-out of how Al Jazeera framed the interview.

Nahla says Mr. Hussein gave a very strong interview. She thought he very effectively quoted an earlier Egyptian
interlocutor calling for reason and peaceful solutions. He also quoted Koranic verses on non-violence, forgiveness, and
not killing, which should play very well with the audience though it was met with a rather hostile reaction from the
interviewer, who seemed caught off-guard.

After the interview, AJ news reported that Mitt Romney is getting criticized by other Republicans for taking advantage of
the crisis for political motives.

Following the news, there was an interview with Dr. Mohamed Al-Jawadi, a historian and political analyst who was asked
if Secretary Clinton's statements are enough to stem the tide of outrage. He said the State Department has achieved
cooperation with the Islamic work by supporting and respecting the people's aspirations and now has strong
relationships based on mutual respect and respecting laws, but there are those in Egypt, Libya, Yemen, and the US who
wish to destroy that cooperation. When asked how to prevent future violent incidents at US Embassies, he emphasized
the importance of strong judicial institutions to address charges of breaking laws and denigrating religions, so the cases
may be settled within legal systems. Educating people about religions and dispelling misconceptions, especially about
Islam, is also very important.

Best regards,

Rebecca




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794439 Date: 11/30/2015
