UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796597 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                             RELEASE IN
                                                             PART B6
                 THE WORLD BANK
                                                                                      NEWS RELEASE
                 Working for a World
                 Free of Poverty




 Abx      a-4 World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim praises U.S. government's blueprint for an AIDS-
                            free generation as important step toward ending AIDS.


 World Bank Group President Praises New U.S. Blueprint for an
                  AIDS-Free Generation
WASHINGTON, November 29, 2012 — World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim praised the Obama
Administration's new PEPFAR Blueprint: Creating an AIDS-Free Generation. U.S. Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton released the blueprint during an event in Washington, DC today.

"This Blueprint is a major step forward in realizing our shared vision of a world free of AIDS and poverty,"
said World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim. "U.S. leadership has been, and remains, pivotal to the
global fight against AIDS. President Obama and Secretary Clinton deserve praise for this roadmap, which
will be an important resource to help countries, us at the World Bank, and all development partners to make
smart choices and take the steps necessary to end AIDS."

 In support of the Blueprint, the World Bank will be stepping up its collaboration with the U.S. government in
 helping countries to scale up the most effective and efficient AIDS interventions and build the strong health
 systems required for sustainable AIDS prevention, treatment, and care. This support will include increasing
 collaboration on country health programming; improving indicators and tools to measure program impact;
 and partnering on implementation science programs to increase the efficiency, effectiveness, and
 sustainability of key HIV interventions.

 The World Bank and HIV/AIDS
 The World Bank offers financing, knowledge, and technical support to developing countries for the effective
 prevention of new HIV infections, treatment, and care for people living with HIV, and alleviation of social and
 economic consequences for communities affected by the epidemic. Since 1989, World Bank financing for
 HIV/AIDS has totaled $4.6 billion, including $1.8 billion in Fiscal Year 2012. The World Bank is one of 11
 co-sponsoring agencies of UNAIDS and helps share the global response to HIV/AIDS, in partnership with
 governments, civil society organizations, other development agencies, foundations, and the private sector.

 Contacts:
 World Bank: Carolyn Reynolds,

 World Bank and AIDS: www.worldbank.org/aids
 Twitter: Aworldbankhealth
 Facebook: www.facebook.com/worldbank
 YouTube: www.youtube.com/worldbank


 News Release
 2013/170/HDN




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796597 Date: 11/30/2015
