        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780595 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                               RELEASE IN
                                                                                                               FULL


From:                               Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                               Friday, March 11, 2011 4:10 PM
To:
Cc:                                Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject:                           Fw: Reporter: State Department official raps Pentagon treatment of Manning:
                                   "counterproductive and stupid"



Fyi


From: Crowley, Philip
Sent: Friday, March 11, 2011 03:33 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Re: Reporter: State Department official raps Pentagon treatment of Manning: "counterproductive and stupid"

I assume you will let the Secretary know if you haven't already. If you think it appropriate to send her a note, I will do so.
I have told Mike and Mark so they know I will disengage this weekend and defer all action to them. Other than my
spouse, I have not told anyone else and will withhold all comment until Monday. On Monday I will inform the rest of my
staff as we are ready to press send on the announcement. Talk again later tonight.

PJ


From: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Friday, March 11, 2011 12:29 PM
To: Crowley, Philip 3
Subject: Fw: Reporter: State Department official raps Pentagon treatment of Manning: "counterproductive and stupid"

Let's discuss this weekend

Cdm


From: Laszaych, Joanne
Sent: Friday, March 11, 2011 12:25 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: FW: Reporter: State Department official raps Pentagon treatment of Manning: "counterproductive and stupid"

From: Thompson, Nicole A
To: Crowley, Philip 3
Cc: PA PO Group
Sent: Fri Mar 11 12:02:04 2011
Subject: Reporter: State Department official raps Pentagon treatment of Manning: "counterproductive and stupid"

Reporter: State Department official raps Pentagon treatment of Manning: "counterproductive and
stupid"

By Laura Rozen laura Rozen

State Department spokesman Philip Crowley harshly criticized the Pentagon's treatment of WikiLeaks suspect
Private First Class Bradley Manning as "ridiculous, counterproductive and stupid" at a Boston-area university
forum yesterday, according to a BBC journalist who attended the event.

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780595 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780595 Date: 11/30/2015




"I just heard an extraordinary remark from State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley," veteran BBC reporter
Philippa Thomas, currently a Nieman Fellow at Harvard University, wrote at her blog.

Crowley was speaking on the topic of new media and foreign policy at an event organized by MIT's Center for
Future Civic Media, when a person in the small audience asked him about WikiLeaks and the U.S. treatment of
PFC Bradley Manning.

"Crowley didn't stop to think," Thomas wrote. "What's being done to Bradley Manning by my colleagues at the
Department of Defense 'is ridiculous and counterproductive and stupid.'"

"Nonetheless, Bradley Manning is the right place," Thomas cited Crowley, adding: "And he went on
lengthening his answer, explaining why in Washington's view, 'there is sometimes a need for secrets.. ..for
diplomatic progress to be made.' But still, he'd said it. And the fact that he felt strongly enough to say it seems
to me an extraordinary insight into the tensions within the administration over WikiLeaks."

Crowley, a former Pentagon spokesman during the Clinton administration, didn't immediately respond to a
request for comment. Nor did Pentagon press secretary Geoff Morrell, who has vigorously defended Quantico's
treatment of Manning including ordering him stripped naked for several nights.

Separately, Marming's father Brian Manning, a former U.S. serviceman, criticized the Pentagon's treatment of
his son as "shocking" in an interview this week with PBS's Frontline, Wired's Kim Zetter reports:


Brian Manning broke his silence to a PBS Frontline correspondent this week after the U.S. Marine Corps brig at
Quantico, Virginia, where his 23-year-old son is being held, stripped the soldier of his clothing and forced him
to stand at attention in the nude and sleep naked. Manning's defense attorney has called the brig's move
"inexcusable" and "degrading treatment."


"This is someone who has not gone to trial or been convicted of anything," Brian Manning told Frontline. "They
worry about people down in a base in Cuba, but here they are, have someone on our own soil, under their own
control, and they're treating him this way.... It's shocking enough that I would come out of our silence as a
family and say ... you've crossed a line. This is wrong."

Manning himself for the first time publicly protested his treatment in an 11-page letter released by his lawyer,
David Coombs this week, the Guardian reports:


In an 11-page legal letter released by his lawyer, David Coombs, Manning sets out in his own words how he has
been "left to languish under the unduly harsh conditions of max [security] custody" ever since he was brought
from Kuwait to the military brig of Quantico marine base in Virginia in July last year. He describes how he was
put on suicide watch in January, how he is currently being stripped naked every night, and how he is in general
terms being subjected to what he calls "unlawful pre-trial punishment."




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05780595 Date: 11/30/2015
