      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792528 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                              RELEASE IN
                                                                                                              PART B6



From:                             Cheryl Mills <cheryl.mills
Sent:                             Sunday, October 7, 2012 11:59 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fwd: Romney FP preview speech


FYI




From: Verma, Richard
Sent: Sunday, October 07, 2012 3:31 PM
To: Blumenfeld, Joshua R; Mills, Cheryl D; Adams, David S
Subject: FW: Romney FP preview speech




For the press and H groups.


        Just listened to romney preview call for press. Basically Romney = bipartisan, mainstream Truman-JFK-Reagan a
        Obama = carter and leading from behind. Obama is Adversaries first, Romney friends first. War against extremisr
        not over, drones not enough. Benghazi Benghazi Israel Israel Israel Benghazi

        From Evernote:
        Romney FP preview speech

        alex wong

        rich williamson

        eliot cohen




            •   WONG
            •   struggle for greater liberty and dignity -- AQ-linked attacks on rise
            •   delay and indecision, undermining traditional bases of our power. in every region in world,
                American security weakened.
            •   restore our relationships with friends and allies
            •   VMI alma mater of George Marshall. romney wants to renew that bipartisan american century
                vision




            •   WILLIAMSON: specifics re Iran, Iraq, Syria, Benghazi. put it in bipartisan prism of foreign policy.
                Truman and beyond. in great contrast to obama who thinks America in decline, other forces in
                control and we're going to lead from behind, will talk about broad struggle with forces in Mid E
                and how we need to confront them. Drones good for killing bad guys, but not an answer, just a
                tool. Romney will outline a broader strategy.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792528 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792528 Date: 11/30/2015




  ELIOT COHEN

     •   obama admin tried to define dealing with radicalism in the Mid East as narrowly as possible. part
         of what recent events show is it's a much broader, more difficult matter to deal with. dealing with
         people not just directly opposed to our interests, but also the Islamist factors in places like Egypt.




     •   JULIE DAVIS, BLOOMBERG: bipartisan vision for FP? til now, pretty top line, are we going to see
         more of a turn to the middle?
     •   RICH: speech at Global Policy Initiative (CGI), dealt with assistance but bringing conditionality.
         not left or right, seen efforts in this regard like Bush's MCC. so characterization no. 2nd, if you
         look at Truman, JFK and Clinton in 2nd term, very different than Carter, Obama. View that
         strength is not provocative, weakness is provocative.
     •   COHEN: can't imagine clinton, truman, JFK using phrase leadership from behind. Romney's is
         assertion of the mainstream.
     •   WONG: gov has been talking for years about need to restore military strength, economy and be
         true to our values. it's HOW we secure our interests abroad. this is really a tradition hatched after
         WW2: build military no one would challenge, develop allies abroad not just with govts but also
         with people. hard power and soft power. Romney been talking about this for years, in his first
         bid, too.
     •   WILLIAMSON: some of harshest criticism on posture not policy in Middle East esp in Syria has
         come from left, from human rights community. Rejection of what libs and conservatives stand
         for.




     •   LEANN CALDWELL, CBS: why the speech now? how does the speech fit into recent statements
         on FP, e.g. CGI speech and WSJ oped? going to veer heavily from those?
     •   WILLIAMSON: in days after Benghazi, we told people to look at Citadel and VFW speech. but now
         in final days, 2 different visions: a strength and capacity to lead. also Mid East peace process.
         Larger mosaic of failed policy of Obama in both FP and domestic with 23million still unemployed.
         discussion of important particulars so can make decision of decisions over passivity.
     •   COHEN: dramatic events in Mid E. not just benghazi. also black flags over tunis and syria. haven't
         gotten anything about the way forward from Obama. romney will step forward and say what he
         would do as president.
     •   JOHN ROBERTS, FOX NEWS. how will this fit into the next presidential debate?

             o   COHEN: will be fit between domestic and foreign issues. Gov will frame as big,
                 consequential choices.




     •   JENNIFER RUBIN, WASHPOST. Romney has not directly said Obama not being forthright with
         American people on Libya.

             o   : he's been clear that part of the role of leaders is to have transparency and obama's
                 failed that test. stall technique, details trickling out. more broadly, benghazi shows that
                 while drone attacks helpful and world better off without OBL, struggle between
                 extremism and moderates is not over, not only a problem in Mid East, but directly to
                 American interests and fatal for 4 Americans in Libya.




     •   MAEVE RESTON, LA TIMES. does romney believe the president should organize troops in libya to
         prevent these attacks? how romney different than bush doctrine?


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792528 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792528 Date: 11/30/2015




            o   WILLIAMSON: after stevens' death, moderate libyans demonstrated. impulse of
                moderation there, demonstrated in elections. there are ways working with others that
                can help those forces. DOCTRINE - peace thru strength, working with friends and allies
                (rejected by this admin in working with Israel), working with countries with different
                interests (see that with Syria and Russia's obstructionism and moving redlines in Iran).
                range of differences with earlier doctrines but Romney more in Reagan-Clinton tradition
                than obama tradition.
            o   COHEN: romney believes you start with your friends, see this esp w/r/t Israel. Obama
                presidency is the departure. he believes you start with your enemies: failed reset with
                Russia, failed outreach to Iran and silence during demos there, sending ambassador to
                Syria with no gain. Romney understands conditionality: friends, enemies and people in
                between.
            o   COHEN: libya and embassy attacks -- obama began apologizing right away for crackpot
                film. Romney understands not about the video.

     •   EMBARGOED UNTIL MIDNIGHT.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792528 Date: 11/30/2015
