     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794125 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                    B6




From:                            H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                            Friday, February 17, 2012 12:11 PM
To:                              'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                         Fw:


Pls print.


From: sbwhoeop
Sent: Friday, February 17, 2012 10:20 AM
Subject:




http://www.nybooks.com/blogs/nyrblog/2012/feb/15/contraception-con-men/

NYRblog : Roving thoughts and provocations from our writers
Font Size: AA A


Contraception's Con Men
Garrv Wifis


drawing by David Levine
Crusader popes
By a revolting combination of con men and fanatics, the current primary race has become
a demonstration that the Republican party does not deserve serious consideration for
public office. Take the controversy over contraceptives. American bishops at first opposed
having hospitals and schools connected with them pay employee health costs for
contraceptives. But when the President backed off from that requirement, saying
insurance companies can pay the costs, the bishops doubled down and said no one should
have to pay for anything so evil as contraception. Some Republicans are using the bishops'
stupidity to hurt the supposed "moderate" candidate Mitt Romney, giving a temporary leg
up to the faux naïf Rick Santorum; others are attacking Barack Obama as an "enemy of
religion."
Pusillanimous Catholics—Mark Shields and even, to a degree, the admirable E. J.
Dionne—are saying that Catholics understandably resent an attack on "their" doctrine
(even though they do not personally believe in it). Omnidirectional bad-faith arguments
have clustered around what is falsely presented as a defense of "faith." The layers of
ignorance are equaled only by the willingness of people "of all faiths" to use them for their
own purposes. Consider just some of the layers:
The Phony Religious Freedom Argument

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794125 Date: 11/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794125 Date: 11/30/2015




The bishops' opposition to contraception is not an argument for a "conscience exemption."
It is a way of imposing Catholic requirements on non-Catholics. This is religious
dictatorship, not religious freedom.
Contraception is not even a religious matter. Nowhere in Scripture or the Creed is it
forbidden. Catholic authorities themselves say it is a matter of "natural law," over which
natural reason is the arbiter—and natural reason, even for Catholics, has long rejected the
idea that contraception is evil. More of that later; what matters here is that contraception
is legal, ordinary, and accepted even by most Catholics. To say that others must accept
what Catholics themselves do not is bad enough. To say that President Obama is "trying to
destroy the Catholic Church" if he does not accept it is much, much worse.
To disagree with Catholic bishops is called "disrespectful," an offense against religious
freedom. That is why there is a kind of taboo against bringing up Romney's Mormonism.
But if Romney sincerely believed in polygamy on religious grounds, as his grandfather did,
he would not even be considered for the presidency—any more than a sincere Christian
Scientist, who rejects the use of medicine, would be voted for to handle public health care.
Yet a man who believes that contraception is evil is an aberrant from the American norm,
like the polygamist or the faith healer.
The Phony Contraception Argument
The opposition to contraception has, as I said, no scriptural basis. Pope Pius XI once said
that it did, citing in his encyclical Casti Connubii (1930) the condemnation of Onan for
"spilling his seed" rather than impregnating a woman (Genesis 38.9). But later popes had
to back off from this claim, since everyone agrees now that Onan's sin was not carrying out
his duty to give his brother an heir (Deuteronomy 25.5-6). Then the "natural law" was
fallen back on, saying that the natural purpose of sex is procreation, and any use of it for
other purposes is "unnatural." But a primary natural purpose does not of necessity exclude
ancillary advantages. The purpose of eating is to sustain life, but that does not make all
eating that is not necessary to subsistence "unnatural." One can eat, beyond the bare
minimum to exist, to express fellowship, as one can have sex, beyond the begetting of a
child with each act, to express love.
The Roman authorities would not have fallen for such a silly argument but for a deep
historical disrelish for sex itself. Early Fathers and medieval theologians considered sex
unworthy when not actually sinful. That is why virgin saints and celibate priests were
prized above married couples. Thomas Aquinas said that priests must not be married,
since "those in holy orders handle the sacred vessels and the sacrament itself, and
therefore it is proper (decens) that they preserve, by abstinences, a body undefiled
(munditia corporalis) (Summa Theologiae, Part 3 Supplement, Question 53, article 3,
 Response). Marriage, you see, makes for defilement (immunditia). The ban on
contraception is a hangover from the period when the body itself was considered unclean,
as Peter Brown overwhelmingly proved in The Body and Society (1988).
 The Phony "Church Teaches" Argument
Catholics who do not accept the phony argument over contraception are said to be "going
 against the teachings of their church." That is nonsense. They are their church. The Second
Vatican Council defines the church as "the people of God." Thinking that the pope is the
 church is a relic of the days when a monarch was said to be his realm. The king was
"Denmark." Catholics have long realized that their own grasp of certain things, especially

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794125 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794125 Date: 11/30/2015




sex, has a validity that is lost on the celibate male hierarchy. This is particularly true where
celibacy is concerned.
There was broad disagreement with Pius XI's 1930 encyclical on the matter. Pope Paul VI
set up a study group of loyal and devout Catholics, lay and clerical, to make
recommendations. The group overwhelmingly voted to change the teaching of Pius XI. But
cardinals in the Roman Curia convinced Paul that any change would suggest that the
church's teachings are not eternal (though Casti Connubii had not been declared infallible,
by the papacy's own standards).
When Paul reaffirmed the ban on birth control in Humanae Vitae (1968) there was
massive rejection of it. Some left the church. Some just ignored it. Paradoxically, the
document formed to convey the idea that papal teaching is inerrant just convinced most
people that it can be loony. The priest-sociologist Andrew Greeley said that Humanae
Vitae did more damage to the papacy than any of the so-called "liberal" movements in
Catholicism. When Pius IX condemned democracy and modern science in his Syllabus of
Errors (1864), the Catholic historian Lord Acton said that Catholics were too sensible to
go crazy every time a pope does. The reaction to Humanae Vitae proves that.
The Phony "Undying Principle" Argument
Rick Santorum is a nice smiley fanatic. He does not believe in evolution or global warming
or women in the workplace. He equates gay sex with bestiality (Rick "Man on Dog"
Santorum). He equates contraception with the guillotine. Only a brain-dead party could
think him a worthy presidential candidate. Yet he is praised by television pundits, night
and day, for being "sincere" and "standing by what he believes." He is the principled
alternative to the evil Moderation of Mitt Romney and the evil Evil of Newt Gingrich. He is
presented as a model Catholic. Torquemada was, in that sense, a model Catholic. Messrs.
Boehner and McConnell call him a martyr to religious freedom. A young priest I saw on
television, modeling himself on his hero Santorum, said, "I would rather die than give up
my church's principles." What we are seeing is not a defense of undying principle but a
stampede toward a temporarily exploitable lunacy. Acton to the rescue!
February 15, 2012, 11:15 a.m.

Copyright (1) 1963-2012 NYREV, Inc. All rights reserved.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794125 Date: 11/30/2015
