       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795393 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                            H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                            Monday, September 10, 2012 8:33 AM
To:                              'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                         Fw: This is what I'm finding in the regional and small papers around and about this
                                 weekend:



Pls print.


From: Burns Strider [mailto:
Sent: Saturday, September 08, 2012 11:56 AM
To: H; Minyon Moore <
Subject: This is what I'm finding in the regional and small papers around and about this weekend:

http://blogs.clarionledger.com/samrhal1/2012/09/06/on-jerusalem-god-and-the-democratic-convention/

On Jerusalem, God and the Democratic Convention
I left politics for a reason: I was tired, down trodden and disenchanted with the whole process.
Having the opportunity to return to journalism is a blessing. Being able to speak my mind and write only what I
believe for the first time in three years is freeing. More importantly, as a former editor of mine recently said,
"I'm glad you're back. You always belonged in newspapers." Indeed, it's like coming home.
After what happened Wednesday at the Democratic National Convention, I would find it impossible to stand as
a member of the Democratic Party if I were still in politics today. Not including God and Israel in the party
platform in the first place was a tremendously stupid omission. However, when likely half the delegates voted
not to put the language back in the platform, that would have been the line for me.
I've never met a single political operative on either side of the aisle who agrees with everything for which their
party stands. A number of gay Republicans despise the anti-gay message of many Republican leaders. A
number of pro-life Democrats despise the vigor of pro-choice Democratic leaders. But in every case, most
political operatives believe in the core message of their party. They believe in the soul of their party and that, all
things considered, their party has the best chance for providing prosperity and strength to the people they serve.
Were I still a political operative, I would have serious trouble saying that about the core of the Democratic Party
today after witnessing what happened Wednesday.
And before anyone starts to lecture me that all Democrats are Godless people, think again. I know far too many
Democrats who are Democrats because they are Christian and see parallels between Democratic principles and
Christian teachings. They accept differing views because they believe only God should judge and that their role
is to do as well as they can for others and pray that God takes care of the rest.
 Democrats are not a Godless party anymore than Republicans are a racist party. Plenty of Republicans espouse
 racial language and codewords, but that doesn't paint an entire party as one way.
 But what happened on Wednesday is about far more than just Christians. It's about Jews and Muslims and any
 person who believes in God, a god or a higher power. It's about acknowledging what more than 90 percent of
 Americans believe — that we are not alone and that God (or a god) created us, watches over us and guides us.
 For me, that God is the one and only true God. And when I read God-given, I know in my heart what it means.
 What it means to others I'll leave to them with no animosity.


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795393 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795393 Date: 11/30/2015




'It's also about more than just faith when we start talking about acknowledging Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.
 We are talking about foreign policy and international relations in an area dictated by fiercely violent and
 vitriolic political and religious battles. Why would anyone in any party who supports a sitting American
 president decide this was a good idea to take out of a platform?
Granted, party platforms are largely symbolic. They carry no weight when it comes to actual policy-making.
They are simply a statement of beliefs. But statements of beliefs carry much weight when identifying who you
are to the world.
There was a clear signal sent on Wednesday. There's a huge divide in the Democratic Party over God and
Israel. The former likely started in defending the separation of church and state as a means to ensure personal
liberties (largely by Christians), but it's devolved into an attack by a vocal and growing minority on the far left,
an attack on the religious freedoms of God-fearing (and god-fearing) people. The latter is likely the inherent
difficulties of having a largely diverse party of differing cultures and backgrounds.
I got out of politics for my own reasons, and I am at home again in my chosen profession. But had I not already
done so, today would be a new day for me. I'd be a man without a party, and I'd be fine with that. That's how I
spent most of my life, it's how I'm spending it now and it's how — I wager — most Americans spend theirs.
Policy over parties. Leading from the political majority. Governing from the political middle. Providing a voice
and an opportunity for the political minority.
When we have that, our democracy works far better than when we follow the fringe, benefit the few and listen
only to our kin — regardless of which political party is doing it.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795393 Date: 11/30/2015
