        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792118 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                                Thursday, August 30, 2012 10:38 AM
To:                                  Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:                             FW: NYTimes: Obama's Team of Idolizers




August 27, 2012
Obama's Team of Idolizers
By ROGER COHEN
NEW YORK — When Barack Obama was on the presidential campaign trail the first time, he used the title of Doris Kearns
Goodwin's Lincoln biography, "Team of Rivals," to describe the entourage he would seek at the White House, a
combative group from across the political spectrum who would challenge his every idea.


(He also compared himself to Abraham Lincoln in announcing his candidacy at the Illinois State capitol: "The life of a tall,
gangly, self-made Springfield lawyer tells us that a different future is possible.")


Well, four years have passed and Obama has adroitly steered the bankrupted United States he inherited away from the
precipice but has not provided a "different future" worthy of the hope invested in him; and that imagined team of rivals
became a team, or rather a coterie, of idolizers.


There is only one star in the galaxy at this White House and his name is Barack Obama. Everyone in the Sun King's court
has drunk the Kool-Aid.


The failure of hope, the absence of profound change, has much to do with the Republican obstructionism that has
helped keep unemployment above 8 percent. But it is also related to Obama's refusal to entertain a real team of rivals,
to place around him big characters with big ideas who would challenge his instinct for cautious politics and foreign
policy. And so a transformative election failed to produce a transformative president.


In the end the trust of a cool man who had sublimated abandonment into a singular willfulness Was limited. The sense of
a controlling leader, unable to provide connective tissue to fire the economy, lies behind the fact that many Obama
voters will cast their ballot in November with more grudging respect than enthusiasm.


Nixon, like Obama, was a loner, but he had Kissinger generating ideas. Carter had Brzezinski. Reagan had Shultz. The first
Bush had Baker. Obama has Tom Donilon as national security adviser. Donilon is an affable pro who has been described
as a one-client lawyer. It is clear who the client is.


Then there is Hillary Clinton, a superb secretary of state. But for various reasons (her future is very much ahead of her),
she has generally acquiesced to the White House being the locus of major foreign-policy decisions (salvaging things
where necessary, as in Pakistan.)


The Obama inner circle remains a group of tough political tacticians: David Axelrod, David Plouffe and Valerie Jarrett.
The White House national security team does not boast a single name of strategic stature. Anyone outside Washington
would be hard pressed to name one.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792118 Date: 11/30/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792118 Date: 11/30/2015



The policy upshot has been predictable: cerebral, cool, and with one big exception, cautious. Obama has corrected big
mistakes — abandoning the unwinnable global war on terror and pulling out of Iraq. To his immense credit he took a big
gamble on killing Osama Bin Laden. But elsewhere he has been cautious to a fault, eyeing the political calendar.

He held out a hand to Iran but promptly reverted to tired old carrots and sticks; his response to the great popular
uprising of 2009 was slow. He took half-steps on Israel and Palestine — criticizing Israeli settlements, saying the pre-
1967 lines were the basis for a two-state peace — only to offer zero follow-through. Nothing changed.

On Egypt, he toyed with preserving Mubarak ad interim before the tide became irreversible. On Syria, he has in essence
dithered. On Afghanistan, domestic politics dictated the agenda, at a cost in American lives.

One citizen inspired to stand outside the Illinois State Capitol back in 2007 was John Kael Weston, then a State
Department officer coming out of a harrowing assignment alongside U.S. Marines in Fallujah, Iraq, and headed for
Afghanistan.

This month, troubled by events in Afghanistan, Weston wrote to the president: "When you ordered tens of thousands of
troops into Afghanistan, I personally did not agree with your decision from my Helmand Province vantage point. I
believe Afghanistan remains a marathon, not a sprint — and the short-term escalation sent our forces into non-strategic
terrain and complicated our transition strategy. I knew, however, that our troops — especially our Marines — would
fight hard in Helmand. And they did. You subsequently awarded the Marine Expeditionary Brigade the Presidential Unit
Citation (PUC). It is well deserved. Their effort came at a cost. Ninety Marines were killed, including friends of mine, with
many more wounded.

"Next month, Marines will gather at Camp Lejeune, N.C., to receive the PUC award. Secretary of the Navy Mabus is set
to present it. While an honor, I know Marines hope you opt not to delegate the day's special gathering to someone else.
I feel the same way given ongoing Marine and troop sacrifice in Afghanistan."

Weston added: "Please pardon my bluntness: I believe it is simply the right thing to do."

Obama needed more people in the Situation Room saying, "Please pardon my bluntness." Having sent the Marines in
(and concluded a Camp Lejeune speech in 2009 with "Semper Fi") he should indeed present the award himself.

But the president's semper wary political operatives, focused on votes, may well calculate otherwise.

You can follow Roger Cohen on Twitter or join him on Facebook.




CloseShareFacebookTwitterGoogle+TumbIrLinkedinRedditE-mailPermalink
More in Opinion (1 of 21 articles)
Op-Ed Contributor: The Chemical Threat to America Read More >>

Close




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792118 Date: 11/30/2015
