       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769916 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                                      RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                                      B6



From:                                    Neera Tanden                                                                                               B6
Sent:                                    Tuesday, June 22, 2010 1:05 AM
To:
Subject:                                 individual mandate/minimum coverage provision




Hi Hillary,

Last week, the Republicans offered a motion to recommit to eliminate the individual mandate (or as
it's called by the Administration, the minimum coverage requirement); it failed in a vote of 187 to
230, but it totally took the Speaker's Office by surprise. I meant to send you this last week, but was
traveling, but I thought you might get a chuckle - Camp, the author of the motion to recommit, used
the President's words from the primary in his wind up for the MTR - it's in red below:



Mr. CAMP. Mr. Speaker, with the unemployment rate stuck at nearly 10 percent, far too many Americans and small businesses are struggling to
get by. While the bill before us contains some very limited benefits, it does little to help small businesses create the jobs so many Americans
desperately need.

  The motion to recommit the underlying bill keeps the underlying bill intact and provides real help to Americans by repealing one of the most
onerous provisions of the new health care law, the individual mandate that, while exempting illegal immigrants, forces Americans to buy
government-approved health insurance or pay a tax if they don't.

  The Federal Government has never required its citizens to purchase a particular product before, and doing so with health insurance violates
the basic principles of freedom and individual choice. No American should be forced to buy or purchase health insurance they don't want or
can't afford.

  This provision is so controversial that 20 States and the Nation's leading small business organization, the National Federation of Independent
Business, have filed a lawsuit questioning its constitutionality. While legal experts will soon start arguing that case, we already know that the
individual mandate tax penalty will fall hardest on middle- and low-income Americans.

  According to the Congressional Budget Office, in 2016, nearly 75 percent of the Americans who pay this tax will have household incomes
below 500 percent of the Federal poverty level. That's roughly $73,000 for a married couple with no children. CB0 also tells us that the
Democrats' health care law will increase premiums for millions of Americans by up to 13 percent. That's a premium increase of about $2,100.

  As the Democrats' health care bill drives up the cots of health care premiums even higher, it will become more and more unaffordable for
American families to comply with the mandate. Repealing this mandate will directly benefit millions of Americans and uphold the freedoms
upon which this Nation was founded. It has the added benefit of eliminating the need for the IRS to hire thousands of additional employees,
possibly as many as 16,000, just to enforce the new health care law.

  The recently enacted health care law is bad for workers, bad for employers, and bad for America. Clearly, we need to repeal and replace this
law with commonsense reforms that will actually lower health care costs and let Americans keep the plan they have and like.

  And let me remind my colleagues of a quote from then-Presidential candidate Barack Obama. And I quote, — A mandate
means that in some fashion everybody will be forced to buy health insurance.    But I believe the problem is not that folks
are trying to avoid getting health care. The problem is they can't afford it."

  This health care law increases premiums by $2,100 for millions of American families and requires them to buy this government-approved
insurance that they cannot afford.

  I urge my colleagues to stand with the American people and vote for the motion to recommit.

  I yield back the balance of my time.


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769916 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769916 Date: 11/30/2015




I was wondering when the Rs would do this. I had no idea that they'd wait til AFTER the
bill was passed. And that's not even his best quote attacking it!



I organized some of the amicus briefs in defense of the mandate in the state lawsuits -
one by small business groups and the other by disease groups in the VA case. But they
should survive court challenge.



Also, Robert Pear promises me he's still working on this story, it's just been less of a hurry
than other issues for him.



Hope you're well -



Neera




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769916 Date: 11/30/2015
