      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791136 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                              PIR <preines
Sent:                              Sunday, June 10, 2012 9:20 AM
To:                                Shongole37,              ;H
Cc:                                CDM; Huma Abedin; Lona Valmoro; Jake Sullivan
Subject:                           Bizarre/Bazaar Bounty



* Via Electronic Mail & by hand from my courier Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti III Jr. *



Sun, Jun 10, 2012



To My Comrade in Arms Fuad Mohamed Khalaf -

After reading the story at bottom about the reward you have offered in exchange for information leading to the
whereabouts of Hillary Clinton, here is the infidel's schedule tomorrow:

• She is speaking at Wellesley College's Alumnae Hall located at 106 Central Street in Wellesley, Massachusetts, one of
our 50 states. If you go, you'll need to RSVP by calling               It should actually be quite an interesting event,
and she's taking q&a if you have anything to ask her. Even if you do not pick this location, I'd strongly consider watching
it via livestreaming on the world wide web.

• She then returns to the capital of our evil nation, to make a belligerent statement against your neighbor Iran. And
then I believe she has office time. You'll need to contact Claire Coleman for an appointment.

• Later that evening, she is hosting a wedding shower at her home for her former colleague Susan Collins of Maine.
Address is                           Washington has four quadrants, so you want to make sure you're in Northwest.
               a left off of Massachusetts when you're heading towards Rockland's BBQ.
However, I urge you to take strong precautions against crossing paths with a woman known as Barbara Mikulski. She
does not look like she poses a threat to your mission, but trust me when I say she is one of our fiercest warriors.

I have added your email Shongole37@hotmall.con to our'daily public schedule distribution list, so make sure to watch
for any updates. (You'll also receive a great many statements and travel advisories, so you need to keep an eye on your
spam folder too).

However, Shongole - may I call you Shongole? I must insist on a trade richer than 10 roosters and 10 hens in exchange
for her, as she is far more valuable to the world, our nation, to this administration, and to me personally. I have great
respect & affection for her. She is very special.

I therefore require 6 goats to be included in the package.

In terms of her caring and feeding, I warn you that she might make for an especially non-compliant prisoner.
Environmentally, she requires a great deal of heat. She prefers light and airy rooms. I'm sure your inclination will be to
close the drapes, but this action only antagonizes her. Also, she has a tendency to agree to your requests, only later to
disavow the conversation entirely. She can be quite crafty that way. She will insist on keeping her weekly one on one
meetings with Susan Rice, as well as access to a phone so that John Kerry can reach her 7 times a day.

On the flip side, she sleeps a lot, takes out her own garbage, and if you coerce her into making a propaganda video, she
always nails the taping on the first attempt - but does require a teleprompter. And she gets impatient if the script is

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791136 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791136 Date: 11/30/2015




longer than 2-3 minutes. Oh, and make sure to include phonetics. She is very gracious, will pose for pictures with your
jihadists and their families to mark special occasions, new assignments, or new postings.

Look forward to hearing from you,

Philippe




Somali Insurgents Offer 10 Camels To Locate Obama, 10 Roosters For Clinton NYPOST Sunday, June 10, 2012

MOGADISHU, Somalia -- Somalia's al Qaeda-allied al Shabaab rebels Saturday mocked a US offer of up to $33 million for
information enabling the arrest of its top leaders, saying they would give 10 camels to anyone who helped locate
President Barack Obama.

The highest price put up by the US State Department on Thursday was for al Shabaab chief Ahmed Abdi aw-Mohamed --
more commonly known as Godane or Abu Zubayr -- with a $7 million bounty for information on where he is hiding.

"I can assure you that these kind of things will never dissuade us from continuing the holy war against them," said
another senior al Shabaab leader, Fuad Mohamed Khalaf, or "Shongole," in a message carried on several websites.

"There is nothing new in the fact that infidels pay to have Muslim leaders killed. They already did that by offering camels
for the head of Prophet Muhammad, and the dollar is the camel of today," he said.

He was referring to an offer of 100 camels made for Muhammad when he was fleeing Mecca for Medina, according to
the Koran.

Khalaf added, "Whoever informs the mujahedeen fighters of the place where Obama can be found will get 10 camels
and for [US Secretary of State Hillary] Clinton, we will offer 10 roosters and 10 hens."

The State Department said in a statement announcing the bounty for seven al Shabaab leaders that "the group is
responsible for the killing of thousands of Somali civilians, Somali peace activists, international aid workers, journalists
and African Union peacekeepers."

Al Shabaab insurgents still control large parts of southern Somalia, but African Union troops, government forces and
Ethiopian soldiers have clawed back several key bases from the insurgents in recent months.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791136 Date: 11/30/2015
