     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793676 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Reines, Philippe I <reinesp@state.gov>
Sent:                             Monday, December 24, 2012 9:45 AM
To:
Subject:                          Re: Statement



Sorry, didn't mean medically. Wouldn't ever do that.

I meant I enlisted their help in my ongoing efforts to undermine the John Boltons and Laura Ingraham's of the world who
are belittling your health. I sent Ingraham a long note. Crafting one to Bolton now. Don't worry, no profanity. Not that
kind of note. Just not letting these comments stand, no matter who says them.




    Original Message
From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemail.com]
Sent: Monday, December 24, 2012 09:38 AM
To: Reines, Philippe I
Subject: Re: Statement

Thanks for the outreach, but I'm ok in the doctor department for now.

    Original Message
From: Reines, Philippe I [mailto:reinesp@state.gov]
Sent: Monday, December 24, 2012 08:41 AM Eastern Standard Time
To: H
Subject: Re: Statement

Just sent. And speaking of your cracked head, I reached out to both the Nfl commish (I remembered that his dad held
your Senate seat) and Bill Frist. Frist responded wonderfully and is ready to help.




    Original Message
From: H [mailto:HDR22@clintonemailcom]
Sent: Monday, December 24, 2012 07:59 AM
To: Reines, Philippe I
Subject: Re: Statement

And I miss you too! Having a cracked head is no fun at all.

Could you also send me the email I sent out to everyone Friday night?

     Original Message
 From: Reines, Philippe I [mailto:reinesp@state.gov]
 Sent: Friday, December 21, 2012 05:44 PM Eastern Standard Time
 To: H
 Cc: Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
 Subject: Re: Statement
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793676 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793676 Date: 11/30/2015




Hi! Miss you! Here it is...



STATEMENT OF SECRETARY OF STATE HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON ON THE PRESIDENT'S NOMINATION OF SENATOR
JOHN F. KERRY TO SUCCEED HER AS SECRETARY OF STATE OF THE UNITED STATES


Today, I spoke to Senator John Kerry and congratulated him on his nomination to be the next Secretary of State. I also
spoke with President Obama and told him that he has made an excellent choice. I hope Senator Kerry will be confirmed
quickly.


I have been privileged to know John for many years and to call him a friend, colleague, and partner. He will bring
decades of service to our country and deep experience in international affairs. The son of a career Foreign Service
Officer, diplomacy is in his blood. As a decorated veteran, he knows what it takes to defend our nation and our
values. As a leader in the Senate, he understands how to build coalitions and craft compromises. As a statesman
respected around the world, he will be able to sustain and extend America's global leadership.


John Kerry has been tested — in war, in government, and in diplomacy. Time and again, he has proven his mettle.


I remember watching young Lieutenant Kerry's testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee many years
ago and thinking that I had just seen a man of uncommon courage and conscience. Years later, as First Lady, I admired
John's integrity and leadership as he returned to Vietnam to uncover the truth about fellow American soldiers who
never came home, and to help normalize relations. Then, as Senate colleagues, we worked together on behalf of
wounded warriors, working families, and other causes close to both our hearts.


Over the past four years, now as Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Senator Kerry has been my
trusted partner on major foreign policy challenges facing our nation. He helped us end the war in Iraq and advance a
responsible transition in Afghanistan, co-authored key assistance legislation for Pakistan, won ratification of the New
START Treaty with Russia, led the way on climate change, and helped us navigate a fast-changing Middle East.


President Obama and I have often asked Senator Kerry to undertake delicate diplomatic missions and to deliver difficult
messages. He has forged strong relationships with leaders around the world. As I have learned, being able to talk
candidly as someone who has won elections and also lost them is an enormous asset when engaging with emerging or
fragile democracies.


Through it all, Senator Kerry has fought for our nation's diplomats and development experts — and for investing in their
mission and America's global leadership. And now, he is working closely with me and my team to learn the lessons of
the tragedy in Benghazi, further protect our people and posts, and implement every single one of the Accountability
Review Board's recommendations.


We need a leader with John Kerry's experience and talent at the helm of the State Department and USAID in the years
ahead. There is much more to do on all of these crucial challenges, from Afghanistan to nonproliferation to climate
change, and many others. We also have to consolidate America's expanded engagement in the Asia-Pacific, continue
championing the rights and opportunities of women, pursue a new approach to development centered on dignity and
self-sufficiency, keep putting economics at the center of our foreign policy, and practice the kind of smart power that
harnesses innovation and partnerships — with governments and with people — to solve problems and seize
opportunities.


The men and women of the State Department and USAID represent the best traditions of a bold and generous
nation. They serve and sacrifice every day, often in dangerous circumstances. It has been one of the great honors of my
life to serve with such fine public servants over the past four years. I could not be prouder of all we have achieved
together. They deserve the highest caliber leadership, and that is exactly what they'll get in John Kerry.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793676 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793676 Date: 11/30/2015




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793676 Date: 11/30/2015
