UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797827 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL




                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                              October 19, 2012



  For: Ron Klain
  From: Sidney Blumenthal
  Re: Final debate


      1. Romney will inevitably falsify, distort and mangle facts on a range of subjects from
         Libya to the defense budget. But why is this debate different from all other debates? In
         the dedicated foreign policy debate, the stakes are higher—America's role in the world.
         That makes Romney's errors even more consequential and potentially threatening. And
         that must be an essential predicate of Obama's point when he exposes Romney's
         falsehoods. When Romney lies on domestic policy it's shameful, but when he lies on
         foreign policy it's dangerous.
      2. When Romney lies or distorts, he should be revealed as more than misleading. In the
         foreign policy debate, when Romney lies he shows that he's unprepared. That word-
         "unprepared"—is potentially lethal to him. It should be linked logically to his falsehoods,
         which become the proof. When you're untrue, you're unprepared, and when you're
         unprepared you can't be strong.
      3. Romney's attack line on Libya is not only false, as exposed in the last debate. (Obama
         here can joke that Romney apparently wants to rerun the last debate but this time without
         Candy Crowley present to call him out. Romney will become angry and nonplussed.) His
         attack line is a reheated leftover of the Bush era attacks on Democrats designed by Karl
         Rove as weak on terrorism, which were themselves repackaged old Republican attacks
         from the Cold War. It's all nostalgia. And it's not about policy—it's only about politics
         and intended to obscure the realities on the ground and the truth about the matter.
      4. The issue of the legacy of George W. Bush is complex. Romney has angered Republicans
          with his attack on George W. Bush and refusal to defend him in the last debate. (See
          Susan Eisenhower on her blog: http://susaneisenhower.com/2012/10/18/what-drives-mitt-
          romneyfihnore-830
         "Romney's debate answers were undoubtedly aimed at undecided voters, but many
          members of the Republican Party I've spoken to in the last two days are incensed by
          Romney's handling of the Bush question. This debate is unlikely to change the contours
          of the campaign, but it has offered one more glimpse at what drives the man who wants
          desperately to move into the White House.") Obama can make the following points: a. Of




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797827 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797827 Date: 11/30/2015




         course: He has inherited two wars, one of which he has ended and another that he is
         ending, characterizing how he has defended US interests in each case; b. After the
         elimination of Bin Laden, AQ is shattered, splintered and diffuse, still in spots a menace
         but as a central organization smashed, requiring smart, flexible and nuanced approaches
         to a variety of situations, not ham-handed, dogmatic and rhetorical responses like
         Romney proposes that can only have negative unintended consequences; c. Romney's old
         ideas are outdated, whose source is his advisers, who were Bush's propagandists, not
         really even his first-rank advisers, but his cheerleaders—not the neoconservative A-
         Team, but the B-Team; d. Then, really stick in the shiv by having Obama say that he was
         somewhat surprised that Romney in the last debate did not give President George W.
         Bush credit where credit is due—for example, breaking with the neoconservatives around
         Vice President Cheney by adopting the surge in Iraq led by current CIA director David
         Petraeus that prepared the groundwork for Obama's own policy in Iraq. And now we can
         understand, in that light, why Romney failed to acknowledge President Bush in any
         positive way—he's to his far right and the captive of the discredited advisers and policies
         that none other than Bush himself finally broke with.
     5. Don't neglect to interject the economic factor as the foundation of US strength in the
         world. The Financial Times/Brookings Global Index reports that it is Obama's policies
         that are working--"the brightest spot in the world economy"—and that the ones that are
         not working are precisely the sort of austerity policies imposed in Europe—in fact like
         those advocated by Romney! Romney is the one pushing the bad austerity medicine from
         Europe that would min the recovery. Romney's policies are a European poison pill for
         the American recovery.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797827 Date: 11/30/2015
