UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792599 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL

                                                        for Global Justice
                                   GRUBER               and Women's Rights
                                  PROGRAM               at Yak Law School



                                       GRUBER FOUNDATION
                                    BACKGROUND AND HISTORY

     This document provides general background information on the work at Yale of the Gruber
 Foundation. Founded in 2011 by a landmark contribution from philanthropists Peter and Patricia
 Gruber, the Foundation is dedicated to the advancement of science, young scientists, global
 justice, and women's rights.

     The Gruber Foundation succeeds The Peter and Patricia Gruber Foundation, originally
 established in 1993, and carries on its philanthropic missiDn and prestigious annual science
 prizes.

    The Gruber Foundation encompasses three major programmatic initiatives: the Gruber
 Program for Global Justice and Women's Rights at Yale Law School; the Gruber Prizes and
 Young Scientists Awards; and the Gruber Science Fellowship Program at Yale.

     Gruber Program for Global Justice and Women's Rights

     The Gruber Program for Global Justice and Women's Rights at Yale Law School supports
 outreach and education programs that reflect the Foundation's commitment to furthering global
 justice and women's rights (which were formerly expressed through the annual Gruber Justice
 and Women's Rights Prizes).

     The Gruber Program for Global Justice and Women's Rights comprises three core
  components: (i) support for Yale Law School's annual Global Constitutionalism Seminar; (ii) the
  Gruber Distinguished Global Justice and Women's Rights Lectures Series; and (iii) the Gruber
  Global Justice and Women's Rights Fellowships.

      The Program's work reflects an appreciation that "global justice" is not limited to formal
  systems of laws, but also entails the essential elements of public health, social welfare and
  fedistribution, and the non-legal means which are frequently necessary for the achievement of
  global justice.

  1. Global Constitutionalism Seminar

  The Global Constitutionalism Seminar annually convenes a group of approximately fifteen
  Supreme Court and Constitutional Court judges from around the world. The group meets for four
  days in a seminar-style setting to consider topics of common interest. The Seminar has been
  heralded as perhaps the only forum where leading jurists can confidentially and freely discuss the
  most important legal issues of the day with leading academic lawyers. Topics considered at past
  meetings have included freedom of expression, international norms, and terrorism.



                                                  1
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792599 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792599 Date: 11/30/2015




 2. The Gruber Distinguished Lectures in Global Justice and Women's Rights

 The Gruber Distinguished Lecture in Global Justice and the Gruber Distinguished Lecture in
 Women's Rights are separate signature lectures open to the entire Yale community and other
 interested group. The events feature speakers whose exceptional achievements have served the
 causes of global justice and women's rights. The lectures are often enhanced by panels and
 conferences. In addition, the lecturers may spend time at Yale Law School teaching a class or
 engaging in a range of other community activities, such as Master's teas, faculty workshops, and
 similar opportunities.

  The Inaugural Gruber Distinguished Lecturer in Women's Rights is Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg
  of the United States Supreme Court. The event will take place at Yale Law School in October
  2012.

  The Inaugural Gruber Distinguished Lecturer in Global Justice is Luis Moreno Ocampo, the first
  Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court. Mr. Ocampo's lecture is scheduled for January
  2013 .

  3. The Gruber Fellowships in Global Justice and Women's Rights

  The Gmber Fellowships in Global Justice and Women's Rights help foster international
  understanding and dialogue in the fields of global justice and women's rights.

  The Gruber Program annually awards post-graduate fellowships that allow recent graduates of
  Yale graduate and professional schools to spend a year working on issues of relevance to the
  fields of global justice and/or women's rights. The 2012-2013 Gruber Fellows include two Yale
  School of Nursing graduates and two Yale Law School graduates. Their fellowship work will
  include midwifery training and capacity building in Haiti, protecting migrant labor issues in
  Argentina, advocating on behalf of Iraqi refugees, providing critical pediatric nursing care and
  training to rural populations, and protecting against "land-grabbing" and other violations of
  property rights of women in Uganda. A more detailed description of the Gruber Fellows and
  projects is included at the end of this document.

  In addition to launching careers in the areas of global justice and women's rights, Gruber
  fellowships have supported multi-disciplinary initiatives and valuable international exchanges at
  the faculty level, such as:

          • an international conference on "Parity as Practice: The Politics of Equality" — a
            forum for scholars to discuss the impact of, as well as the challenges posed, by
            gender parity models;
          • a new collaboration between Yale Law School and the School of Public Health: an
            international working group to address problems at the intersection of health, rights
            and justice in southern Africa. The group is addressing drug-resistant tuberculosis,
            HIV and silicosis in African miners, and it will examine how these public health
            problems affect not only miners' health, but also their freedom and human rights;

                                                  2

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792599 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792599 Date: 11/30/2015




          0 a week-long convening in New Haven, the Global Health Leadership Institute
              Annual Conference, bringing together delegations of policymakers, academics and
              health workers to develop country-specific action plans to address public health
              challenges, including access to and quality of health care. Gruber faculty fellowships
              made possible the participation of faculty from Ethiopian, South African and
              Ghanaian universities.

 Gruber Prizes and Young Scientists Awards

 The Gruber Foundation will continue to award three $500,000 Gruber Prizes each year in the
 physical and life sciences, including a Cosmology Prize, a Genetics Prize, and a Neuroscience
 Prize, and will maintain the Gruber Young Scientists Awards. Considered among the most
 prestigious awards in the sciences, the prizes honor contemporary individuals whose
 groundbreaking work provides new models that inspire and enable fundamental shifts in
 knowledge. Recipients are chosen by independent prize selection panels comprised of experts
 active in the respective fields. The members of the panels are in turn selected by independent,
 non-governmental organizations.

  The 2012 Genetics Prize honored Douglas C. Wallace, widely considered the founder of
  mitochondrial genetics in humans. The Neuroscience Prize recognized the
  pioneering discoveries by molecular neurobiologists Lily Jan, PhD, and Yuh Nung Jan, PhD, who
  have laid the groundwork for many important advances in the understanding of the development
  and function of the nervous system. The Cosmology Prize honored Charles Bennett and the
  WMAP Team for their use of Cosmic Microwave Background radiation, to determine the
  universe's vital statistics—its age, content, geometry, and origin – a feat that in turn has helped
  transform cosmology itself into a precision science.

  In 2011, the Gruber Prize in Cosmology recognized four astronomers - Marc Davis George
  Efstathiou, Carlos Frenk, and Simon White – for their "pioneering use of numerical simulations
  to model and interpret the large-scale distribution of matter in the Universe." The Genetics
  Prize honored the many groundbreaking biotechnologies developed by biochemist and geneticist
  Ronald W. Davis. Neuroscientist Huda Y. Zoghbi was a Neuroscience Prize recipient for her
  pioneering work that has unlocked the genetic and molecular mysteries of a number of
  devastating neurological disorders

  In 2010, Gruber prize recipients included astronomer Charles Steidel, whose studies of ancient
  galaxies have shed light on their formation and evolution over 12 billion years. Gerald R. Fink
  was recognized for his foundational work in molecular genetics, and neuroscientist Robert H.
  Wurtz was honored for a forty-year career that helped to launch the field of visual cognition.

  Gruber Science Fellowship Program

  The Gruber Foundation will also support the training of new leaders within these key science
  disciplines through the Gruber Science Fellowship Program at Yale. Providing $2.5 million
  annually, the program will initially provide approximately fifty graduate fellowships each year.


                                                   3

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792599 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792599 Date: 11/30/2015




 Background on Peter and Patricia Gruber

 Born in Budapest, Hungary, in 1929, Peter Gruber escaped to India with his parents in 1939,
 three months before the Second World War engulfed Europe. He was educated in the Himalayas
 by Irish Christian Brothers and Jesuits, sparking a lifelong dedication to scholarship and human
 rights. He later came to the United States, where he launched a successful investment career and
 is recognized as a pioneer in the area of emerging markets.

  Patricia Gruber has a background in liberal arts, holding a master's degree in psychology from
  Antioch West University and a post-master's certificate in psychology from the Psychotherapy
  Institute in Berkeley. Previously a psychotherapist in private practice in California, she has in
  recent years devoted herself full time to the Foundation. In 2010, she was awarded a Ph.D.
  honoris causa from the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovat, Israel, for her work with the
  Foundation. In addition to her dedication to the Gruber Foundation since its inception, Pat has
  been involved with a number of human rights organizations, including the Advisory Council of
  the American Bar Association's Center for Human Rights, the International League for Human
  Rights at the United Nations.




                                                   4

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792599 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792599 Date: 11/30/2015




                                   Gruber Fellows 2012-13


                      Erin George will spend her fellowship year with Partners In Health, where
                  she will work in partnership with Haitian health care leaders to build capacity
                  among Haitian nurses and midwives. Erin will conduct needs assessments of
                  nurses and midwives at Partners In Health sites and create clinical, education,
                  and research partnerships between Haitian and American health organizations
                  in order to strengthen the nursing and midwifery professions in Haiti. A
                  member of Yale School of Nursing Class of 2012, Erin graduated from Bryn
                  Mawr College in 2006 with a B.A. in Growth and Structure of Cities and from
                  MGH Institute of Health Professions in 2010 with a BSN. She previously
                  worked as a nutrition educator in Hawaii and a women's health and HIV
                  community health researcher in Boston, MA.




                Amanda Gutierrez will spend her fellowship year
            working with the Center for Justice and International
            Law in Buenos Aires, Argentina, in collaboration with
            domestic organizations to address the exploitation of
            migrant Bolivian workers in the Argentine textile
            industry. Amanda will document labor practices in the '
            industry, assess the Argentine government's response
            to pervasive exploitation, and develop strategies to
            leverage the power of international law and domestic
            organizing to improve the government's approach on
            this issue. Amanda, a member of the Yale Law School
            Class of 2012, graduated with highest honors and
            highest distinction from the University of North
            Carolina at Chapel Hill, where she was involved with
            a number of immigrants' rights initiatives.


                                               Becca Heller, Yale Law School Class of 2010,
                                               will spend her fellowship year working with the
                                           Iraqi Refugee Assistance Project (IRAP), specifically
                                         ..-by developing legal interventions for Iraqi refugee
                                           young women and girls who are being sexually
                                           trafficked. With Jonathan Finer '09, Becca co-founded
                                                  as a student organization when she was a YLS
                                           student. With enormous support from Yale Law
                                           School, RAP has since become an international law
                                           student movement for refugee rights, with chapters at
                                                5

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792599 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792599 Date: 11/30/2015




             more than 20 law schools in the United States and the Middle East. In addition to the
             honor of being selected as a Gruber Fellow, Becca has received Skadden and Echoing
             Green Fellowships in recognition of her work with IRAP. She is currently a visiting
             clinical lecturer in law at YLS and was recently named one of the Christian Science
             Monitor's "30 Change Agents Under 30."

             Stephanie Keene will work with the International Justice Mission (UM) in Kampala,
             Uganda, to provide legal services to women and
             children who have been victims of illegal
             property seizure, or "property grabbing."
             Stephanie will support IJM lawsuits on behalf of
             victims of property grabbing; lead and develop
             legal training for Ugandan justice offlcials and
             develop strategies to reform customary practices
             that impede women's property rights in rural
             communities. Before joining the Yale Law
             School Class of 2012, Stephanie graduated with
             high honors from Princeton University and
             worked for the U.N. World Food Program in
             Dakar, Senegal

             Nichole Trumper, a member of the Yale School of Nursing Class of 2012, will
             spend her fellowship year working- with the Foundation for International Medical
                                                Relief of Children (FIMRC) in LimOn,
                                                 Nicaragua, as a pediatric nurse practitioner.
                                                 Nichole's primary project will be to support the
                                                 Pediatric Health Program through execution of
                                                acute and preventative patient care, the creation
                                                and distribution of health education materials,
                                                and streamlining data tracking and institutional
                                                 memory practices. Secondary projects will
                                                 encompass on-site initiatives such as designing
                                                 and implementing community outreach activities
                                                 'ocused on dental hygiene, water sanitation and
                                                 lealthy habits. Before coming to Yale, Nichole
                                                 graduated from the University of Wisconsin-
                                                    adison and was academic All-Big Ten as a
                                                   adger crew team rower.




                                                 6



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792599 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792599 Date: 11/30/2015




                                      Gruber Fellows 2011-12

 Caroline Gross YLS '10
 International Association of Women Judges in Washington, DC and Tanzania

 Caroline Gross is a 2010 graduate of Yale Law School. During her fellowship year, Caroline will
 work for the International Association of Women Judges on combating "sextortion," or the abuse
 of power through sexual exploitation, in Tanzania. Working with Tanzanian judges and NG0s,
 she will develop materials for practitioners, victims, and government officials on the application
 of Tanzanian and international anti-corruption laws to the problem of sexual exploitation, and
 she will prepare a report on barriers to the implementation of these laws.

 Caroline graduated summa cum laude from Harvard University in 2005, with an A.B. in History
 and Science. She clerked for the Honorable Stanley Marcus of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
 Eleventh Circuit before beginning her fellowship.

 Scarlet Kim YLS '11
 Human rights work with the New York Civil Liberties Union

 Scarlet Kim will spend her fellowship year at the New York Civil Liberties Union, where she
 will work on a project addressing the use of prolonged solitary confinement in New York state
 prisons. Scarlet will document conditions of confinement at several New York supermax prisons
 and conduct legal research exploring methods of incorporating international human rights law
 into a New York state constitutional challenge to prolonged solitary confinement.

  A member of the Yale Law School class of 2011, Scarlet graduated from Yale College, where
  she studied history and international studies. Scarlet has also studied in China on a Fulbright
  Fellowship and worked as a research associate at the Council on Foreign Relations.




                                                  7



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792599 Date: 11/30/2015
