    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793365 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                            H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                            Friday, January 20, 2012 7:48 AM
To:                              'illichtman
Cc:                              'ValmoroLj@state.gov'
Subject                          Re: National Partnership invitation to HRC



What a wonderful invitation. I'm copying Lona to see if we can commit to a time in June this far ahead because I know
you have to book a room etc. I hope it can work out. All the best for 2012!


From: Judy Lichtman [mailto:
Sent: Wednesday, January 18, 2012 05:24 PM
To: H
Cc: Millscd@state.gov <Millscd@state.gov>; Valmorolj@state.gov <Valmorolj@state.gov>
Subject: National Partnership invitation to HRC

Words cannot adequately express how profoundly honored we will be if you accept our invitation to honor you.

Much love,
Judy



4e-
national partnership
for women & families


January 18, 2012

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton
via e-mail

Dear Madame Secretary:

As you may remember, each year the National Partnership for Women & Families hosts a gala luncheon to honor
trailblazing leaders who have helped advance the role of women in the United States and worldwide, make our
workplaces more fair and family-friendly, and win quality, affordable health care for everyone. We had the great
privilege of honoring you at our luncheon in 1994 and I am writing to see if you would allow us to make you our honoree
and keynote speaker again in June, at our 2012 Annual Luncheon.

There is no more perfect honoree than you. You are a world leader with an illustrious career, exceptional achievements
in foreign policy, and have served as a lifelong role model for women and girls worldwide. We have watched with so
much pride as you broke barriers for women in government and politics, and cheered these last few years as you
skillfully steered the country's foreign policy, always making the rights and well-being of women and girls a centerpiece
of the nation's agenda. As a champion of women's rights and the power of women's voices, we so appreciate your
leadership in establishing the United States' first-ever National Action Plan on Women, Peace, and Security to formalize
the nation's commitment to promoting women's role in conflict prevention and resolution, protecting women from
gender-based violence and ensuring that women have equal access to relief and recovery assistance in war-torn and
violent areas of the world. You have transformed society with your tireless work to give women and girls in every corner
of the globe the chance to live free of violence, with comprehensive health services and real opportunities for education
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793365 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793365 Date: 11/30/2015




and employment. Our daughters and their daughters will be so much better off because of your resolve and
contribution.

We would be immensely proud to have the chance to honor you in June. You may remember that our event brings
together more than 1,500 people from the women's, legal, business, public policy, civil rights, health, advocacy, and
labor communities here in Washington, D.C. We are currently planning to hold it on Friday, June 8, at the Washington
Hilton, but would be happy to adjust the date to accommodate your schedule.

In addition to you, President Clinton and Vice President Gore, our distinguished honorees over the years have included
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, journalist Christiane Amanpour, historian Doris Kearns Goodwin, actor and
academic Anna Deavere Smith, as well as United Nations officials, pioneering civil rights attorneys, and luminaries from
numerous other fields.

Last year, the National Partnership turned 40. Like us, you remember that, when we opened our doors in 1971 as the
Women's Legal Defense Fund, women couldn't get credit cards or mortgages in their own names, job listings were
separated into jobs for men and jobs for women, and abortion was illegal in many states. We've been busy during those
years, helping to win the battles to outlaw pregnancy discrimination and sexual harassment, and, with your significant.
help, pass the Family and Medical Leave Act, undo the horrendous U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Ledbetter v. Goodyear,
pass health care reform, and much more.

We have been transforming public policies, changing business culture, and altering the way Americans see women's role
in families and in our society. Our work is not nearly done, but we are proud of the progress we've helped win over
these 40 years and ready for the challenges that lie ahead.

The National Partnership is the nation's preeminent voice on behalf of women and families. We work every day to build
a country where equal opportunity and women's rights are secure, no one experiences discrimination, all workplaces
are family-friendly, and every family has quality, affordable health care and real economic security. Our Annual
Luncheon is a time-honored Washington tradition and we could have no more appropriate honoree in 2012 than you.

The event begins with a VIP reception at 11:00 a.m. The luncheon portion begins at noon and ends by 2:00 p.m. The VIP
reception is for our speakers, major donors, members of Congress, members of the Administration, and other
distinguished guests. We would be delighted if you would be willing to attend for some portion of that time.

We look forward to your response. You can reach us by phone at (202) 986-2600 or by e -mail at
din                         or jllichtman                        Please let us know if we can provide any additional       B6
information or materials.

Thank you so much for considering this request.

Warmest regards,


                                                                  •


Debra L. Ness                                       Judith L. Lichtman
President                                           Senior Advisor




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793365 Date: 11/30/2015
