        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792109 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                         Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Wednesday, August 29, 2012 8:31 PM
To:
Subject:                                      Fw: Navy SEALs book gives different account of bin Laden death (Reuters)




From: OpsNewsTicker@state.gov [mailto:OpsNewsTicker@state.gov]
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2012 06:54 PM
To: NEWS-PM; NEWS-Mahogany
Subject: Navy SEAL's book gives different account of bin Laden death (Reuters)

WASHINGTON (Reuters) - A U.S. Navy SEAL who has authored a first-hand account of the raid that killed
Osama bin Laden says the al Qaeda leader was shot in the head as he peeked from a bedroom door, an account
that diverges from the Obama administration's original description of the incident.

   The book, "No Easy Day,". says bin Laden was unarmed when Navy SEALs found him during the raid on his
Pakistan compound, according to a source who read the book, which is due to be released on Sept. 4.

   The book's author, writing under the pseudonym "Mark Owen," says bin Laden was looking out from his
bedroom door when he was shot in the head, said the source, who spoke on condition of anonymity.

   In the confused hours after the raid, White House counterterrorism adviser John Brennan had said originally
that bin Laden "was engaged in a firefight" with the Navy SEALs.

   The White House amended that account a day later, saying he was not armed but had resisted capture inside
an upper-floor bedroom in the compound.

   National Security Council spokesman Tommy Victor declined comment on the book.

   Colonel Tim Nye, spokesman for the Pentagon's Special Operations Command, or SOCOM, said he and
other Defense Department officials received copies of the book late last week from the publisher, Dutton.

   U.S. officials said last week they were surprised by the book, which was not vetted by government agencies
to ensure that no secrets were revealed.

    Pentagon officials now are reviewing its contents to see if it contains classified information and to determine
if further steps can or should be taken against the author, who should have submitted the book for pre-
publication review under the terms of his service in the Navy SEALs, Nye said.




News Tickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792109 Date: 11/30/2015
