    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793503 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                              Thursday, January 19, 2012 8:38 AM
To:                                'Russorv@state.gov.
Subject                            Fw:



Pls print and give to me when I come in.

    Original Message ---
From: Mills, Cheryl D [mailto:MillsCD@state.gov]
Sent: Thursday, January 19, 2012 03:31 AM
To: H
Subject:



WaPo article - most telling quotes from article b/I:

"People are getting more angry now as they realize there won't be any help," he said. "It's building up hatred to the
West, and it's becoming extremism. It's very dangerous now."

"Until a month ago, no one supported the Brotherhood, but today we would support Israel if they helped us take Bashar
out," said Shakir, the activist in Horns. "Today we support anyone without questions if they help us."




In Syria, world inaction fuels armed revolt



Anti-regime protesters chant slogans and flash the victory sign as they march during a demonstration at the mountain
resort town of Zabadani, Syria. (AP)

Liz Sly
Wednesday, Jan 18, 2012

BEIRUT — Growing indications that a deeply divided international community is either unable or unwilling to intervene
to halt the violence in Syria are fueling an armed rebellion that risks plunging the country, and perhaps the region, into a
wider war.

The slide toward all-out conflict seemed to accelerate Wednesday after the opposition claimed that Syrian government
forces had been forced to accept a cease-fire negotiated with rebel soldiers in the town of Zabadani, near the Lebanese
border.

Rebel soldiers who identified themselves as members of the Free Syrian Army and a Zabadani activist said loyalist
soldiers retreated Wednesday afternoon, five days after launching an offensive to quell dissent in Zabadani. The
mountain resort 20 miles north of Damascus is one of as many as three dozen places in Syria that the opposition says
have slipped beyond government control in recent weeks.

Witnesses said the government troops appeared to be heading toward another of the restive towns outside the capital.
Offensives by Damascus have ebbed and flowed throughout the 10-month-old uprising, and the rebels acknowledged


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793503 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793503 Date: 11/30/2015




Netanyahu into land-for-peace concessions. "The idea that the President can propose a
US map [regarding Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank] for a country he does not know
is a disaster," Gingrich said. Then he complained, "The Clinton administration has not held
[Palestinian Authority Chairman Yasser] Arafat's feet to the fire."
But, by October 1998, Netanyahu had all but caved to Clinton's pressure. The man who
once mocked "advocates ofcapitulation" now clasped hands with Arafat after a protracted
conference at Wye, Maryland. Netanyahu agreed to redeploy Israeli troops from 13
percent of the West Bank, including most of Hebron. His sudden turnabout cost him key
support inside Likud, provoking a Knesset vote for early elections. His right-wing base
shattered, paving the path for a decisive victory for the Labor Party's Ehud Barak, a former
Israeli general favored and quietly supported by the Clinton administration.
Suddenly in the wilderness, Netanyahu plotted his path back by cultivating the right-wing
in the US — the pundits, the Republican politicians, the big donors, Fox News. In 2007, he
held a meeting with a small group of conservative activists emerging as key players in the
conservative blogosphere. Among those present was Andrew Breitbart, who became a
notorious hatchet man staging wild stunts and whose myriad websites routinely carry
conspiratorial, racially charged attacks on Obama. Other figures at the meeting included
conservative bloggers Scott Johnson, Jim Holt and Jeff Emmanuel. "At our meeting we
talked mostly about the dangers of the Iranian regime acquiring a nuclear bomb," Johnson
 recalled, revealing his newly acquired foreign policy expertise. "It was a subject to which
 Netanyahu had obviously devoted great thought."
 Two years later, Netanyahu returned to the Prime Minister's office at the head of an even
 more decidedly right-wing coalition than before government and was determined not to
 repeat his previous mistakes of "capitulating" to the peace process at the behest of an
 American president. Now he turned to the movement he had courted to help him
 undermine and humiliate Obama.
 Humiliating Obama
 In March 2010, when Obama dispatched Vice President Joseph Biden to Israel in a futile
 attempt to restart negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian Authority, Netanyahu
 appeared in Jerusalem at a massive rally of 1,000 evangelicals organized by Texas mega-
 church Pastor John Hagee, a leading Christian Zionist and sometime Holocaust revisionist
 whose End Times theology committed him to the vision of Greater Israel. Seated onstage
 beside Netanyahu was Israel's Ambassador to the United States, Michael Oren (a
 neoconservative former Shalem Center fellow), and Deputy Foreign Minister Danny
 Ayalon, who had just snubbed a visiting delegation of leading Democratic members of
 Congress. Before the rapture-ready audience, Netanyahu proclaimed that Jerusalem
 would remain "the undivided, eternal capital of the Jewish people."
 At once, he authorized the construction of 1,600 new settlement units in occupied East
 Jerusalem over the stringent objections from the Obama administration. Though the move
 angered the White House, Ron Dermer, a top Netanyahu aide with close ties to leading
 Republicans in Washington, reassured the Prime Minister that Republicans would retake
 Congress. Netanyahu simply rejected Obama's plea to freeze settlements and then
 rejected overtures to restart the peace process. In the 2010 mid-term elections,
  Republicans gained control of the House of Representatives.
  While on a trip to New York days after the Republican victory, Netanyahu authorized
  another 1,000 more settlement units in East Jerusalem, a direct rebuke of Obama. That
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793503 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793503 Date: 11/30/2015




same day, Netanyahu held a meeting with the incoming House Majority Leader Eric
Cantor, the only Jewish Republican in Congress, and a leader of the right-wing in the
House Republican Conference. Cantor's office produced a summary of the meeting for the
media that contained the remarkably crude statement: Cantor promised Netanyahu that
"the new Republican majority will serve as a check on the [Obama] Administration and
what has been, up until this point, one party rule in Washington."
In April 2011, Republican Speaker of the House John Boehner personally invited
Netanyahu to speak before a joint session of Congress. He was interrupted 36 times by
standing ovations – more than Obama during his State of the Union address – despite
making such mind-boggling false claims as that the "vast majority" of Israeli settlers live in
"neighborhoods in Jerusalem and greater Tel Aviv."
With a rancorous, multi-billion dollar US presidential campaign certainly looming on the
horizon, Netanyahu continued his pattern of making friends in the radical right's media
machine. Among them was Glenn Beck, a Mormon convert and former Fox News host,
who had compared a major liberal Jewish religious denomination to radical Islamists and
claimed that Obama has "a deep-seated hatred for white people." Beck was admonished
by the Anti-Defamation League and other mainstream Jewish groups for his anti-Semitic
rants against George Soros, a major funder of liberal and Democratic Party-related
organizations. In July 2011, Beck traveled to Israel to deliver a diatribe against liberal
Israelis demonstrating against Netanyahu's economic policies, labeling them patsies in a
secret Islamist-Communist plot.
When the right-wing Zionist Organization of America honored Beck this November with a
prize named after Sheldon Adelson and his wife, Miriam, Netanyahu displayed his •
gratitude in a videotaped tribute. "Glenn, you can be sure that if Sheldon and Miri Adelson
put their name to something, it must stand for a lot. You stand for a lot... And I want to tell
you how deeply we appreciate this stand of courage and integrity."
Dear Sasha
In December, Thomas Friedman, the Pulitzer Prize winning New York Times' former
Jerusalem Bureau Chief and one of the few American columnists whose opinions
seriously register in the Israeli media, published an uncharacteristically pointed critique of
Netanyahu's leadership. In Friedman's column were two lines that incited the wrath and
fury of the Prime Minister's office. "I sure hope that Israel's prime minister, Benjamin
Netanyahu, understands that the standing ovation he got in Congress this year was not for
his politics. That ovation was bought and paid for by the Israel lobby."
Neoconservative opinion makers exploded with orchestrated rage accusing Friedman of
being a self-hating Jewish anti-Semite. In response, the New York Times gave Netanyahu
an opportunity to respond on its opinion page.
But rather than accept the Times' offer, Netanyahu dispatched Ron Dermer, his key
 emissary to the American political scene, especially to the conservative movement, now
 serving as a senior advisor on his staff, to issue what amounted to a declaration of war
 against the American newspaper of record. Dermer's letter was extraordinary in its
 vitriolic, hostile and contemptuous tone. Nothing like it had ever existed before — a vicious
official attack from the Prime Minister of Israel on the credibility of the New York Times.
 Perhaps only a little less surprising was that this major event received nearly no coverage
 in the American press.

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793503 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793503 Date: 11/30/2015




In his scathing letter, Dermer accused the Times of "cavalierly defam[ing] our country,"
claiming that 19 out of 20 op-eds published in the Times were "negative" (Dermer did not
challenge their factual basis). He concluded, "it would seem as if the surest way to get an
op-ed published in the New York Times these days, no matter how obscure the writer or
the viewpoint, is to attack Israel."
One of the remarkable aspects of Dermer's letter was that it was addressed, "Dear
Sasha." Who is Sasha? Sasha Polakow-Suransky, a staff editor at the Times editorial
page, is in charge of assigning pieces on foreign policy. Why did Dermer address his letter
to Polakow-Suransky instead of to Andrew Rosenthal, the director of the Times editorial
page? Was he singling out Polakow-Suransky because he revealed in his 2010 book, The
Unspoken Alliance: Israel's Secret Relationship With Apartheid South Africa, that Israel
offered to sell nuclear warheads to South Africa's apartheid government, a bombshell
revelation that prompted furious denials from Israeli President Shimon Peres and Deputy
Prime Minister Dan Meridor, embarrassing a country that still refuses to discuss its nuclear
program in any public forums, and punishes those who do?
Netanyahu's attack on the Times represented a significant new stage in his shadow war.
He was drawing sharp new lines. By rebuking the paper, Netanyahu attempted to define
its liberal Zionist, pro-peace process editorial line as hostile to Israeli security needs. And
by default, he positioned Rupert Murdoch's Wall Street Journal, with its relentlessly anti-
Obama, pro-Bibi op-ed page, as the only respectable forum for true friends of Israel.
Bibi's man in Washington
More than any other candidate in the Republican presidential contest, Newt Gingrich has
hewed to Netanyahu's line on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In an interview with the cable
TV Jewish Channel, Gingrich declared "We've had an invented Palestinian people who
are in fact Arabs and are historically part of the Arab community and they had a chance to
go many places." He added "I see myself as, in many ways, to be pretty close to Bibi
Netanyahu in thinking about the dangers of the world."
In May 2010, when Gingrich's presidential campaign was no more than the subject of
guarded speculation, Israel Hayom, Bibi's house organ, provided Gingrich with a Hebrew-
language forum to assail Obama's policies. The tabloid splashed a full page photo of a
smiling Gingrich on its front page accompanied by the caption: "The former Chairman of
the House of Representatives attacks the blindness of the Western Elites: 'Evading the
confrontation with Evil may bring a second Holocaust, the mistakes made by the White
House will exact a terrible price."
Israel Hayom's owner, Las Vegas Sands casino corporation chairman Sheldon Adelson, is
America's eighth wealthiest man. At the same time he was bankrolling Netanyahu's
career, Adelson also became Gingrich's leading financial angel. The casino kingpin was
introduced to Gingrich in 1996 through George Harris, a right-wing anti-tax activist and
Clark County, Nevada Republican chairman who helped Adelson block a unionization bid
at one of his casinos. Gingrich resigned from Congress in disgrace in 1999, forced out by
Republicans, hiding his extramarital affair with a congressional staffer. Adelson stepped in
as his financial godfather, pumping millions into the coffers of American Solutions for
Winning the Future, an independent political committee that covered Gingrich's
extravagant travel expenses.
When Gingrich embarked on the presidential trail, George Harris became his campaign
finance co-chair, representing Adelson by proxy. (Adelson's Sands corporation is currently
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793503 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793503 Date: 11/30/2015




facing a federal criminal probe for allegedly bribing foreign officials). And when Gingrich
provoked a hailstorm of criticism for claiming the Palestinians were "invented," Adelson
publicly defended him. "Read the history of those who call themselves Palestinians, and
you will hear why [Newt] Gingrich said recently that the Palestinians are an invented
people," Adelson told a group of American Jews visiting Israel on a program he funds,
Taglit-Birthright Israel.
Despite Gingrich's dismal finish in the Iowa caucuses, the opening contest in the
Republican contest, Adelson has staunchly remained on his side, donating US$5 million to
a Super PAC created to support Gingrich's campaign in the key primary state of South
Carolina, his Armageddon.
Bibi's Super PAC
When Gingrich quits the race, Netanyahu will not be without a candidate. He can count on
former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney to carry the neoconservative banner all the
way to Election Day. Of Romney's 22 campaign foreign policy advisers, 15 worked in the
administration of George W Bush, and six were original members of the Project for the
New American Century, the neoconservative group that called for regime change in Iraq.
Romney's own Super PAC, Restore Our Future, credited with destroying Gingrich's hopes
in Iowa through a relentless barrage of negative ads, is financed in part by Mel Sembler, a
Florida-based a multi-millionaire shopping mall developer and veteran Republican
fundraiser, appointed the US ambassador to Italy by President George W Bush. Sembler
was mired in scandal when the federal government revoked the license of a chain of
adolescent treatment centers he founded after former teenage patients complained they
were sexually abused, psychologically tortured and humiliated during sadistic behavior
modification programs. Less well known is the financial largesse Sembler has bestowed
on neoconservative outfits supporting Netanyahu's policies. He is also a close friend of
Adelson.
 In November 2011, President Obama and French President Nicolas Sarkozy
 commiserated about Netanyahu, unaware that their voices were picked up by a live
microphone. "You're fed up with him, but I have to deal with him even more often than
 you," Obama complained to Sarkozy. Romney seized on the episode as proof of Obama's
 disqualifying leadership and proof of his own fitness for office. "We have here yet another
 reason why we need new leadership in the White House," Romney declared. (Joining the
 chorus of pro-Bibi attacks on Obama were the Netanyahu-approved bloggers Breitbart
 Hoft and Johnson).
 In ramping up the effort to turn Israel into an anti-Obama wedge issue, a group of
 neoconservative Netanyahu allies have started a independent political committee called
 the Emergency Committee for Israel (ECI). The group's name was inspired by the
 Emergency Committee to Save the Jewish People of Europe, an organization that
 Netanyahu's father, Benzion, helped lead during World War II in part to raise money for
 the right-wing Irgun militia in Palestine. The group's board comprises a Who's Who of
 Washington neoconservatives. It is directed by Noah Pollak, a former assistant editor of
 Azure, the in-house journal of the Adelson-funded Shalem Center, several of whose
 fellows are now in Netanyahu's inner circle of advisers. Pollak was credited with helping
 the Israeli army launch a YouTube channel to rebut accusations that it committed war
 crimes in the Gaza Strip and elsewhere.

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793503 Date: 11/30/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793503 Date: 11/30/2015




This month, the ECI established a Super PAC in order to use unlimited corporate
contributions for political attack ads. The group's first major presidential campaign ad buy
targeted Representative Ron Paul (R-Texas), a fervently anti-war libertarian candidate
who has called for an end to the special relationship between Israel and the United States.
Scheduled to air in the key primary state of South Carolina, where the Republican
electorate is dominated by right-wing evangelicals, the ad features Gary Bauer, an ECI
board member, Christian right leader and failed presidential candidate staring into the
camera, warning that "Ron Paul's conservatism is isolationist and conspiratorial." (Bauer
endorsed former Senator Rick Santorum, a right-wing Catholic, who has declared, "All the
people that live in the West Bank are Israelis. They are not Palestinians. There is no
Palestinian. This is Israeli land.")
Jewish concerns
While Obama and the Democratic Party elite have kept silent in the face of Netanyahu's
American shadow war, its polarizing effects have prompted resistance from an
unexpected place: the Jewish-American establishment. Weeks of Republican attacks on
Obama for his supposed molly-coddling of Israel enemies caused deep discomfort in the
offices of mainstream Jewish groups, which have lobbied for decades to consolidate
support for Israel in both major American political parties. With Israel deliberately being
shaped into a campaign wedge issue, some Jewish leaders worried that rank-and-file
Democratic voters would begin to sour on the US-Israel special relationship.
In October, two of the US's oldest and most prominent Jewish organizations, the Anti-
Defamation League and the American Jewish Committee, released a "National Pledge for
Unity" urging politicians, religious leaders and other Jewish groups aimed at preserving.
bipartisan support for Israel. "We want the discourse on US support for Israel to avoid the
sometimes polarizing debates and political attacks that have emerged in recent weeks, as
candidates have challenged their opponents' pro-Israel bone fides or questioned the
current administration's foreign policy approach vis-a-vis Israel," declared Anti-Defamation
League national director Abraham Foxman. "The last thing America and Israel need right
now is the distractions of having Israel bandied about as a tool for waging political
attacks."
The Emergency Committee for Israel and the Republican Jewish Coalition, an Adelson-
funded pro-Netanyahu group that claims to raise "tens of millions" of dollars for
Republican candidates each election cycle, not only rejected the unity pledge, but
 accused its authors of attempting to suppress pro-Israel activism. In a defiant statement
by its chairman, neoconservative activist William Kristol, the ECI proclaimed, "This attempt
 to silence those of us who have 'questioned the current administration's foreign policy
 approach vis-a-vis Israel' will re-energize us." Thus the show went on. The effort to lower
 the temperature only became another occasion for the pro-Netanyahu operation to raise
 the heat. As their anti-Obama campaign intensifies, Israel is being merged seamlessly
with traditional right-wing wedge issues such as abortion, gay marriage and the menace of
 immigration.
 The deepening wedge
 In his writings and in the company of his inner circle, Netanyahu has expressed almost as
 much disdain for liberal Jewish supporters of Israel as he has for the professed enemies
 of the Jewish state. His book, A Durable Peace, is filled with attacks on Israeli advocates
 of a negotiated peace with the Palestinians, accusing them of "cloying sentimentalism"
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793503 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793503 Date: 11/30/2015




and falling victim to the "relentless Jewish desire to see an end to struggle." Netanyahu
was said to privately fume about Obama's Jewish senior advisor, David Axelrod, and his
then-Chief of Staff, Rahm Emanuel, an ardent liberal Zionist whose father was born and
raised in Israel. Netanyahu reportedly called them "self-hating Jews."
After two decades of cultivating the culture warriors of the American right as allies against
those seeking "an end to struggle," Netanyahu is beginning to see results. He initiated and
propelled a polarization process that has enabled Republicans to use Israel as a cudgel
for attacking their opponents, and did so over the objections of powerful mainstream
Jewish-American interests. Haim Malka, a senior fellow for the center-right Washington-
based Center for Strategic and International Studies, predicted in a recent paper: "The
partisan wedge is likely to deepen, posing considerable challenges to Israel and the US-
Israeli partnership."
In the past, America's Israel lobby sold the US-Israel alliance as a marriage of two vibrant
democracies united by shared liberal values. In the current environment of heightened
polarization, the special relationship is increasingly marketed to Americans as a united
front of besieged bastions of Western civilization against an incipient Islamic onslaught.
Rapture ready evangelicals, right-wing ultra-nationalists, and Republican Jews are far
more likely to be attracted to this sort of alliance than cosmopolitan liberals. And this may
be exactly the way Netanyahu wants it.
But he is far from confident that he can dislodge Obama. Steeling himself for a possible
second Obama term, Netanyahu has signaled his intention to move up the date of Israel's
national election. Hanan Krystal, a political analyst for Israel Radio, explained Netanyahu's
possible motives to Reuters: "At the highest echelons, they have long been saying that if
Obama is elected for a second term, the carrot will be replaced by a stick."




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793503 Date: 11/30/2015
