    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792863 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART B6


From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Friday, August 10, 2012 10:06 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: WashPost: Syrian rebels feel abandoned, betrayed by U.S.




From: Anne-Marie Slaughter [mailto
Sent: Friday, August 10, 2012 09:48 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: FW: WashPost: Syrian rebels feel abandoned, betrayed by U.S.

Make sure you read this— we are really missing a chance.
Syrian rebels feel abandoned, betrayed by U.S.
By Liz Sly
AL-BAB, Syria — As the Arab world's bloodiest revolt continues to maim, kill and ravage lives on an ever-
escalating scale, anti-American sentiments are hardening among those struggling to overthrow President Bashar
al-Assad, in ways that could have profound consequences for the country and the region in a post-Assad era.

Battle of Aleppo is going to be like Battle of Algiers. S should suggest that POTUS reread Martin Luther's Kings "I've been
to the mountaintop" speech. The road b/w Jerusalem and Jericho is not far away.


Let us develop a kind of dangerous unselfishness. One day a man came to Jesus; and he wanted to raise some
questions about some vital matters in life. At points, he wanted to trick Jesus, and show him that he knew a little
more than Jesus knew, and throw him off base. Now that question could have easily ended up in a philosophical
and theological debate. But Jesus immediately pulled that question from mid-air, and placed it on a dangerous curve
between Jerusalem and Jericho. And he talked about a certain man, who fell among thieves. You remember that a
Levite and a priest passed by on the other side. They didn't stop to help him. And finally a man of another race
came by. He got down from his beast, decided not to be compassionate by proxy. But he got down with him,
administering first aid, and helped the man in need. Jesus ended up saying, this was the good man, this was the
great man, because he had the capacity to project the "I" into the "thou," and to be concerned about his brother.
Now you know, we use our imagination a great deal to try to determine why the priest and the Levite didn't stop. At
times we say they were busy going to a church meeting - an ecclesiastical gathering - and they had to get on down
to Jerusalem so they wouldn't be late for their meeting. At other times we would speculate that there was a religious
law that "One who was engaged in religious ceremonials was not to touch a human body twenty-four hours before
the ceremony." And every now and then we begin to wonder whether maybe they were not going down to
Jerusalem, or down to Jericho, rather to organize a "Jericho Road Improvement Association." That's a possibility.
Maybe they felt that it was better to deal with the problem from the causal root, rather than to get bogged down with
an individual effort.

But I'm going to tell you what my imagination tells me. It's possible that those men were afraid. You see, the Jericho
road is a dangerous road. I remember when Mrs. King and I were first in Jerusalem. We rented a car and drove from
Jerusalem down to Jericho. And as soon as we got on that road, I said to my wife, "I can see why Jesus used this
as the setting for his parable." It's a winding, meandering road. It's really conducive for ambushing. You start out in
Jerusalem, which is about 1,200 miles, or rather 1,200 feet, above sea level.

And by the time you get down to Jericho, fifteen or twenty minutes later, you're about 2,200 feet below sea level.
That's a dangerous road. In the days of Jesus it came to be known as the "Bloody Pass." And you know, it's
possible that the priest and the Levite looked over that man on the ground and wondered if the robbers were still
around. Or it's possible that they felt that the man on the ground was merely faking. And he was acting like he had

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792863 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792863 Date: 11/30/2015




been robbed and hurt, in order to seize them over there, lure them there for quick and easy seizure. And so the first
question that the Levite asked was, "If I stop to help this man, what will happen to me?" But then the Good
Samaritan came by. And he reversed the question: "If I do not stop to help this man, what will happen to him?"



From: noreply@washingtonpost.com [mailto:noreply@washingtonpost.com]
Sent: Friday, August 10, 2012 8:49 PM
To: Anne-Marie Slaughter; bnasayers
Subject: WashPost: Syrian rebels feel abandoned, betrayed by U.S.




                 E-mail
This page was sent to you by
Message from sender:
Syrian rebels feel abandoned, betrayed by U.S.
By Liz Sly
AL-BAB, Syria — As the Arab world's bloodiest revolt continues to maim, kill and ravage lives on an ever-
escalating scale, anti-American sentiments are hardening among those struggling to overthrow President Bashar
al-Assad, in ways that could have profound consequences for the country and the region in a post-Assad era.




Do you love D.C.? Get the insider's guide to where to stay, what to do and where to eat. Go to
www.washingtonpost.com/qog for your guide to D.C. now.
@ 2010 The Washington Post Company I Privacy Policy




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792863 Date: 11/30/2015
