UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773837 Date: 11/30/2015
                                                                           RELEASE IN FULL




         Like many women in Washington, and a lot of men too, I read with fascination Dr. Anne-Marie
 Slaughter's article in The Atlantic about the challenges she faced in her time in government and the
 conclusions she drew from them. As a Foreign Service Officer for two decades, currently serving in a
 high-level position (Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs) and as a mother of two boys
 ages 11 and 8, I was riveted by Dr. Slaughter's description of the environment in which I work every day.
 My experience could not be more different.

          In conversation after conversation, my colleagues and I puzzled over why Dr. Slaughter's
 experience had been so different from ours. Was it because she had tasted another life, that of academia
 where she had a level of control over her life that we could not even imagine? Was it because she lived in
 a different city from her family as opposed to the more typical stress all working parents face? Was it
 because she had an internal struggle that we did not? Regardless of why our experiences differed so
 greatly, I was left thinking not only about my own experience, but about the responsibility we women
 have to create change by introducing a different environment for the younger, more junior officers- both
 male and female- whether in government or elsewhere. After a stream of my officers stopped in to tell
 me that they wished I would weigh in, I decided to add some of my thoughts and experiences to the
 conversation.

 OWN YOUR DECISIONS

          I joined the Foreign Service at the young age of 21. I was single, certain I would only do the job
 for a few years until I grew up, and never gave much thought to what it would mean for my personal life
 much less what it would mean when I became a mother a decade later. Over the years, through
 assignments to Cairo, Tel Aviv (where I met my husband), Amman (where I had son #1), Taipei (with #2
 now in tow as well), and Dubai, I never really considered another way of life. I was having too much fun
 and wanted to achieve more, reach higher, and become a leader in my field.

          Along the way, I turned down assignments that I desperately wanted but that I knew would not be
 a good fit for my family, and the same went for my husband. I took the full allotted maternity leave after
 the birth of each child and so did my husband. [I am still in disbelief that maternity leave comes out of
 sick leave. So non-parents can get seriously ill and have sick leave available, but not parents?] I
 established the unheard of practice of taking a week off upon arriving at each overseas post in order to get
 my family settled before jumping into work myself. And I have set a hard and fast time that I arrive and
 depart the office on normal days, and have made sure each of my supervisors was aware that I would be
 keeping to those hours before taking an assignment. Mobile technology and consistent selection of jobs
 that handle mainly unclassified material have enabled me to continue my work regardless of my physical
 location and late into most evenings after my kids are asleep. I am focused and efficient during working
 hours at the office and am rarely far from my blackberry when I am not at the office.

          My husband has made similar choices- regularly leaving the house while it's still dark out so that
 he can get his work done in time to do his share of the carpool duties and choosing assignments that kept
 him with the family even though it meant slower or fewer promotions. We are both honest about where
 we are when we are not at work. We are clear in our own minds that in this phase of our lives, the "work
 life balance" means work and family. Full stop. Social life is on the "nice to have" list not the mandatory
 list, we haven't seen a non-animated movie in a movie theater in a decade, we collapse from exhaustion
 most evenings by 10, watch almost no tv and do all shopping online except for groceries. Fun for us at



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773837 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773837 Date: 11/30/2015




 this point is family dinner time, walking the dog, camping as a family for a night on the weekend, reading
 together before bed, you get the idea. Everything else is work. Friends and colleagues have been
 surprised and occasionally offended when I categorically state that I do not agree to engagements on
 weekday evenings, with the exception of my monthly book club which keeps me sane.

          It was painful to turn down a dream job in Jerusalem that I once would have killed for. But I
 knew the school was an hour drive away, my kids would spend 2 hours a day on a bus and I would be
 consumed by always-urgent work. It was hard to face colleagues when I did not serve in Iraq, though I
 speak fluent Arabic and could surely have made an important contribution. And it was excruciatingly
 hard to face one of my best friends who made the choice to leave her two daughters for a year to lead a
 critical mission in Iraq. I sought other assignments where I could also serve my country, pursue my
 ambitions and continue to rise in the ranks while raising my family the way I feel most comfortable. And
 as plum jobs have sometimes gone to other officers, I have remained fundamentally confident that I have
 chosen a path that is right for me.

          So the bottom line for me is: own your decisions. Know what your own priorities are, stay true to
 them, and know that every decision has consequences. If you have made a choice that is true to your
 priorities, the consequences will be far less painful.


 NO ONE HAS IT ALL, AT LEAST NOT MOST OF THE TIME

          After I read Dr. Slaughter's article I was struck by how two-dimensional her vision of "having it
 all" had been before her Washington experiment. My experience has been much messier than a high-
 ranking job and raising a family may look from the outside. It is a work in progress every single day.
 Just as I have passed up dream jobs and professional opportunities even as I pursued my ambitions, I have
 played less of a role in my children's school, extra-curricular activities, and homework routine than I
 would like. It was hard to let my husband take our son to the doctor when he was sick and we both could
 have used some extra snuggles. And the pain of my first grader asking me why I couldn't pick him up
 every day after school "like the other mommies" was a thousand times worse than turning down my
 dream job. My kids knew by first grade that they should sign up to bring water to school parties even
 though I love to bake. I would like to have closer friends, but that would require time I simply cannot
 give. And I would love to exercise and get haircuts when I need them, but those too are luxuries that do
 not go along with the life I am leading at the moment.

           I have been incredibly gratified to see that my kids, now that they are starting to understand some
 of these choices, are (occasionally) proud to have a mom who works hard at home and in the formation
 and execution of our nation's foreign policy. But the fact is that there is no such thing as having it all at
 every moment of every day. I don't believe there is a woman - or man- on Earth who feels that they "have
 it all" at every moment of every day.


 WORK LIFE BALANCE ISN'T ONLY FOR PARENTS

         The red herring of this conversation is that it is all about kids. Yes, kids add a layer of
 unpredictability, but everyone needs work-life balance and we all have to make choices to achieve the



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773837 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773837 Date: 11/30/2015




 level of balance we seek. I speak on panels at the State Department about work-life balance and I always
 try to point out that we frame the conversation as being about family and the workplace, but that "life" is
 something different to everyone. If we are genuine in our desire to create an environment that allows
 balance, then we want everyone to have a life, whether that means running marathons, caring for aging
 parents, supporting a partner in his or her career, playing in a band, or getting a good night's sleep before
 going back to work.



 LEAD BY EXAMPLE

          It is here where I was most distressed by Dr. Slaughter's article. One of the questions that
 lingered for me after reading Dr. Slaughter's article was how her vision of herself as a feminist and the
 pace she set impacted the people on her team. We have many more choices now thanks to the generations
 before us who blazed so many trails for us. Don't we owe the women coming after us even better? If we
 wish things were different still, shouldn't we use the stature we have achieved to continue to create
 change? Do the young men and women we mentor really need us telling them whether or not they can
 "have it all", especially when that means something different to each of us?

          As someone who came up through the ranks and now leads a team of over 250 people of varying
 ages, ranks and backgrounds, I feel responsible for how my leadership impacts their lives and careers. I
 want my people to have lives so that they can make positive and optimistic contributions when they are at
 work. I want my office manager to leave early and bowl her heart out two nights a week since I know
 how hard she works at the office and at home, and that she will make up those hours up on other days. I
 want the young dad on my team to take his daughter to the doctor and the other young dad to be there
 when his wife has her ultrasound. And I want the newly-divorced young woman to get out with her
 friends and have a social life she feels good about. I want the pregnant hard-charger to feel good about
 taking her full maternity leave without a single shred of guilt.

        I went into the foreign policy profession because I wanted to make the world a better place.
 Having achieved a high rank- and hopefully I will someday achieve higher still- I feel an equal desire to
 make my own immediate world a better place by the way I lead.

 Work hard, live hard. I try every day to lead that by example, and occasionally achieve some balance.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773837 Date: 11/30/2015
