UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                           RELEASE IN FULL



  Statement on the Attack in Benghazi
  September 11,2012

  I condemn in the strongest terms the attack on our mission in Benghazi today. As we work to
  secure our personnel and facilities, we have confirmed that one of our State Department officers
  was killed. We are heartbroken by this terrible loss. Our thoughts and prayers are with his family
  and those who have suffered in this attack.

  This evening, I called Libyan President Magariaf to coordinate additional support to protect
  Americans in Libya. President Magariaf expressed his condemnation and condolences and
  pledged his government's full cooperation.

  Some have sought to justify this vicious behavior as a response to inflammatory material posted
  on the Internet. The United States deplores any intentional effort to denigrate the religious beliefs
  of others. Our commitment to religious tolerance goes back to the very beginning of our nation.
  But let me be clear: There is never any justification for violent acts of this kind.

  In light of the events of today, the United States government is working with partner countries
  around the world to protect our personnel, our missions, and American citizens worldwide.

  Statement on the Death of American Personnel in Benghazi, Libya
  September 12, 2012

  It is with profound sadness that I share the news of the death of four American personnel in
  Benghazi, Libya yesterday. Among them were United States Ambassador to Libya Chris Stevens
  and Foreign Service Information Management Officer, Sean Smith. We are still making next of
  kin notifications for the other two individuals. Our hearts go out to all their families and
  colleagues.

  A 21 year veteran of the Foreign Service, Ambassador Stevens died last night from injuries he
  sustained in the attack on our office in Benghazi.

  I had the privilege of swearing in Chris for his post in Libya only a few months ago. He spoke
  eloquently about his passion for service, for diplomacy and for the Libyan people. This
  assignment was only the latest in his more than two decades of dedication to advancing closer
  ties with the people of the Middle East and North Africa which began as a Peace Corps
  Volunteer in Morocco. As the conflict in Libya unfolded, Chris was one of the first Americans
  on the ground in Benghazi. He risked his own life to lend the Libyan people a helping hand to
  build the foundation for a new, free nation. He spent every day since helping to finish the work
  that he started. Chris was committed to advancing America's values and interests, even when
  that meant putting himself in danger.

   Sean Smith was a husband and a father of two, who joined the Department ten years ago. Like



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




   Chris, Sean was one of our best. Prior to arriving in Benghazi, he served in Baghdad, Pretoria,
   Montreal, and most recently The Hague.

   All the Americans we lost in yesterday's attacks made the ultimate sacrifice. We condemn this
   vicious and violent attack that took their lives, which they had committed to helping the Libyan
   people reach for a better future.

   America's diplomats and development experts stand on the front lines every day for our country.
   We are honored by the service of each and every one of them.

   Remarks on the Deaths of American Personnel in Benghazi, Libya
   September 12, 2012

   Yesterday, our U.S. diplomatic post in Benghazi, Libya was attacked. Heavily armed militants
   assaulted the compound and set fire to our buildings. American and Libyan security personnel
   battled the attackers together. Four Americans were killed. They included Sean Smith, a Foreign
   Service information management officer, and our Ambassador to Libya Chris Stevens. We are
   still making next of kin notifications for the other two individuals.

   This is an attack that should shock the conscience of people of all faiths around the world. We
   condemn in the strongest terms this senseless act of violence, and we send our prayers to the
   families, friends, and colleagues of those we've lost.

   All over the world, every day, America's diplomats and development experts risk their lives in
   the service of our country and our values, because they believe that the United States must be a
   force for peace and progress in the world, that these aspirations are worth striving and sacrificing
   for. Alongside our men and women in uniform, they represent the best traditions of a bold and
   generous nation.

  In the lobby of this building, the State Department, the names of those who have fallen in the line
  of duty are inscribed in marble. Our hearts break over each one. And now, because of this
  tragedy, we have new heroes to honor and more friends to mourn.

  Chris SXevens fell in love with the Middle East as a young Peace Corps volunteer teaching
  English in Morocco. He joined the Foreign Service, learned languages, won friends for America
  in distant places, and made other people's hopes his own.

  In the early days of the Libyan revolution, I asked Chris to be our envoy to the rebel opposition.
  He arrived on a cargo ship in the port of Benghazi and began building our relationships with
  Libya's revolutionaries. He risked his life to stop a tyrant, then gave his life trying to help build a
  better Libya. The world needs more Chris Stevenses. I spoke with his sister, Ann, this morning,
  and told her that he will be remembered as a hero by many nations.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




  Sean Smith was an Air Force veteran. He spent 10 years as an information management officer
  in the State Department, he was posted at The Hague, and was in Libya on a brief temporary
  assignment. He was a husband to his wife Heather, with whom I spoke this morning. He was a
  father to two young children, Samantha and Nathan. They will grow up being proud of the
  service their father gave to our country, service that took him from Pretoria to Baghdad, and
  finally to Benghazi.

  The mission that drew Chris and Sean and their colleagues to Libya is both noble and necessary,
  and we and the people of Libya honor their memory by carrying it forward. This is not easy.
  Today, many Americans are asking — indeed, I asked myself— how could this happen? How
  could this happen in a country we helped liberate, in a city we helped save from destruction?
  This question reflects just how complicated and, at times, how confounding the world can be.

  But we must be clear-eyed, even in our grief. This was an attack by a small and savage group —
  not the people or Government of Libya. Everywhere Chris and his team went in Libya, in a
  country scarred by war and tyranny, they were hailed as friends and partners. And when the
  attack came yesterday, Libyans stood and fought to defend our post. Some were wounded.
  Libyans carried Chris' body to the hospital, and they helped rescue and lead other Americans to
  safety. And last night, when I spoke with the President of Libya, he strongly condemned the
  violence and pledged every effort to protect our people and pursue those responsible.

  The friendship between our countries, borne out of shared struggle, will not be another casualty
  of this attack. A free and stable Libya is still in America's interest and security, and we will not
  turn our back on that, nor will we rest until those responsible for these attacks are found and
  brought to justice. We are working closely with the Libyan authorities to move swiftly and
  surely. We are also working with partners around the world to safeguard other American
  embassies, consulates, and citizens.

  There, will be more time later to reflect, but today, we have work to do. There is no higher
  priority than protecting our men and women wherever they serve. We are working to determine
  the precise motivations and methods of those who carried out this assault. Some have sought to
  justify this vicious behavior, along with the protest that took place at our Embassy in Cairo
  yesterday, as a response to inflammatory material posted on the internet. America's commitment
  to religious tolerance goes back to the very beginning of our nation. But let me be clear — there is
  no justification for this, none. Violence like this is no way to honor religion or faith. And as long
  as there are those who would take innocent life in the name of God, the world will never know a
  true and lasting peace.

   It is especially difficult that this happened on September 11th . It's an anniversary that means a
   great deal to all Americans. Every year on that day, we are reminded that our work is not yet      .
   finished, that the job of putting an end to violent extremism and building a safe and stable world
   continues. But September 11 th means even more than that. It is a day on which we remember




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




   thousands of American heroes, the bonds that connect all Americans, wherever we are on this
   Earth, and the values that see us through every storm. And now it is a day on which we will
   remember Sean, Chris, and their colleagues.

   May God bless them, and may God bless the thousands of Americans working in every corner of
   the world who make this country the greatest force for peace, prosperity, and progress, and a
   force that has always stood for human dignity — the greatest force the world has ever known. And
   may God continue to bless the United States of America.

   Thank you.

   Statement on the Deaths of Tyrone S. Woods and Glen A. Doherty in Benghazi, Libya
   September 13, 2012

  The attack on our diplomatic post in Benghazi, Libya on Tuesday claimed the lives of four
  Americans. Yesterday, I spoke about two: Ambassador Chris Stevens and Information
  Management Officer Sean Smith. Today, we also recognize the two security personnel who died
  helping protect their colleagues. Tyrone S. Woods and Glen A. Doherty were both decorated
  military veterans who served our country with honor and distinction. Our thoughts, prayers, and
  deepest gratitude are with their families and friends. Our embassies could not carry on our
  critical work around the world without the service and sacrifice of brave people like Tyrone and
  Glen.

  Tyrone's friends and colleagues called him "Rone," and they relied on his courage and skill,
  honed over two decades as a Navy SEAL. In uniform, he served multiple tours in Iraq and
  Afghanistan. Since 2010, he protected American diplomatic personnel in dangerous posts from
  Central America to the Middle East. He had the hands of a healer as well as the arm of a warrior,
  earning distinction as a registered nurse and certified paramedic. All our hearts go out to
  Tyrone's wife Dorothy and his three sons, Tyrone Jr., Hunter, and Kai, who was born just a few
  months ago.

  We also grieve for Glen Doherty, called Bub, and his family: his father Bernard, his mother
  Barbara, his brother Gregory, and his sister Kathleen. Glen was also a former Navy SEAL and an
  experienced paramedic. And he put his life on the line many times, protecting Americans in Iraq,
  Afghanistan, and other hotspots. In the end, he died the way he lived — with selfless honor and
  unstinting valor.

  We condemn the attack that took the lives of these heroes in the strongest terms, and we are
  taking additional steps to safeguard American embassies, consulates, and citizens around the
  world. This violence should shock the conscience of people of all faiths and traditions. We
  appreciate the statements of support that have poured in from across the region and beyond.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




  People of conscience and goodwill everywhere must stand together in these difficult days against
  violence, hate, and division.

  I am enormously proud of the men and women who risk their lives every day in the service of
  our country and our values. They help make the United States the greatest force for peace,
  progress, and human dignity that the world has ever known. We honor the memory of our fallen
  colleagues by continuing their work and carrying on the best traditions of a bold and generous
  nation.

  Remarks at the Opening Plenary of the U.S.-Morocco Strategic Dialogue
  September 13, 2012

  SECRETARY CLINTON: Good morning. Well, let me welcome our friends and colleagues
  from Morocco here to the Benjamin Franklin Room on the eighth floor of the State Department
  for this very important first session of the U.S.-Morocco Strategic Dialogue. Before I begin to
  address the significance of this Strategic Dialogue and the next step in our long relations with
  Morocco, I want to say a few words about the events unfolding in the world today.

  We are closely watching what is happening in Yemen and elsewhere, and we certainly hope and
  expect that there will be steps taken to avoid violence and prevent the escalation of protests into
  violence.

  I also want to take a moment to address the video circulating on the Internet that has led to these
  protests in a number of countries. Let me state very clearly — and I hope it is obvious — that the
  United States Government had absolutely nothing to do with this video. We absolutely reject its
  content and message. America's commitment to religious tolerance goes back to the very
  beginning of our nation. And as you know, we are home to people of all religions, many of
  whom came to this country seeking the right to exercise their own religion, including, of course,
  millions of Muslims. And we have the greatest respect for people of faith.

  To us, to me personally, this video is disgusting and reprehensible. It appears to have a deeply
  cynical purpose: to denigrate a great religion and to provoke rage. But as I said yesterday, there
  is no justification, none at all, for responding to this video with violence. We condemn the
  violence that has resulted in the strongest terms, and we greatly appreciate that many Muslims in
  the United States and around the world have spoken out on this issue.

   Violence, we believe, has no place in religion and is no way to honor religion. Islam, like other
   religions, respects the fundamental dignity of human beings, and it is a violation of that
   fundamental dignity to wage attacks on innocents. As long as there are those who are willing to
   shed blood and take innocent life in the name of religion, the name of God, the world will never
   know a true and lasting peace. It is especially wrong for violence to be directed against
   diplomatic missions. These are places whose very purpose is peaceful: to promote better
   understanding across countries and cultures. All governments have a responsibility to protect


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




   those spaces and people, because to attack an embassy is to attack the idea that we can work
   together to build understanding and a better future.

   Now, I know it is hard for some people to understand why the United States cannot or does not
   just prevent these kinds of reprehensible videos from ever seeing the light of day. Now, I would
   note that in today's world with today's technologies, that is impossible. But even if it were
   possible, our country does have a long tradition of free expression which is enshrined in our
   Constitution and our law, and we do not stop individual citizens from expressing their views no
   matter how distasteful they may be.

   There are, of course, different views around the world about the outer limits of free speech and
   free expression, but there should be no debate about the simple proposition that violence in
   response to speech is not acceptable. We all — whether we are leaders in government, leaders in
   civil society or religious leaders — must draw the line at violence. And any responsible leader
   should be standing up now and drawing that line.

   I wanted to begin with this statement, because, as our Moroccan friends and all of you know, this
   has been a difficult week at the State Department. I very much appreciate, Minister, the
   condolences your government expressed to our Embassy in Rabat. And even though that tragedy
   happened far away in Benghazi, we found a reminder of the deep bounds that connect Morocco
   to the United States. It was in the High Atlas Mountains of Morocco that one of the Americans
   we lost this week, Ambassador Chris Stevens, fell in love with the region when he served as a
   Peace Corps volunteer there. That experience set him on a decades-long career of service. So in
   the memory of fallen friends and colleagues, let us remind ourselves of the many ways in which
   not just our governments but the people of our two nations have worked together to build a better
   future.

   In many ways, the United States looks to Morocco to be a leader and a model. His Majesty King
   Mohammed deserves great credit for the work you've undertaken. In fact, after my visit to Rabat
   earlier this year, I told my team: "We need to start a Strategic Dialogue with Morocco." No
   country has been a friend of the United States longer than Morocco. You were the first nation to
   recognize us back in 1777. But we're not satisfied with simply having a friendship that is
   longstanding. We want one that is dynamic, growing, looking toward the future. So let me
   highlight a few of the areas we should focus on today.

  On political reform, we have all seen remarkable changes taking place across North Africa and
  the Middle East. I commend Morocco and your government for your efforts to stay ahead of
  these changes by holding free and fair elections, empowering the elected parliament, taking other
  steps to ensure that the government reflects the will of the people. Today, our political working
  group will discuss how the United States can continue to support your efforts to translate
  commitments into actions. Because as we all know, democracy, real reform, require that people
  themselves feel the changes in their everyday lives: the courts reformed, the government more




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




 open and transparent, universal human rights of all Moroccans — men and women alike —
 respected.

 I'm especially pleased by Morocco's commitments to take on the deeply troubling problem of
 child marriage. We know that child brides are less likely to get an education, more likely to face
 life-threatening problems, particularly around child birth and delivery, which not only
 shortchanges them but can even rob them and their communities of their lives and talents. So we
 want to encourage the government and civil society to continue their important work together on
 this issue.

 With regard to the Western Sahara, the United States continues to support efforts to find a
 peaceful, sustainable, mutually agreed-upon solution. U.S. policy toward the Western Sahara has
 remained consistent for many years. We have made clear that Morocco's autonomy plan is
 serious, realistic, and credible, and that it represents a potential approach that could satisfy the
 aspirations of the people in the Western Sahara to run their own affairs in peace and dignity. We
 continue to support the negotiations carried out by the United Nations and hope parties can work
 toward resolution.

  With respect to the economy, our second working group will focus on what more can be done to
  deliver tangible economic benefits. Morocco's economy is relatively healthy, but you face the
  same problem that is now endemic across the world — unemployment is still too high, especially
  among young people.

  That's why the United States is providing $1.5 million to support an effort to attract foreign
  investors, foster local economic development, and combat corruption across the region. And I'm
  pleased to announce that later this year we will hold a Morocco business development
  conference here in Washington to connect businesses from both countries.

  Today, we should discuss ways to build on all of these efforts by increasing bilateral trade, a
  particular goal of mine since so much trade from Morocco goes to Europe. I'd like to increase
  the amount of trade coming to the United States, and also to improve economic integration
  across North Africa, which could greatly behefit Morocco because of Morocco's stability and
  Morocco's very strong economic foundation. The greater integration there is, the greater the
  benefits for Moroccans.

  Third, the attack in Benghazi this week reminds us that security remains a vital issue. Through
  our work together on the Global Counterterrorism Task Force, the United States and Morocco
  already share crucial information and best practices, and I thank Morocco for hosting a Global
  Counterterrorism Task Force workshop on threats in the South Atlantic next month.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




   We are also collaborating through USAID, the Peace Corps, and other agencies to help provide
   Moroccan youth with alternatives to criminal and extremist organizations. And so we are
   partnering to help strengthen Morocco's criminal justice system and law enforcement.

   There will be a lot to discuss in the meeting today. And let me add, the United States greatly
   appreciates the constructive role Morocco is playing on the UN Security Council, especially your
   support for the effort to end the violence and bloodshed in Syria and help to usher in a new
   democratic future for that country. I commend Morocco for offering to host the next ministerial
   meeting of the Friends of the Syrian People, and we look forward to continuing to work closely
   together as close partners even after your term on the Security Council has ended.

  Finally, our education and cultural ties are reason for much celebration. This year marks the 30th
  anniversary of our official program to facilitate academic exchanges and other bonds between us.
  There are more than 5,000 Moroccan alumni of these programs. Two are with us today — Dr.
  Benjelloun and Dr. Ouaouicha — and we thank them. But among all our work on this front, from
  preserving Morocco's historic sites to empowering youth, there's one area I particularly hope we
  can focus on today and receive your advice and counsel — namely, interfaith dialogue.

  In these tense and turbulent times, it's more important than ever for people of different faiths to
  exchange ideas, to build understanding, to promote religious tolerance. It's one of the great
  challenges of the 21' century, and it's one that we must address together.

  So we have a lot of work to do, Minister, but our friendship runs long and deep, and as the treaty
  our nations signed in 1786 says, and I quote, "Trusting in God, it will remain permanent." I'm
  confident that we will continue to solve problems and produce results that make our nations
  stronger, more peaceful, more secure, more prosperous, and also contribute to doing the same for
  the world.

  So again, let me welcome you, Minister. It's been a great pleasure for me to get to know you, to
  work with you, to be your colleague bilaterally, regionally, and globally, and also welcome your
  distinguished delegation.

  Thank you. (Applause.)

  Remarks at Reception Marking Eid ul-Fitr
  September 13, 2012

  SECRETARY CLINTON: Good evening, and although I am many weeks overdue in saying it:
  Eid Mubarak. No matter how belated we are honoring Eid and the end of Ramadan, this is a
  cherished tradition here at the State Department. And I would like to thank all of you for being
  here, including the many members of the Diplomatic Corps.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




 Tonight, our gathering is more somber than any of us would like. This comes during sad and
 difficult days for the State Department family. We lost four Americans. They were good and
 brave men. They were committed to the cause of building a brighter future for the people of
 Libya. And we condemn the violence in the strongest terms, the violence against our posts in
 Benghazi, in Egypt, and now in Yemen.

 The Libyan ambassador is with us tonight, and I want to take a moment to thank him for the
 support that his government and the Libyan peosple have shown to the United States in this
 tragedy, particularly the outpouring of feelings of grief and loss because of the killing of our
 ambassador.

 Ambassador Aujali, would you mind saying a few words?

 AMBASSADOR AUJALI: [redacted]

 SECRETARY CLINTON: Thank you very much, Ambassador. I know that that was a very
 personal loss for you, as it was for me. I'm the one who sent Chris to Benghazi during the
 revolution to show support and be able to advise our government, about what we could do to
 bring freedom and democracy and opportunity to the people of Libya.

  Religious freedom and religious tolerance are essential to the stability of any nation, any people.
  Hatred and violence in the name of religion only poison the well. All people of faith and good
  will know that the actions of a small and savage group in Benghazi do not honor religion or God
  in any way. Nor do they speak for the more than one billion Muslims around the world, many of
  whom have shown an outpouring of support during this time.

  Unfortunately, however, over the last 24 hours, we have also seen violence spread elsewhere.
  Some seek to justify this behavior as a response to inflammatory, despicable material posted on
  the interne. As I said earlier today, the United States rejects both the content and the message of
  that video. The United States deplores any intentional effort to denigrate the religious beliefs of
  others. At our meeting earlier today, my colleague, the foreign minister of Morocco, said that all
  prophets should be respected because they are all symbols of our humanity, for all humanity.

  But both of us were crystal clear in this paramount message: There is never any justification for
  violent acts of this kind. And we look to leaders around the world to stand up and speak out
  against violence, and to take steps to protect diplomatic missions from attack.

  Think about it. When Christians are subject to insults to their faith, and that certainly happens,
  we expect them not to resort to violence. When Hindus or Buddhists are subjected to insults to
  their faiths, and that also certainly happens, we expect them not to resort to violence. The same
  goes for all faiths, including Islam.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




   When all of us who are people of faith — and I am one — feel the pain of insults, of
   misunderstanding, of denigration to what we cherish, we must expect ourselves and others not to
   resort to violence. That is a universal standard and expectation, and it is everyone's obligation to
   meet that, so that we make no differences, we expect no less of ourselves than we expect of
   others. You cannot respond to offensive speech with violence without begetting more violence.

   And I so strongly believe that the great religions of the world are stronger than any insults. They
   have withstood offense for centuries. Refraining from violence, then, is not a sign of weakness in
   one's faith; it is absolutely the opposite, a sign that one's faith is unshakable.

  So tonight, we must come together and recommit ourselves to working toward a future marked
  by understanding and acceptance rather than distrust, hatred, and fear. We can pledge that
  whenever one person speaks out in ignorance and bigotry, ten voices will answer. They will
  answer resoundingly against the offense and the insult, answering ignorance with enlightenment,
  answering hatred with understanding, answering darkness with light; that if one person commits
  a violent act in the name of religion, millions will stand up and condemn it out of strength.

  In times like these, it can be easy to despair that some differences are irreconcilable, some
  mountains too steep to climb; we will therefore never reach the level of understanding and
  peacefulness that we seek, and which I believe the great religions of the world call us to pursue.
  But that's not what I believe, and I don't think it's what you believe either here tonight. Part of
  what makes our country so special is we keep trying. We keep working. We keep investing in
  our future. We keep supporting the next generation, believing that young people can keep us
  moving forward in a positive direction.

  So tonight I think it's important that we talk not just about that better tomorrow that we all seek,
  but also about some of the things — the real, practical, tangible things — that young people are
  doing to help shape that better future.

  Two years ago in this room, at our Eid reception, we launched a program called Generation
  Change to lead a grassroots agenda of positive engagement with Muslim communities. And I
  asked the young Muslim leaders in the audience that night to be our unofficial ambassadors, to
  help build personal connections, seek out partners in other countries. And I can report to you
  tonight they did not disappoint. In a few minutes, you're going to meet some of these young
  leaders, each with a powerful story to tell.

  The Generation Change network that started in this room now circles the globe. We are building
  an international alliance of young people who want to drive change in their own communities.
  They act as mentors, spark respectful debates, simply offer words of encouragement when
  needed. But most importantly, they inspire others to keep expanding the circle of mutual
  understanding and respect, one person at a time.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




  Even as we work to spread tolerance more broadly, we also are working to deepen our
  appreciation for the experiences of others. Our 2012 Hours Against Hate initiative encourages
  young people to put themselves in another person's shoes through service projects. So far, young
  people from all over the world have pledged thousands of volunteer hours to help people from a
  different background, to see them as a fellow human being, not a stereotype, not a caricature, but
  another real live person — people who don't look like you, live like you, pray like you, but with
  whom we will share this planet. And therefore, we have work to do.

  People of faith and conscience are called to be the leaders of tolerance. In my tradition, like all
  traditions, we are expected to love one another. And together, we have to translate that into better
  understanding and cooperation. I'm particularly pleased that the young people you will hear from
  tonight are really setting an example, not only for young people elsewhere in the world but,
  frankly, for us who are older as well.

  Let me now call to the stage someone who has been a tremendous assistance to me in these
  efforts. Farah Pandith is the Department's first Special Representative to Muslim Communities.
  And from the beginning, she has made reaching out to young people and civil society her top
  priority. Farah will introduce you to three young leaders who I am very proud of.

  Remarks at the Transfer of Remains Ceremony to Honor Those Lost in Attacks in Benghazi, Libya
  September 14, 2012

  SECRETARY CLINTON: Thank you very much, Chaplain. Mr. President, Mr. Vice President,
  Secretary Panetta, Ambassador Rice, Secretary Powell and Mrs. Powell, family members of the
  four patriots and heroes we bring home, members of the State Department family, ladies and
  gentlemen, today we bring home four Americans who gave their lives for our country and our
  values. To the families of our fallen colleagues, I offer our most heartfelt condolences and
  deepest gratitude.

  Sean Smith joined the State Department after six years in the Air Force. He was respected as an
  expert on technology by colleagues in Pretoria, Baghdad, Montreal, and The Hague. He enrolled
  in correspondence courses at Penn State and had high hopes for the future. Sean leaves behind a
  loving wife Heather, two young children, Samantha and Nathan, and scores of grieving family,
  friends, and colleagues. And that's just in this world. Because online in the virtual worlds that
  Sean helped create, he is also being mourned by countless competitors, collaborators, and garners
  who shared his passion.

  Tyrone Woods, known to most as Rone, spent two decades as a Navy SEAL, serving multiple
  tours in Iraq and Afghanistan. Since 2010, he protected American diplomatic personnel in
  dangerous posts from Central America to the Middle East. He had the hands of a healer as well
  as the arms of a warrior, earning distinction as a registered nurse and certified paramedic. Our
  hearts go out to Tyrone's wife Dorothy, and his three sons Tyrone, Jr., Hunter, and Kai, born just
  a few months ago, along with his grieving family, friends, and colleagues.



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




  Glen Doherty, who went by Bub, was also a former SEAL and an experienced paramedic. He too
  died as he lived, serving his country and protecting his colleagues. Glen deployed to some of the
  most dangerous places on Earth, including Iraq and Afghanistan, always putting his life on the
  line to safeguard other Americans. Our thoughts and prayers are with Glen's father Bernard, his
  mother Barbara, his brother Gregory, his sister Kathleen, and their grieving families, friends, and
  colleagues.

  I was honored to know Ambassador Chris Stevens. I want to thank his parents and siblings, who
  are here today, for sharing Chris with us and with our country. What a wonderful gift you gave
  us. Over his distinguished career in the Foreign Service, Chris won friends for the United States
  in far-flung places. He made those people's hopes his own. During the revolution in Libya, he
  risked his life to help protect the Libyan people from a tyrant, and he gave his life helping them
  build a better country.

  People loved to work with Chris. And as he rose through the ranks, they loved to work for Chris.
  He was known not only for his courage but for his smile — goofy but contagious — for his sense
  of fun and that California cool.

  In the days since the attack, so many Libyans — including the Ambassador from Libya to the
  United States, who is with us today — have expressed their sorrow and solidarity. One young
  woman, her head covered and her eyes haunted with sadness, held up a handwritten sign that said
  "Thugs and killers don't represent Benghazi nor Islam." The President of the Palestinian
  Authority, who worked closely with Chris when he served in Jerusalem, sent me a letter
  remembering his energy and integrity, and deploring — and I quote — "an act of ugly terror."
  Many others from across the Middle East and North Africa have offered similar sentiments.

  This has been a difficult week for the State Department and for our country. We've seen the
  heavy assault on our post in Benghazi that took the lives of those brave men. We've seen rage
  and violence directed at American embassies over an awful internet video that we had nothing to.
  do with. It is hard for the American people to make sense of that because it is senseless, and it is
  totally unacceptable.

  The people of Egypt, Libya, Yemen, and Tunisia did not trade the tyranny of a dictator for the
  tyranny of a mob. Reasonable people and responsible leaders in these countries need to do
  everything they can to restore security and hold accountable those behind these violent acts. And
  we will, under the President's leadership, keep taking steps to protect our personnel around the
  world.

  There will be more difficult days ahead, but it is important that we don't lose sight of the
  fundamental fact that America must keep leading the world. We owe it to those four men to
  continue the long, hard work of diplomacy. I am enormously proud of the men and women of the
  State Department. I'm proud of all those across our government, civilian and military alike, who




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




 represent America abroad. They help make the United States the greatest force for peace,
 progress, and human dignity the world has ever known. If the last few days teach us anything, let
 it be this: That this work and the men and women who risk their lives to do it are at the heart of
 what makes America great and good.

 So we will wipe away our tears, stiffen our spines, and face the future undaunted. And we will
 do it together, protecting and helping one another, just like Sean, Tyrone, Glen, and Chris always
 did. May God bless them and grant their families peace and solace, and may God continue to
 bless the United States of America.

 And now, let me have the great honor of introducing someone who came to the State Department
 earlier this week to grieve with us. He well understands and values the work that these men were
 doing for our country. The President of the United States.

 Remarks With Mexican Secretary of Foreign Relations Patricia Espinosa After Their
 Meeting
 September 18, 2012

  SECRETARY CLINTON: Good afternoon, everyone. And it is such a pleasure for me to
  welcome my friend and colleague, Secretary Espinosa, along with a very distinguished
  delegation of officials from the Mexican Government for this continuation of consultation at the
  highest levels of each of our governments.

  Before I turn to the matters discussed today, let me give a brief update on the ongoing U.S.
  response to the protests in the Middle East and elsewhere. I'm sure as you know already, we are
  taking aggressive steps to protect our staffs in embassies and consulates worldwide. That
  includes reviewing our security posture at every post and augmenting it where necessary. And
  we are working closely with the Libyan Government in our efforts to bring to justice those who
  murdered our four American colleagues in Benghazi.

  The FBI is now in Tripoli to join the investigation with Libyan officials, and there is nothing
  more important to us than ensuring the safety of our American representatives worldwide. At the
  same time, as I have said to State Department employees, the incidents of the past week highlight
  how important our work is. The United States must and will remain strongly engaged in the
  world. Our men and women risk their lives in service to our country and our values, because they
  know that the United States must be a force for peace and progress. That is worth striving and
  sacrificing for, and nothing that happened last week changes this fundamental fact.

  Now, turning to our friends and partners in Mexico, we are always pleased to have a chance to
  discuss matters of mutual interest and concern between us. Mexico is one of our closest friends
  as well as partner on dozens of critical issues. So we talk about every kind of issue you can
  imagine, from education and healthcare to poverty alleviation to the environment. But today, we
  focused on a top priority for us both — security.



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




   We just co-chaired the fourth meeting of the U.S.-Mexico Merida High-Level Consultative
   Group. This is the last one we will hold during the Calderon Administration. And I want to offer
   my personal appreciation to President Calderon and to Foreign Secretary Espinosa for their
   leadership and commitment to this partnership and to all on both sides of the border in our
   governments who have been deeply engaged and committed to it. The Merida Initiative
   represents an unprecedented level of security cooperation between Mexico and the United States.

   As our countries continue to deal with the serious challenge of transnational criminal
   organizations, including drug traffickers, illegal arms traffickers, money launderers, and violent
   gangs that threaten people on both sides of the border, we well know there is no quick and easy
   way to stop these criminals and bring them to justice. But nevertheless, during the past now
   nearly four years, our countries have collaborated to an extraordinary and unprecedented degree.
   We have brought together policy makers and experts from across our governments and societies
   who have worked hand in hand to keep our people safe. And I think the habits of cooperation we
   have built are among our most important achievements, and we will rely on them for a long time
   to come. -

  Today, our delegations reviewed the gains we've made on key priorities, including improving
  law enforcement coordination, reducing the demand for drugs, modernizing our border
  infrastructure, strengthening the rule of law, and building more resilient and empowered
  communities. We also discussed the lessons we've learned and the work that lies ahead in these
  and other areas, which our joint statement will reflect. I want to underscore how important our
  security relationship with Mexico is to the United States.

  The Government of Mexico and the Mexican people have faced the threat posed by these
  criminals with courage and resolve, and we remain committed to doing everything we can to
  support Mexico as it continues to work to bring those criminals to justice. This is a transnational
  problem, and it calls for a transnational solution, and the United States believes this is a matter of
  shared responsibility. That was the first message I brought as Secretary of State when I came to
  Mexico, and it continues to be the hallmark of our efforts together. Making sure our people are
  safe and our neighbors are safe is of the utmost importance to us.

  Now, our two countries share many other priorities, and one of them, empowering women and
  girls, was also addressed today. We took the opportunity, the Foreign Secretary and I, to sign a
  Memorandum of Understanding between our countries to work together to advance gender
  equality, empower girls and women, promote their human rights, and enhance their security.

  So again, Secretary Espinosa, let me thank you for years of work and effort, for our productive
  conversations in many places around the world and again today, and for being such a valuable
  colleague and partner. The United States deeply, deeply values our relationship with Mexico and
  the ties of family and friendship that connect so many millions of our people.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




 And we look forward to the future. We believe strongly that presidential administrations may
 change, elections will come and go, but we have established a firm foundation for cooperation
 that has already benefited both our countries and which will continue to benefit both of our
 countries for many years ahead. So thank you very much.

 MS. NULAND: We'll take (inaudible), Margaret Brennan, CBS News.

 QUESTION: Madam Secretary, thanks for your time. Are you any closer to finding who killed
 Ambassador Chris Stevens? Libya's President says this attack was planned for months. Are you
 confident he's wrong and that security measures were appropriate? And will you leave justice to
 the Libyans?

  SECRETARY CLINTON: As I said at the outset, we are taking aggressive steps to protect our
  people and our consulates and embassies around the world. We are reviewing our security
  posture at every post and working with host governments to be sure they know what our security
  needs are wherever necessary. We are also working closely with the Libyan Government to bring
  the perpetrators to justice so that we can be assured that we have found who murdered our four.
  colleagues and under what circumstances. As I said, the FBI has joined the investigation inside
  Libya, and we will not rest until the people who orchestrated this attack are found and punished.

  It is also important to look at this strategically and understand what is going on across the region.
  In a number of places where protests have turned violent, we are seeing the hand of extremists
  who are trying to exploit people's inflamed passions for their own agendas. But overwhelmingly,
  we have found that the people of Egypt, of Libya, of Yemen and Tunisia are not prepared to
  trade the tyranny of a dictator for the tyranny of a mob. They want to turn their attention to the
  future to provide better opportunities for themselves and their children, and they want a strong
  partnership with the United States and the American people based on mutual interests and mutual
  respect.

  This is part of a larger debate that is going on inside these societies. In Libya, for example, in
  their first free elections, moderates were successful at the polls. But look, there are extremists in
  all of these societies and on the outside who are working to take advantage of broad outrage in
  order to incite violence and specifically incite violence against Americans and American
  facilities.

  And as I have said to many of the leaders I have spoken to over the past week, these extremist
  efforts are a threat to the people of the societies and the governments of those societies as well as
  to the region and the United States. And I think it's important at this moment for leaders to put
  themselves on the right side of this debate — to speak out clearly and unequivocally against
  violence, whoever incites it or conducts it.

  And in a struggle like this, there can be no doubt where the United States must stand. We support
  those who are fighting for the same values and rights that we believe in — in democracy, in


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




   freedom, in universal rights for men and women, for justice and accountability. And I want to
   underscore that the United States will continue to work with partners and allies in the region and
   around the world to help bring security to these nations so that the promise of the revolutions that
   they experienced can be realized.

   And finally, on your specific point about Benghazi, we obviously never talk publicly about
   security at any of our missions for obvious reasons. But that said, let me assure you that our
   security in Benghazi included a unit of host government security forces, as well as a local guard
   force of the kind that we rely on in many places around the world. In addition to the security
   outside the compound, we relied on a wall and a robust security presence inside the compound.
   And with all of our missions overseas, in advance of September 11th, as is done every year, we
   did an evaluation on threat streams. And the Office of the Director of National Intelligence has
   said we had no actionable intelligence that an attack on our post in Benghazi was planned or
   imminent.


   But let me state the obvious again. Our diplomats engage in dangerous work, and it's the nature
   of diplomacy in fragile societies and conflict zones to be aware of the necessity for security but
   to also continue the important diplomatic work that has to go on. There is risk inherent in what
   we do and what these brave men and women representing the United States are up against every
   single day, and we do our very best to limit that risk by ensuring that our security protocols
   reflect the environments in which diplomats work and the threats that they are presented with.

  Thank you.

  Remarks With Indonesian Foreign Minister Raden Mohammad Marty Muliana
  Natalegawa After Their Meeting
  September 20, 2012

  SECRETARY CLINTON: Good afternoon, everyone. And it's such a pleasure, as always, to
  welcome the Indonesian Foreign Minister, and I believe the largest delegation that has ever come
  from Indonesia, for the purpose of our third meeting of the U.S.-Indonesia Joint Commission.

  This commission is the result of a vision by our two presidents for a comprehensive partnership,
  and the agreement to that effect was signed in 2010. Thanks to this partnership, the United States
  and Indonesia are working more closely than ever on a range of issues from global security to
  clean energy and climate to regional trade and commerce.

  And today, Marty and I had the chance to take stock of where our teams have come in the time
  of the last year, because we had our meeting in Bali a year ago. And I must say, I was very
  impressed. We covered a great deal today.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




 But before I start, I'd like to say a few words about the protests in several countries around the
 world. We have condemned in the strongest possible terms the violence that has erupted from
 these protests. And as I have said, the video that sparked these protests is disgusting and
 reprehensible, and the United States Government, of course, had absolutely nothing to do with it.

 But there is no justification for violence, and I want to thank the Foreign Minister and his
 government for speaking out against violence. We have to look to reasonable people and
 responsible leaders everywhere to stand up to extremists who would seek to take advantage of
 this moment to commit violent acts against embassies and their fellow countrymen.

 Today's meetings have highlighted the strong foundation that we have built together. And one of
 our most important concerns is promoting peace and stability in the Asia Pacific. Today, I'm
 announcing that the Obama Administration has informed Congress of the potential sale of eight
 A1-I-64D Apache Longbow helicopters to the Indonesian Government. This agreement will
 strengthen our comprehensive partnership and help enhance security across the region.


 On growth and prosperity, we are increasing our trade relationship that topped $26 billion last
 year. Investments in transportation, energy, and infrastructure are creating jobs and supporting
 economic growth in both countries. For example, the deal between Lion Air and Boeing alone
 represents $21 billion in trade over the next decade. Indonesia's Government has announced half
 a trillion dollars in infrastructure improvements, and we recently signed a memorandum of
 understanding to make it easier for American companies to bid on these projects.

  And yesterday, we signed an agreement for implementing our Millennium Challenge
  Corporation Compact with Indonesia. Over the next five years, the United States will invest $600
  million in clean energy development, child health and nutrition programs, and efforts to help
  make Indonesia's Government more transparent and open.

  The United States is also looking forward to Indonesia hosting APEC in 2013, and we are
  confident that Indonesia will come to this role with a commitment to promote greater economic
  integration across the Asia Pacific.

  Both the Foreign Minister and I believe that strong education is essential to compete in a modern
  global economy. That's why the United States has expanded the Fulbright Program and
  supported partnerships between dozens of American and Indonesian universities. Academic
  exchanges between our countries are up and applications from Indonesian students to visit the
  United States have increased by one third. USAID has recently expanded its basic education
  program to provide $83 million for teacher training and literacy programs for young children.
  And we're providing $20 in scholarship funding for Indonesian graduate students.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




  I also thanked the Minister for Indonesia's leadership in ASEAN. The Foreign Minister's
  personal leadership has helped lay the groundwork for diplomacy between ASEAN and China as
  it relates to the South China Sea. And we continue to support ASEAN's six-point principles,
  which we believe will help reduce tensions and pave the way for a comprehensive code of
  conduct for addressing disputes without threats, coercion, or use of force.


  Finally, Indonesia and the United States have stood together on a range of global challenges,
  from democratic reform in Burma to combating climate change, to working to end the violence
  in Syria. We are also coordinating efforts to further develop south-south and triangular
  cooperation, such as enhancing disaster preparedness in Burma and convening a conference on
  women's empowerment.

  We believe that as the second and third-largest democracies in the world, the United States and
  Indonesia have a special responsibility to promote democracy and human rights. And for the last
  four years, Indonesia has hosted the Bali Democracy Forum to promote peaceful, democratic
  transitions through example and open dialogue. Last year, more than 80 countries attended. And
  once again, the United States will be sending a high-level delegation.


  So, Minister, thank you for everything. Thank you for the great partnership we've had between
  us and between our countries.

  MS. NULAND: We'll take two questions today, we'll start with Ros Jordan of Al Jazeera
  English.

  QUESTION: Thank you, Madam Secretary, Mr. Foreign Minister. Madam Secretary, my
  question is about the ongoing investigation into last week's attack at the consulate in Benghazi.
  You are meeting this afternoon with members of Congress to discuss the progress and the
  concerns that they understandably have. First, there is the federal mandate to establish an
  accountability review board. Have you done so? Who would you like to see chair it? Are there
  certain questions that you desperately want to have answered in order to safeguard the safety of
  Foreign Service Officers around the world?

  And related to this, given the political instability and the successes of the past year and a half, are
  you satisfied that in light of those political changes, enough was done to protect those working in
  the Middle East and North Africa? And then finally — and this is perhaps going into the area of
  rumor and speculation — but there is at least one report suggesting that Ambassador Stevens felt
  that he was on a, quote, "al-Qaida hit list." Is this a scurrilous rumor? Is this gallows humor
  when one is working in a period of difficulty and great challenge, or is there something more to
  what he allegedly — and I stress that word — said?




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




  SECRETARY CLINTON: Well, first, let me say I'm looking forward to the opportunity to go
  up to the Congress today. I will be briefing in two separate sessions, the House and the Senate, in
  a classified setting, along with my interagency -colleagues, as we continue to work together, and
  with governments around the world, to ensure that our people and our facilities are safe. I will be
  joined today by the Director of National Intelligence, General Clapper, by the Deputy Secretary
  of Defense, Ash Carter, by the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Sandy Winnefeld,
  along with experts from the FBI, the State Department, and elsewhere in the government.

  Now, I anticipate that this briefing will cover our security posture before and during the events,
  and the steps we have taken since to do everything we can with host governments to protect our
  people and our embassies and consulates. The Director of National Intelligence will speak to the
  intelligence issues surrounding these events in Libya. Deputy Secretary Carter will brief on the
  superb support we have had from the U.S. military in the wake of these events, and we are at the
  very early stages of an FBI investigation. The team from the FBI reached Libya earlier this week.
  And I will advise Congress also that I am launching an accountability review board that will be
  chaired by Ambassador Thomas Pickering.

  I will also talk about the importance of the broader relationships with these countries in light of
  the events of the past days. There are obviously very real challenges in these new democracies,
  these fragile societies, but as I said last week, the vast majority of the people in these countries
  did not throw off the tyranny of a dictator to trade it for the tyranny of a mob. And we are
  concerned first and foremost with our own people and facilities, but we are concerned about the
  internal security in these countries because ultimately, that puts at risk the men, women, and
  children of these societies on a daily ongoing basis if actions are not taken to try to restore
  security and civil order.

  And let me just conclude by saying that there can be no doubt where the United States stands.
  We continue to support those who are fighting for universal values — values that we see at work
  in Indonesia — the third largest democracy in the world. We believe that these values of universal
  rights, of justice and accountability, of democracy, are there for every person regardless of where
  that person might live. So I will look forward to having a chance to talk with members of
  Congress.

  As to your final question, I have absolutely no information or reason to believe that there's any
  basis for that.

  QUESTION: Thank you.

  MS. NULAND: Last question. Victoria Sidjabat from Tempo Magazine, please.

  QUESTION: Yes. Madam, thank you. My question is: Starting today, U.S. Embassy and
  Consulate are closed in Indonesia as the Muslim movie become wild fireball, which could be




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




   designed as a weapon to attack U.S. by raising sentiment anti-U.S. from the countries which has
   Muslim majority population like Indonesia.

   Madam Clinton, how do you see this threat as on the long run? If it's continuing happen, it's —
   obviously could give impact to the implementation of (inaudible) program in Indonesia. What is
   the reason U.S. Government closed the Embassy and Consulate in Indonesia? What is your
   expectation from Indonesia Government, for my Minister Marty Natalegawa? How Indonesia
   Government respond to the closing of this Embassy and Consulate, it's starting today? Is U.S. —
   Indonesia Government has capability to protect U.S. Embassy and Consulate. So the (inaudible)
   program implemented — could be implemented successfully in Indonesia. Thank you.

  SECRETARY CLINTON: Well, let me begin by saying how grateful we are for the excellent
  cooperation we have received from the Government of Indonesia, and in particular, from the law
  enforcement and security institutions in Indonesia. We are very grateful for not only the
  cooperation and protection that has been provided to our facilities, but also to the strong
  statements condemning violence from the President, the Foreign Minister, and others.

  In consultation with the Government of Indonesia, we have temporarily, for tomorrow, closed
  our facilities. We want to be sure that law enforcement in Indonesia has the ability to do what it
  needs to do to make sure that there is no disruption of civil order and security. So we are
  cooperating completely, and we're very grateful for the strong leadership provided by Indonesia.

  FOREIGN MINISTER NATALEGAWA: Hello, (inaudible), if! may just also respond.
  Precisely as the Secretary had said, the decision by the United States Government to close
  temporarily its embassies and consulates tomorrow in Indonesia is a decision that's been made
  based on communication and conversation between the authorities in Indonesia and the United
  States as well. So in other words, it is an informed decision, a decision that is not intended to
  show any unfriendly intent on the part of anyone, but it is what it is, and it's quite some — it's the
  kind of step that governments actually carry out when situations requires it, even in our case.
  Some of our embassies abroad, when the situation requires us to have a temporary closing of the
  embassy, we do that as well. So it is something that is quite regular and something that is
  actually coordinated as well.

  But if! may just broaden the subject matter, I think as our President had said in the past,
  Indonesian Government — the Indonesian people, even, obviously cannot and would not condone
  the — any acts of violence against diplomatic premises, against diplomatic personnel, because
  that is, truly — would be a challenge to the efficient and a proper conduct of relations among
  states. So that's our point of departure.


  At the same time, of course, beyond the immediate issue of protection of the embassies, we have
  still ahead of us the challenge of how to prevent the kind of situations where we are now at in




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




 terms of the kind of incendiary and the kind of statements or, in this instance, films that cause —
 that is now we have all deplored and condemned for these kind of activities not to be repeated.
 So we have a lot of homework to work towards in the future as well.

 SECRETARY CLINTON: Thank you all very much.

 FOREIGN MINISTER NATALEGAWA: Thank you.

 Remarks With Pakistani Foreign Minister Hina Rabbani Khar Before Their Meeting
 September 21, 2012

 Good afternoon, and let me begin by welcoming Foreign Minister Khar on her first visit to
 Washington as foreign minister. We've had the opportunity to meet in Islamabad and other
 settings, but I am very pleased that we would have this chance to exchange views on our bilateral
 relationship as well as regional and global issues.

 I want to begin by addressing the events of the day and the past week. Today, we've once again
 seen protests in several cities in Pakistan. Unfortunately, some of those protests have turned
 violent and, sadly, resulted in loss of life. I want to thank the Government of Pakistan for their
 efforts to protect our Embassy in Islamabad and consulates in Lahore, Peshawar, and Karachi.

 And I want to be clear, as I have said on numerous occasions, the violence we have seen cannot
 be tolerated. There is no justification for violence. Of course, there is provocation, and we have
 certainly made clear that we do not in any way support provocation. We found the video that's at
 the core of this series of events offensive, disgusting, reprehensible.

  But that does not provide justification for violence, and therefore it is important for responsible
  leaders, indeed responsible people everywhere, to standup and speak out against violence and
  particularly against those who would exploit this difficult moment to advance their own
  extremist ideologies.

  Yesterday afternoon when I briefed the Congress, I made it clear that keeping our people
  everywhere in the world safe is our top priority. What happened in Benghazi was a terrorist
  attack, and we will not rest until we have tracked down and brought to justice the terrorists who
  murdered four Americans. And we are taking aggressive measures at all of our posts to protect
  our staffs and their families along with locally employed people who provide so many important
  contributions to the work of our missions.

  The Foreign Minister and I will have a chance to cover a full range of subjects today, and it is no
  secret that the past year and a half has been challenging for Pakistan and the United States. And
  we still have work to do to get our bilateral relationship to the point where we would like it to be,
  but we both recognize that we can achieve more when we work together on a focused agenda. So




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




  today is the latest in a series of high-level meetings. Ambassador Marc Grossman has just
  returned from consultations in Islamabad. I look forward to seeing President Zardari next week
  at the UN General Assembly. At each meeting, we are working to identify the strategic goals we
  share — and there are many — and the concrete actions we can each take to accomplish them.

  Our number one shared priority remains pursuing our joint counterterrorism objectives to ensure
  the security of American and Pakistani citizens alike. We face a common threat from a common
  enemy, and we must confront terrorism and extremism together. Earlier this month, I designated
  the Haqqani Network as a Foreign Terrorist Organization so we could make full use of every
  available legal authority to end their deadly attacks. Pakistan's parliament has called for
  expelling foreign fighters so that Pakistan's territory can be fully under control of the Pakistani
  Government and cannot be used to launch attacks against other nations.

  And the follow-through on this is challenging but necessary, and we look forward to working
  with Pakistan as they continue to address these problems. We have both pledged to support a
  secure, stable, and prosperous Afghanistan, which is vital for the security of the region. And I
  want to thank Foreign Minister Khar for Pakistan's reopening of the NATO supply lines to allow
  the movement of goods to Afghanistan.

  We will discuss the successful first meeting of the Safe Passage Working Group in Islamabad
  which brought together Afghan, Pakistani, and U.S. representatives to advance the peace process
  in Afghanistan. The Pakistani Government's public call for insurgents to come forward and talk
  with the Afghan Government was particularly important. We are ready to work together to build
  on these steps, and we will continue our discussions through bilateral consultations and the U.S.-
  Afghanistan-Pakistan Core Group.

 Now, of course, our relationship goes far beyond our shared security concerns, and today we will
 discuss the many other ways in which we work together, particularly to create economic
 opportunity for Pakistanis. Foreign Minister Khar and I agree that we need to shift our economic
 relationship from aid to trade and investment. We are working to help Pakistan attract more
 private sector investment. We hope to finalize a bilateral investment treaty soon. And we've
 created a Pakistan private investment initiative to help more of Pakistan's small and medium
 sized companies get access to capital.

 Over the past few years, we have seen Pakistan's civilian government begin to put down stronger
 roots. And if elections proceed as planned next year, it will mark the first time in Pakistan's
 history that a civilian-led government has served its full term. The United States supports
 Pakistan's economic development, and we have said many times that we want to see democracy
 succeed in Pakistan.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




 We also support Pakistan's sovereignty, but we are clear that all sovereign nations carry certain
 obligations to protect the human rights of their citizens, to control their territory, to prevent
 threats to their neighbors and the international community.

 So we know that there is still much to be done, but I can assure the people of Pakistan that the
 United States remains committed to this important relationship and we are confident we can
 continue to move forward together one step at a time to reach our shared strategic objectives.

 Thank you very much.

 Remarks With Tunisian Foreign Minister Rafik Abdessalem Before Their Meeting
 September 21, 2012

 SECRETARY CLINTON: Good morning. I am pleased to welcome the Foreign Minister from
 Tunisia. I'm looking forward to our meeting. We obviously have a great deal to discuss, and I
 want to thank the Foreign Minister and the Government of Tunisia for their efforts over the last
 week to help secure our Embassy and the American Cooperative School of Tunis following the
 violent assaults of last Friday.

 We are monitoring events closely today. There is no higher priority for President Obama and
 myself than the safety of our people. We've taken a number of steps around the world to
 augment security and to protect our personnel at diplomatic posts. And we are working closely
 with host governments in this effort.

 As I have said before and as is embodied in the Vienna Convention and other international
 agreements, all governments have the duty, the solemn duty, to defend diplomatic missions.
 They must be safe and protected places so that governments can exchange views and work on
 many important issues, and leaders across the world must stand up and be counted in rejecting
 violence and holding violent actors accountable.

  We are working closely with the Government of Tunisia. They have assisted us in enhancing the
  security of our facilities. We've also discussed with them the imperative of bringing to justice
  those responsible for these violent attacks. And we have offered and will continue to look for
  ways that we can assist the new Government of Tunisia in ensuring the rule of law throughout
  their country, first and foremost for the people of Tunisia themselves. We look forward to
  continuing to build our new partnership with the Tunisian Government and people. Our
  relationship is built around the shared principles of all democracies — a commitment to
  nonviolence, to tolerance, and inclusivity for all people, and to upholding the rule of law.

  The Tunisian people have bravely put themselves on the road to democracy. They were the first
  of the Arab revolutions and they have made important progress in a very short period of time.
  They have worked too hard and sacrificed too much over too many years to see their progress
  hijacked or derailed by extremists with their own agenda. And those extremists, not only in



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015




  Tunisia but in too many places around the world, look for opportunities to exploit this current
  situation or other situations, and all people and leaders must stand against them.

  So as the Tunisian Government takes steps to strengthen security and protect the Tunisian people
  and economy from extremism and violent agendas, the United States stands ready to help. We
  also are working closely with Tunisia on the broader shared threat of terrorism, including from
  groups like al-Qaida and its affiliates.

  So Minister, please know the United States remains committed to supporting Tunisia as you deal
  with this current situation, as you continue your democratic transition, and we want to be with
  you as you confront challenges and help seize opportunities together for the betterment of the
  future of Tunisia.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792511 Date: 11/30/2015
