       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794254 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                       B6

From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                               Friday, April 6, 2012 6:36 PM
To:                                 Oscar Flores
Subject:                            Fw: "Syria is Obama's Srebrenica" Ginsberg On HuffPost Front Page



Pls print.


From: Mills, Cheryl D [mailto:MillsCD@state.gov]
Sent: Thursday, March 29, 2012 05:31 AM
To: H
Subject: Fw: "Syria is Obama's Srebrenica" Ginsberg On HuffPost Front Page




From: John Podesta [mailto:
Sent: Thursday, March 29, 2012 05:14 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Fw: "Syria is Obama's Srebrenica" Ginsberg On HuffPost Front Page




From: Marc Ginsberg [mailto:,
Sent: Wednesda March 28, 2012 11:12 PM
To: undi-sclose          <undi-sclose
Subject: "Syria is Obama's Srebrenica" Ginsberg On HuffPost Front Page


17;1
 Marc Ginsberg
 Former U.S. Ambassador to Morocco and White House Mid East Adviser

Syria            Is Obama's Srebrenica
Posted: 03/28/2012 5:32 pm


Back in 1992, Serb forces besieged the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo after Bosnia declared its independence. In almost four
years of urbicide, Washington uncomfortably stayed on the sidelines as Serbs inflicted unspeakable atrocities and
hardship on Sarajevo. The well documented U.S. government's paralysis boxed in any hope for a new strategy until 7,000
Muslims were executed in cold blood by Bosnian Serb forces in the refugee enclave of Srebrenica in July, 1995. It took that
unspeakable atrocity to finally shock the White House out of its self-imposed box and face the facts that its Bosnia policy
was going nowhere.

Flash forward 17 years later, and in this second year of Syria's so-called Arab Spring bloodbath it's déjà vu all over again at
thoo Penn. While Syria is not Srebrenica, there are eerie similarities in how this Obama team is hopelessly caught up in a
Bosnian-style policy vacuum circa 1995, characterized by an excessively domineering election campaign apparatus that
inexorably trumps national security considerations. That is a dangerous recipe when coupled with the absence of any long-
term strategy in Syria.

Why is the White House on such a slippery slope that it claims it is determined to avoid?

       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794254 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794254 Date: 11/30/2015




First, when the initial violence broke out in Syria in March 2011, the Administration, fresh from its Libyan involvement,
deemed Syria the equivalent of foreign policy kryptonite. "Syria is not Libya" trademarked the defensive crouch, and all of
those Administration figures crying for humanitarian involvement in Libya fell shockingly silent even as the unspeakable
violence in Syria far surpassed anything that took place in Libya. And unlike Libya, Syria was too much of a heavy lift for
an Administration that had seen much of its Middle East policies shredded by events that always seemed to outmaneuver
good intentions.

The occasional Administration condemnation of Assad's shocking ruthlessness from the President or Secretary of State
was inadequately backed up by biting sanctions or efforts to mobilize international pressure on Assad. And Assad and his
cronies cunningly responded with empty promises to reform as cover to escalate the crackdown.

Second, two months into the spreading revolt, and as civilian casualties mounted, the White House fell into a policy trap
demanding that Assad either commence reforms or "go." Assad had no intention of doing either, but the Obama team kept
telegraphing a preference for "the devil it knows."

Assad read those tea leaves all too well. He interpreted our self-declared "preference" for the known devil as a license to
escalate the violence against Syria's civilians knowing that Washington had short-leashed itself against any tangible
intervention against his regime.

Third, the Administration is fixated by unsubstantiated fears that the regime's swift implosion would usher in a prolonged
period of sectarian strife and the reemergence of the Muslim Brotherhood. It failed to appreciate that the longer the
atrocities continue the more bitter the desire for vengeance would become. Now, the contrary may be coming to pass --
there is real fear that the longer the brutality drags on the more likely that extremists will seize power from more moderate
Syrians -- not the other way around. Outside experts who contested this assessment were read the "do not disturb" sign
nailed to the Situation Room door.

Then in May, Obama demanded Assad once again "either lead a political transition or get out of the way"... with then a
mounting casualty count of 1,600 dead. But none of this was adequately backed up by any firm "or else": no efforts to curb
Syria's oil revenue lifeline, no laser-style targeting of businessmen supporting the regime effort to commence
humanitarian relief for Syria's civilians, no effort to delegitimize the regime by having its leadership referred to the
International Criminal court to marshal a more multilateral approach to compel Assad to choose "either/or."
All the while the White House was being deluged by reasonable policy recommendations from nationally known Syrian
experts that there were many new sanctions and policies the U.S. could have adopted throughout the summer and fall
short of direct military involvement to ratchet up the pressure on Assad, including sanctions on Syria's Central Bank,
sanctions on Lebanese banks laundering oil revenue for Assad, quiet outreach to Syria's minorities to coax them away
from the regime or political support for the Syrian opposition, just to name a few.

Fourth, as more reports of atrocities trickled out of Syria last summer, the U.S. began subcontracting U.S. policy to Turkey
in the expectation that greater coordination with Ankara would create more multilateral support against the regime. At the
time, this made eminent sense. Ankara, faced with a growing humanitarian refugee crisis on its Syrian border, and furious
with its failed investment in the Assad regime, picked up the mantle. There were bilateral talks of buffer zones and
humanitarian corridors and, perhaps non-lethal support to the nascent Free Syrian Army.

But as my able colleague Tony Badran reported in his blog in www.nowlebanon.com (confirming what I picked up during
my recent visit to Turkey a few days ago), Secretary Clinton caught her Turkish counterpart off guard during their meeting
in Washington last month. Clinton reportedlytold Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu that the Obama Administration
"preferred going through the Russians" in an attempt to achieve a political solution being shopped by the UN/Arab
League's Special Syrian Envoy Kofi Annan.
By unexpectedly dismissing Turkish/Arab League plans to create a buffer zone/or humanitarian corridor as well as
organizing and providing non-lethal support to the Free Syrian Army, everything that Turkey thought was on the table
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794254 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794254 Date: 11/30/2015




with Washington appeared to fall off of it. It seemed to matter to no one in the White House that it had just pushed our
Turkish colleagues over the cliff after we had jumped on their bandwagon.

To add insult to injury to the Turks scurrying to come up with a reasonable approach to the humanitarian catastrophe in
Syria, Mrs. Clinton inappropriately commended the recently passed UN Security Council Resolution and correlated
President's Statement on Syria along lines that the Russians had demanded. There were no deadlines, no credible threat of
action if Assad fails to embrace Annan's plan, and as a sop to the Russians, no mention of getting rid of Assad despite that
being the cornerstone of Obama's policy. It was the type of hollow UN action akin to dressing a pinstriped pig with lipstick
all the while the Russians pour arms into Assad's hands as they buy time for the regime to kill every last Syrian opposing
it.
More than any another White House in quite a while, "politics" has been the alpha dog in this Situation Room when it
comes to foreign policy (as compared to national security, where the President has excelled). As Badran stated in his piece:
"President Obama wishes to nip in the bud any possibility of this happening in an election year.
The trouble with this approach is that there is growing realization in policy circles that Obama's political staff is setting the
stage for a bigger problem for the President later on. There are more than enough reasons, aside from the atrocities, to set
aside election year considerations and immediately focus on formulating a Syria policy that will prevent Syria from
descending into chaos that only will benefit our adversaries.

Just today, the UN declared that over 9,000 Syrians have been killed. A UN Human Rights watchdog also
today declared that Assad is committing "crimes against humanity" by targeting, torturing and imprisoning children.
And, surprise, surprise, while Assad "agreed" to the Annan cease-fire peace plan on Monday, which required his forces to
withdraw from besieged cities and towns, Syrian security forces unleashedan attack on rebel-controlled areas on the
Lebanese border in direct violation of his self-declared ceasefire.
On April 1 in Ankara another "Friends of Syria" meeting will be held. Chafing from U.S. backsliding, Turkey and its Arab
League allies plan to force Washington to get off its political dime and commit to acting in unison with them -- at least
to overtly support the creation of humanitarian aid corridors -- and to put some teeth behind the Annan plan to hold
Assad's feet to the fire once and for all to stop the bloodshed. Short of boots on the ground, there is so much more that can
be done to help alleviate the human suffering, provide non-lethal support to the Free Syrian Army, and hold Assad's feet to
the fire. There have been some reports that belatedly, the Administration may be getting the message.
However, if the U.S. refuses to accede to new ideas from its "Syrian Friends" then, to coin its own phrase with respect to
Assad, "it should get out of the way."

Fortunately, our Turkish, European and Arab allies don't have the pretext of a presidential campaign to prevent them
adopting beneficial, expeditious policies against Assad which will pay a huge dividend for U.S. strategic national security
interests in the Middle East.

Follow Arnb. Marc Ginsberg on Twitter: www.twitter.comi@ambmcg



700 12th Street, N.W.
Washin ton, D.C.   20005
             (T)
             (M)




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794254 Date: 11/30/2015
