      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794479 Date: 11/30/2015

                                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL




From:                            H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                            Sunday, April 29, 2012 2:47 PM
To:                              'millscd@state.gov'
Subject:                         Re: WP Editorial: A pivotal moment for U.S. role in Chinese human rights



No fooling...


From: Mills, Cheryl D [mailto:MillsCD@state.gov]
Sent: Saturday, April 28, 2012 12:02 PM
To: H
Subject: Fw: WP Editorial: A pivotal moment for U.S. role in Chinese human rights




From: Choi, Sung W
Sent: Saturday, April 28, 2012 07:32 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Campbell, Kurt M; Moy, Kin W; Carlson, Aubrey A; Lang, Stephan A; Rosenberger,
Laura M; Marchant, Christian M
Subject: WP Editorial: A pivotal moment for U.S. role in Chinese human rights

Cclx baohirtgton pot

This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




A pivotal moment for U.S. role in Chinese human
rights
By Editorial Board, Published: April 27

CHEN GUANGCHENG, one of China's best-known and bravest human rights activists, had been illegally and
unjustly kept under house arrest in his village for 19 months when he somehow escaped last Sunday. He made
his way to Beijing, and though his whereabouts are unconfirmed, activists reported Friday that he was under the
protection of the U.S. Embassy. The State Department refused to respond to questions about him.

If the activists are right, as seems likely, the Obama administration faces difficult conversations with the
Chinese government at a sensitive moment. But the principle it should adhere to is clear: It must be prepared to
offer Mr. Chen refuge if he seeks it and refuse to allow his return to state custody — either official or unofficial.

Reasons for U.S. diplomats to wish Mr. Chen had taken his troubles elsewhere are numerous — and in some
measure understandable. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner
are due in Beijing next week for an annual strategic and economic dialogue; the Obama administration is trying
to maintain what recently have been relatively smooth relations with China as that country goes through what is

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794479 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794479 Date: 11/30/2015




looking like a bumpy leadership transition. Such considerations no doubt affected U.S. calculations when a
deputy mayor from the city of Chongqing sought refuge in a consulate in February: The official eventually
walked out of the consulate and was taken into custody by security forces dispatched from Beijing.

Mr. Chen's case is different. The 40-year-old, self-educated lawyer, blind from birth, courageously undertook to
defend women who were victims of forced sterilizations or abortions. He was arrested, tried on trumped-up
charges of property destruction and blocking traffic, and sentenced to 51 months in prison. Since completing his
term in September 2010, he has been held in his home by local security forces without charge or sentence. After
he made a video about his situation last year, he and his wife were severely beaten.

Mr. Chen's family is now in danger. Activists say his wife and daughter have been confined to their home, and
his brother and nephew have been arrested. No doubt authorities are embarrassed by Mr. Chen's escape, but he
and his family have committed no crime and deserve no punishment.

It is not clear if Mr. Chen is seeking asylum in the United States. Activists in touch with him say he wishes only
to be allowed to live legally and in peace in China, and that he is reluctant to leave the country. But Mr. Chen
clearly qualifies for political asylum, and there is a precedent for the U.S. Embassy in Beijing serving as a
harbor for a dissident — Fang Lizhi, who lived there for a year following the 1989 Tiananmen square
crackdown.

As U.S. Ambassador Gary Locke pointed out in January, China's respect for human rights "is in a down period,
and it's getting worse." Ms. Clinton mentioned Mr. Chen by name in a speech last November in which she
called on Beijing "to embrace a different path."

Well-timed or not, the administration's handling of this affair may tell the new Chinese leadership, and the rest
of the world, whether the United States is serious about defending those who seek to push China toward that
different path.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794479 Date: 11/30/2015
