      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772704 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                               RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                               Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                               Monday, October 11, 2010 2:54 PM
To:
Subject:                            RE: Ariel Pablos-Mendez and GH team


This is the individual he is suggesting to run ghi


From: Shah, Rajiv (AID/A)
Sent: Monday, October 11, 2010 5:50 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Ariel Pablos-Mendez and GH team

Cheryl,

Below as we discussed is Ariel's bio. All of this paperwork is in and I hope he is announced during the lame duck session
as we need him urgently.

I also would highlight that we have a very strong new team in Global Health. This includes:

Arnie Batson — she was the World Bank's star in Global health, created the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization
and was the force behind most of the World Bank's innovative health initiatives including polio eradication buy downs,
health systems work with the UK and Norway and Gates, and the bank's focus on AIDS and malaria.

We also have hired some other very strong players including Heather Flynn (came from the Hill and does leg for GH),
Seth Amgot (came from the advocacy community and does communications and did that work with ONE and Gates and
Rockefeller and others previously), Wendy Taylor (ran bioventures fro global health which was a significant gates grantee
and did the major product development partnerships in the field) a couple of folks from McKinsey that worked on projects
and I have seen their work before and some junior people like Betsy Williams that are very good.

To be honest, this team is talented, new and capable but also frustrated because of the lack of authority to do things.

Raj


Ariel Pablos-Mendez

Managing Director

Ariel Pablos-Mendez, MD, joined the Rockefeller Foundation in 2007. Dr. Pablos-Mendez's appointment as Managing
Director marked his return to the Rockefeller Foundation, where he worked from 1998 to 2004. During his previous tenure,
he worked with international agencies and donors to spearhead the creation of several public-private partnerships to
develop drugs and vaccines for diseases of poverty, such as the Global Alliance for TB Drug Development. He also led a
re-thinking of the Foundation's program on AIDS, which brought about a pioneering initiative for the comprehensive
treatment of mothers with AIDS and their families in Africa.

Having served as acting director for Health Equity in The Foundation, Dr. Pablos-Mendez moved to Geneva in 2004
where he was Director of Knowledge Management and Sharing at the World Health Organization (WHO). There he
worked on establishing the principles and practice of knowledge management as a core competence of public health, to
help bridge the gap between research and implementation, and established WHO's first eHealth unit.

Dr. Pablos-Mendez received his MD from the University of Guadalajara's School of Medicine (Mexico) and his MPH from
Columbia University, where he also serves as a Professor of Clinical Medicine and Public Health.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772704 Date: 11/30/2015
