UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793580 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL
                                            MEMORANDUM




  TO: S
  FROM: ANNE-MARIE
  RE: LEGACY SPEECHES AND SUBSEQUENT BOOK


  As you enter the home stretch of your time in office, you have an opportunity to crystallize some of
  the most important dimensions of your new and distinctive approach to foreign policy in a way that •
  will have resonance long beyond your tenure (in addition to the QDDR, of course!). Many of the
  perceptions, concepts, and habits of mind that come naturally to you as you look at the world, and
  that you have done so much to try to institutionalize within the State Department, are still quite a
  reach for the foreign policy establishment.

  if you were to give three speeches over the next year on a new generation of global problems, a new
  set of solutions, and a new understanding of power and leadership, it would allow you both to sum
  up and reflect on much of what you have accomplished that is often out of -die public eye and would
  provide the foundation for a short book that could be published in the year after you step down. It
  would not take the place of your memoirs, should you want to write those as well, but would be
  more like a credo that would help cement your place in American foreign policy not only as one of
  its most successful practitioners, but also as a thinker and visionary.

      1) A NEW GENERATION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS: This is already part of your mantra in many
          speeches, beginning with your first major policy speech when you declared that the majority
          of 21" century problems are global problems, problems that all nations worry about (non-
          proliferation, counter-terrorism, disease, climate change, resource scarcity, the state of the
          global economy) and that no nation can solve alone. By focusing on that basic point again
          now you could point to all the things you have done to address those problems (new energy
          and CT bureaus, water and food security initiatives, global health, economic statecraft, etc)

      2) A NEW SET OF SOLUTIONS: Here is where you emphasize all the solutions that go beyond
          the state as part of government to society and society to society diplomacy. You have
          brought new players into foreign policy through PPPs and outreach to state and local
          governments. You have developed solutions and strategies that focus on different segments
          of society (women, youth, entrepreneurs, civil society, diasporas). You have integrated
          technology into both diplomacy and development as a game-changer (all the ways mobile
          technology is helping women, farmers, teachers, etc; Mwomen, Tech at State, etc). All of this
          can be rolled into 21" century statecraft.

      3) A NEW UNDERSTANDING OF POWER: This speech would be the most conceptual, but I
          think you could bring it down to earth with countless great examples. Essentially you would



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793580 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793580 Date: 11/30/2015




         be articulating the distinction between "power over" others and "power with" others and
         explaining how important "power with" is in diplomacy of many different kinds. You would
         start by making clear that it is often necessary to exercise traditional coercive power
         (sanctions v. Iran, for instance), but even there it is impossible for the U.S. to do alone
         unless we can mobilize others to join a coalition. Moving to the individual level, you can
         focus on all the ways that the US can.empower others by creating the conditions/providing
         the technology/convening and connecting so that they can exercise power with other
         members of their community, their gender, their demographic, their profession —whatever
         groups they participate in. Unlocking that power takes a special kind of leadership, one that
         you have helped the U.S. develop alongside more traditional leadership roles. You have
         looked down the road, seen the way the world is changing, and changed both U.S. foreign
         policy thinking and tools to meet those challenges.

  I would suggest that you give these speeches at 3 universities around the world: one in the U.S.
  (Princeton??? :-)); one in Asia (could be anywhere from India to Korea); and the last one on power
  in Africa (the concept of Ubuntu, of Southern African origin, speaks to the ideas that human beings
  cannot exist in isolation). At the very least all three could be published together in a pamphlet by
  State, but they could also be easily elaborated (and illustrated) to make a short, accessible, but serious
  book.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793580 Date: 11/30/2015
