      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796047 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                Hanley, Monica R <HanleyMR@state.gov>
Sent:                                Monday, November 26, 2012 4:04 AM
To:
Cc:                                  Huma Abedin
Subject:                             FOR AMR CALL --November 25 Letter from Dr. Essam Haddad to Ambassador
                                     Patterson




Cairo, November 25, 2012

Dear Ambassador Patterson,
I received with great concern the statement by the spokesperson of the department of state, on 23 November 2012
regarding the constitutional declaration issued by H.E. Dr. Mohamed Morsy President of Egypt.

In this regard, it is of utmost importance to stress that since the current Egyptian administration assumed its
responsibility on July 1 2012, it has firmly committed itself to exert all possible efforts in order to fulfill the aspirations of
the Egyptian people in freedom, justice and dignity, and to complete the democratic transition. That said, Egypt
embarked on a serious exercise to build its democratic institutions through the adoption of a modern inclusive
constitution as a corner stone for its political structure.

Unfortunately, we have been following throughout the past few weeks some irresponsible acts aiming at hindering this
ongoing democratic process in a way that may destabilize the country and causes unrest.
Nonetheless, the administration has been, and still is, keen to hold an intensive and inclusive dialogue with all national
stakeholders. We are confident of our ability to reach common ground and bridge any gap, and we are determined to
pursue this positive approach leading to consensus.

Indeed, some concerns emerged after the decisions that we fully understand. However, a thorough and objective
examination of the constitutional declaration reveals that it addressed most of the concerns of the Egyptian people,
responded to their needs and most importantly prevented a political vacuum from occurring. The extension of the
deadline of the constituent assembly to formulate its final draft will definitely serve that aim and will allow people to
freely express their opinions in the envisaged referendum.
Moreover, it is important to emphasize that the temporary nature of the measures taken by the president, were not
meant to concentrate powers

in his hands, but on the contrary to devolve power to democratically elected parliament and to avoid any attempt to
undermine or abort two democratically elected bodies (upper house of parliament and constituent assembly).

In addition, the administration took these measures to accelerate the process of building the institutions of a democratic
system, with checks and balances and separation of powers, in which the president himself will be accountable to the
parliament due to be elected shortly after the adoption of the constitution. This clearly means that he President has
indeed imposed a time cap (two months only from the previous
deadline) on his legislative authorities.

In this context, the constitutional declaration may be conceived as a preemptive measure to neutralize the expected
unconstructive role and attitude of some of the politically motivated members of the judiciary and preserving the
impartial and professional aspect of the judiciary system.

As you may agree with me, Your Excellency, the Egyptian democratic transition needs the support of the international
community in order to consolidate itself and prosper. Thus, Egypt expects the United States'

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796047 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796047 Date: 11/30/2015



support to these efforts, and to the genuine Egyptian democratic transition process. We are confident of our abilities to
lead the country to good governance and rule of law, in order to make of Egypt a success story and a model for other
Arab Spring countries.
Sincerely,
Dr. Essam Al-Haddad

Assistant to the President of Egypt
For External Relations and International Cooperation




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05796047 Date: 11/30/2015
