     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791516 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Tuesday, July 24, 2012 9:00 AM
To:
Subject:                           FW: today Prantas Island, tomorow...Okinawa...



The latest from China.


From: Arnaudo, Raymond V
Sent: Tuesday, July 24, 2012 8:28 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3; Harris, Robert K; Balton, David A (OES); Ohtagaki, Johna 0; Harrell, Peter E
Cc: 'robert smith'; Vuille-Kowing, Kira
Subject: today Prantas Island, tomorow—Okinawa-




Chinese nationalists eye Okinawa
Financial Times
July 23, 2012
By Kathrin Hille in Beijing and Mure Dickie in Tokyo

For many observers, rising frictions between China and Japan over a group of remote and
uninhabited islands in the East China Sea are worrying enough. But if some influential Chinese
nationalist commentators have their way, the spat over the Japanese-controlled Senkaku islands -
which Beijing calls the Diaoyu — could widen into a dispute over a much more important archipelago.




                             Click to enlarge


In a fiery editorial earlier this month, the Global Times newspaper urged Beijing to consider
challenging Japan's control over its southern prefecture of Okinawa — an island chain with a
population of 1.4m people that bristles with US military bases. "China should not be afraid of
engaging with Japan in a mutual undermining of territorial integrity," the Communist party-run
paper declared. Major General Jin Yinan, head of the strategy research institute at China's National
Defense University, went even further. He told state radio that limiting discussion to the Diaoyu was
"too narrow", saying Beijing should question ownership of the whole Ryukyu archipelago — which by
some definitions extends beyond Okinawa.

While the Chinese government has offered no endorsement of such radical views, their open espousal
by senior commentators is likely to be deeply unsettling both to Japan and other neighbouring
nations. "Challenging, Japan's sovereignty over the Ryukyus would indeed be a break from the past,"
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791516 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791516 Date: 11/30/2015




says Taylor Fravel, a Chinese security expert at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who argues
that Beijing has tended to limit its territorial claims for the sake of clearly defined borders.

Chinese questioning of Japanese sovereignty over Okinawa is based on the prefecture's roots in an
independent state known as the Ryukyu Kingdom that won control of the archipelago in the 15th
century. Ryukyu kings paid formal tribute to Chinese emperors, a practice allowing lucrative trade
that continued even after the kingdom was conquered by a Japanese feudal domain in 1609. Okinawa
only officially became part of Japan in 1879. For some in China, this history is enough to render
illegitimate Japanese rule over a strategically important archipelago seen as the biggest impediment
to the expansion of Chinese naval power in the Pacific.

Tang Chunfeng, a former official at the Chinese embassy in Tokyo, is one of those campaigning for
China to rethink its acceptance of Japanese rule over Okinawa, saying past restraint has "done a lot of
harm. When I was in Japan, I didn't even know that the Ryukyus were once ours," says Mr Tang, now
a Japan specialist at a commerce ministry think-tank.

But such arguments could be diplomatically incendiary. "Once you start arguing that a tributary
relationship at some point in history is the basis for a sovereignty claim in the loth century, you start
worrying a lot of people," says June Teufel Dreyer, a China and Japan specialist at the University of
Miami. "Many, many countries had tributary relationships with China." Some Chinese hawks stop
short of saying Okinawa should be Chinese, suggesting it is enough to promote the idea that the
archipelago should be independent from Japan. Such a gambit, they say, would make clear to Tokyo
the cost of continuing to deny Chinese claims to the Diaoyu/Senkaku.

But Zhou Yongsheng, professor at China Foreign Affairs University, warns against such
tactics. "Using the Ryukyu sovereignty issue to resolve the Diaoyu dispute would destroy the basis of
China-Japan relations," Mr Zhou says. "If this was considered, it would basically be the prelude to
military action." Nor can Beijing expect much enthusiasm for independence among Okinawans.
While many in the prefecture are unhappy with Japanese government policies — and with the
presence of US troops — separatist sentiment is muted. A pro-independence candidate who ran for
governor in 2006 received only 6,220 votes.

Chinese questioning of Japan's sovereignty over Okinawa, would also invite comparisons with
Beijing's own policy of suppressing pro-independence movements among its much more restive
Tibetan, Mongolian and Uighur populations. Yasukatsu Matsushima, a professor at Ryukoku
University in Kyoto, is a strong advocate of Okinawan independence who believes Tokyo's rule over
the islands is illegal, but he notes that at least in Japan such views can be openly expressed. It would
be "strange" if China supported self-determination for Okinawans but continued to deny it to its own
minorities, Mr Matsushima says. "We have to consider the background [to any Chinese support for
independence]," he says. "We can't allow Ryukyu independence to be used as a tool."

Additional reporting by Zhao Tianqi.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791516 Date: 11/30/2015
