      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792151 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                             RELEASE IN FULL




From:                            Sullivan, Jacob 1 <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                            Friday, August 31, 2012 3:47 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: Schmitt, NYT: U.S. Seems Set to Designate Haqqani Network as Terror Group



This one from Schmitt



From: Feldman, Daniel F
Sent: Friday, August 31, 2012 03:31 PM
To: Nides, Thomas R; Sullivan, Jacob J; Grossman, Marc I
Cc: Macklin, Ronita; Pearce, David D
Subject: FW: Schmitt, NYT: U.S. Seems Set to Designate Haqqani Network as Terror Group

And a competing one from the Times. Lots of loose talk...



U.S. Seems Set to Designate Haqqani Network as Terror Group
Schmitt, New York Times
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/01/world/asia/us-seems-set-to-designate-haqqani-network-as-terror-
group.html?hp=&adxnn1=1&adxnnlx=1346440540-JOuGBinUsDclevoCuuhAWyw

WASHINGTON — With a Congressional reporting deadline looming, the Obama administration appears
ready to designate the Haqqani network as a terrorist organization, risking a new breach in relations
with Pakistan.

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and top military officials are said to favor placing sanctions on
the network, an insurgent group operating in Afghanistan and Pakistan that is responsible for some of the
most spectacular assaults on American bases and Afghan cities in recent years, according to half a dozen
current and former administration officials. But a spirited internal debate has American officials,
including those at the White House, weighing the consequences that such a decision would have not only
on United States-Pakistan relations but also on peace talks with the Taliban and on the fate of Sgt. Bowe
Bergdahl, the only American soldier known to be held by the insurgents.

And perhaps most important, administration and Congressional officials say, is whether the designation
would make any difference in hampering the group's ability to raise money from wealthy private donors in
Persian Gulf countries and other patrons. Several of its leaders have already been designated individually
as "global terrorists," so the issue now is what would be gained by designating the entire organization.

Even though Mrs. Clinton is leaning toward designating the Haqqani network as a terrorist organization,
no final decision has been made, the officials said.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792151 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792151 Date: 11/30/2015




"The optics of designating look great and the chest thumping is an understandable expression of
sentiment, but everyone has to calm down and say, 'What does it actually do?' "said one administration
official involved in the debate who favors designating the group.

Under pressure from Congress, the Obama administration must decide by Sept. 9 whether to declare the
Haqqani network a terrorist entity. On one level, the decision seems clear-cut. Since 2008, Haqqani
suicide attackers in Afghanistan have struck the Indian Embassy, five-star hotels and restaurants and, last
September, the headquarters of the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force and the American
Embassy.

A senior American official said last week that it was now "likely" that one of the members of the Haqqani
family leadership, Badruddin Haqqani, the operational commander of the network, was killed in a recent
drone strike in Pakistan's tribal areas. In May 2011, the State Department said that Mr. Haqqani "helps
lead insurgents and foreign fighters in attacks against targets in southeastern Afghanistan."

Critics cite several reasons that designating the Haqqani network a terrorist organization could further
complicate relations between the United States and Pakistan, just as relations are getting back on track
after months of grueling negotiations that finally reopened NATO supply routes through Pakistan.

One reason, officials said, is that such a move would seem to bring Pakistan a step closer to being
designated as a state sponsor of terrorism.

American officials say that the Pakistani military's Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate is covertly aiding
the insurgents. Pakistani officials have rebutted the accusation — admitting that the agency maintains
regular contact with the Haqqanis, but denying that it provides operational support — and contend that
the Obama administration is trying to deflect attention from its own failings in Afghanistan.

Pakistani officials, however, said this week that Islamabad would not protest a designation, calling the
decision "an internal American issue." But administration officials reason that it is worse for Pakistan to
protest the designation publicly because it would be almost a direct admission that it supports the group.

Steven Lee Myers contributed reporting.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792151 Date: 11/30/2015
