      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794401 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                            H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                            Monday, April 23, 2012 5:54 PM
To:                              'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                         Fw: Redirect the nuclear weapons budget by Brig. Gen. Keith Kerr
Attachments:                     message-footer.txt



Pls print.


From: Burns Strider [mailto
Sent: Thursday, April 19, 2012 02:42 PM
To: H
Subject: Redirect the nuclear weapons budget by Brig. Gen. Keith Kerr

The piece below (representing the work of The American Values Network) just posted. General Kerr is one of
our great friends out in California:

http://thehill.com/blogs/congress-blog/homeland-security/222531-redirect-the-nuclear-weapons-budget

Redirect the nuclear weapons budget
By Brigadier General Keith Kerr (Ret.)

Every few years, some outrageous abuse of the taxpayer's dollars rightfully grabs headlines. Many will
remember the infamous $400 toilet seats that were part of the defense procurement scandals of the 1980's. More
recently, there was the "bridge to nowhere," a $25 million dollar boondoggle that perfectly exemplified poor
Congressional oversight of our taxes.

The problem with these headline grabbers is that they often focus on comparatively small matters in the relative
scheme of federal spending and arguably distract attention from vastly more wasteful spending.

You need look no further for an example of this than the hundreds of billions of dollars that the U.S. is
projected to spend on redundant and unnecessary nuclear weapons over the next decade.

It is hard for any of us to fully appreciate the scale of the numbers involved. To put it in perspective, the $600
billion that the New York Times has reported as the next decade's overall nuclear weapons budget is the
equivalent of 24,000 "bridges to nowhere."

These nuclear weapons programs, ill-suited to combat 21st Century threats, are fiercely guarded by the pork
barrel politics of what some have termed the Congressional "Doomsday Caucus" — but there's little to justify
the expense.

Current proposals call for building 12 new nuclear submarines at a total costs of almost $350 billion, but just
eight would be more than adequate to deploy the number of warheads planned under 2010's New START
Treaty. Four of them are, functionally, "subs to nowhere" and canceling them would also save at least $18
billion. Similarly, delaying production of a new bomber would save $18 billion with no impact whatsoever on
our ability to deploy the same number of bombers planned under START. And cancelling a redundant and
unnecessary nuclear lab in New Mexico would save another nearly $6 billion.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794401 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794401 Date: 11/30/2015




Of course, if these expenditures were necessary to keep America safe, they would be worth it, but excessive
spending on nuclear weapons contributes nothing to our security. Worse, these expenditures siphon money
away from more important national security priorities.

Almost a decade ago, General Colin Powell sounded a warning about the expense of America's arsenal of
nuclear weapons, "We have every incentive to reduce the number. These are expensive. They take away from
soldier pay." He added, "They take away from lots of things. There is no incentive to keep more than you
believe you need for the security of the nation."

General Powell is hardly alone in his assessment. In February, Major General Paul Monroe wrote "It would be
irresponsible not to evaluate whether maintaining a large nuclear arsenal is relevant to addressing [current]
threats, and whether some of the hundreds of billions spent on that large arsenal would be better spent on other
defense priorities. We are in a time of tightening budgets, and our troops require the very best possible
equipment." The fact is, we can maintain a strong and reliable deterrent at far less cost and with far fewer
weapons. As Lt. General Robert Gard recently noted, "If the essence of deterrence is a credible threat, then it's
safe to say we can make significant reductions with no impact whatsoever on our deterrent or security
capacity."

In a hopeful sign, some leading Senators have expressed interest in rightsizing the nuclear weapons budget. Sen.
Tom Coburn (R-OK), a consummate deficit hawk has identified the nuclear weapons budget as a priority for
savings, while Sen. Lindsay Graham (R-SC) recently stated, "I'm willing to put the nuclear arsenal on the table
for reform and restructuring and maybe downsizing."

These types of misdirected expenditures should rightly become an election issue. Appropriating money for
unnecessary and redundant programs has nothing to do with being strong, especially when funding is tight and
there are far more important national security priorities competing for the same dollars.

The "Doomsday Caucus" is feverishly resisting any cuts in nuclear programs, whether those expenditures make
sense or not. It's a small group, but there's far more at stake than a single $25 million dollar "bridge to
nowhere." The more attention the proposed misuse of funds receives however, the less likely it is to continue.

Keith Kerr served 33 years in the US Army, retiring with the rank of Colonel. He was commissioned as a
Brigadier General in the California State Military Reserve.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794401 Date: 11/30/2015
