UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793909 Date: 11/30/2015




                        PROPOSED Secretary's Call Sheet for                RELEASE IN FULL

                             Qatari Prime Minister
                                  Time TBD

 Purpose of Call: You are calling Prime Minister Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber al-
 Thani to discuss the Egyptian-American Enterprise Fund and to ask Qatar to
 consider partnering with the Fund. Qatar has expressed some interest.

 * Egyptian-American Enterprise Fund: We recently launched private
   enterprise funds in Egypt and Tunisia. We hope these funds will address the
   critical need for job creation and fuel small business expansion by increasing
   access to capital and strengthen their private sectors. I know our countries
   share a common commitment to these principles, and we would welcome
   working with Qatar in this endeavor.

 • Progress to date: When I was last in Cairo, I announced the appointment of
   Jim Harmon as chairman of the Fund. During President Clinton's second term,
   he served as Chairman, President and CEO of our Export-Import Bank, and I
   have known him a very long time. He currently serves as Chairman of the
   Caravel Fund, which is an emerging and frontier markets fund.

 • UNGA: The Enterprise Fund will be convening the board for its first meeting
   around the time of UN General Assembly meetings. The Chairman is also
   hoping to meet with a few foreign representatives at that time to explore
   potential partnerships, in line with our commitment to the Deauville
   Partnership. If you think there is someone traveling to New York who could
   meet with Chairman Harmon, it would be a good opportunity to start the
   conversation.

 Background: The Egyptian Fund was initially launched with $60 million. Qatar
 has announced a $2 billion aid package to Egypt. The Prime Minister is aware of
 the EAEF, and we believe some portion of the $2 billion could be allocated in an
 appropriate structure to the EAEF. In Harmon's original email raising this request,
 he felt an initial overture to the leadership of countries such as Qatar and Saudi
 Arabia would nudge them to consider joining the US in this effort. Harmon has
 said that while the financial commitment could be significant and notable, in the
 end, the Fund is more interested in support and advice from these countries than
 money. For this reason, he would like to organize an advisory board that would
 include representatives from partner countries.


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05793909 Date: 11/30/2015
