      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792153 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Friday, August 31, 2012 4:15 PM
To:
Cc:                               Reines, Philippe I; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject:                          FW: Clinton staying as far away from Charlotte as physically possible



Highlight.

cdm


From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Friday, August 31, 2012 2:02 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Clinton staying as far away from Charlotte as physically possible




Clinton staying as far away from Charlotte as
physically possible
Posted By Josh Rogin Thursday, August 30, 2012 - 5:07 PM •
Share
"The Cook Islands this year are the hosts of one of the most important institutions of the Pacific called the
Pacific Island Forum," a senior State Department official said Thursday. "It's a group that meets yearly with a
number of working groups. It's been in existence almost half a century; it's very significant."

It's not Charlotte, but it is a big gathering. Last year, the administration sent 50 officials to the forum,
representing 17 different federal agencies. Deputy Secretary of State Tom Nides led the delegation in 2011. The
official said this trip was part of the administration's rebalancing toward Asia, with a special focus on the
smaller countries around the region's periphery.

"Sometimes when we talk about the Asia Pacific, the A is the capital and P is small. And our attempt here is to
underscore that we have very strong, enduring, strategic, moral, political, humanitarian interests across the
region. It's an area in which we invested substantially historically -- blood and treasure," the official said.

"I just returned about two weeks ago from my own trip around the Pacific," the State Department official said.
(Your humble Cable guy did did not attend the briefing, so we have no direct knowledge of the identity of the
briefer, but the State Department publicly announced the foreign travel of Assistant Secretary of State for East
Asian and Pacific Affairs Kurt Campbell earlier this month.)

Clinton will meet in the Cook Islands with Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard and New Zealand Prime
Minister John Key and will be joined by Pacific Command head Adm. Sam Locklear, the anonymous State
Department official said.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792153 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792153 Date: 11/30/2015



In Indonesia, Clinton will meet President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and Foreign Minister Marty
Natalegawa. Expect her to press Indonesia to work better with other ASEAN countries to come to a consensus
position on how to confront China over the South China Sea. ASEAN failed to come to a consensus position at
the ASEAN Regional Forum in July, despite Washington's urgings.

Next, Clinton is off to Beijing to meet with President Hu Jintao, Vice President Xi Jinping, and State
Councilor Dai Bingguo. She will also have "intense meetings" with Foreign Minister Yang Jiachi, the official
said. Topics on the agenda include the South China Sea, North Korea, Iran, Syria, and Afghanistan.

"I think the secretary intends very clearly to underscore our continuing interest in maintaining a strong, positive
relationship between our two countries," the official said. "We recognize how critically important that is, and
one of the challenges before us is to demonstrate how we deal with areas in which we have differing
perceptions and where we face challenging issues on the ground, or in this case in the water."

After Beijing, Clinton will go to Timor-Leste and visit a coffee plantation. Next is Brunei, which will host the
East Asia Summit in 2013, probably after Clinton leaves office. Then, she will go to an island off the shore of
Vladivostok for the APEC summit, where she'll lead a large U.S. delegation and will likely hold a series of
high-level bilateral meetings.

Pressed to explain exactly how the administration plans to advance U.S. and allied interests related to the South
China Sea dispute on the trip, the official offered few specifics.

"I would say that the United States has sought to articulate a very clear set of principles that animate our
strategic approach to the Asia Pacific region, and particularly to the South China Sea. Those will continue," the
official said.

"We have had very intense consultations with every key player in the Asia Pacific region. I think one of the
messages that we seek to carry on this trip is that it is absolutely essential that cooler heads prevail in every
capital, and that great care be taken on these issues, and that, in fact, all of these complex territorial matters
have existed for decades. They have been managed generally effectively for decades, and during this period
we've seen some of the most manifest Asian prosperity. We need that to continue. This is the cockpit of the
global economy, and so care must be taken across the board."




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05792153 Date: 11/30/2015
