     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794154 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                                RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                                B6




From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                               Tuesday, February 21, 2012 11:36 AM
To:                                 'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject                             Fw: You see this?



Pis print.

    Original Message
From: Burns Strider                                                                                                                  B6
Sent: Tuesday, February 21, 2012 11:26 AM
To: H
Subject: You see this?

This is Franklin Graham on Morning Joe... Staff transcribed it from Morning Joe's site... Its NOT official... Read thru it...
Wow:



Franklin Graham on Morning Joe... This will likely turn up the volume on this mess... The manuscript was done quickly by
my staff... So, its not official

GEIST: Welcome back to Morning Joe. We have on the Reverend franklin graham. Also the host (?) of "now with alex
wagner" every day at noon, alex wagner. Reverend, I'll ask you the question that senator santorum was asked on
sunday. Do you believe that President Obama is a Christian?GRAHAM: You have to ask that of President Obama. I think
people have to ask Barack Obama. He's come out saying he's a christian. So I think the question is, what is a
Christian?GEIST: So you don't take him at his word when you say he's a Christian?GRAHAM: Of course, I do. You have to
ask every person. I just have to assume that he is. A christian is a person who believes that Jesus christ is our son and
that if we put our faith and trust in him that god will forgive us of our sins. That's the definition of a christian. I was 22
years old when I asked christ to come into my heart. You cannot be born a christian. You can only be
converted.BARNICLE: You said he's christian in as much as he goes into church on sunday. You don't know if he accepted
Jesus christ. Do you still believe that?GRAHAM: I don't know. I asked him when he was running how he came to faith in
christ. He said he was working on the south side of chicago in the community. They asked him what church i went to.
They said if you don't work in the community you have to join one of the churches. Then, of course, he joined reverend
jeremiah's church. So that's what his answer to my question was.GEIST: By your definition, he's not a christian.GRAHAM:
You have to ask him. I cannot ask that question for anybody. All I know is I'm a sinner. And god has forgiven me of my
sins.BARNICLE: I just don't get it, reverend. I know that we have other things to talk about. Why can't you just say, yeah,
i believe he's a christian. I said he's a christian? He goes to church. He practices his faith. If he says he's a christian. I can
accept that. All I know what jesus christ has done in my heart and how he changed my life. You said in the past president
obama's father was muslim. So he has the seed of islam in his blood.GRAHAM: No — what I said was, under islamic law,
Sharia law, Islam sees him as a son of lam. Because his father was a muslim. Grandfather was a muslim. That's just the
way it works. That's the way they see it. He says he didn't grow up that way and he believes in Jesus christ. So the
muslim world, Islam sees him as a son of Islam.BARNICLE: But you don't believe he's a muslim?GRAHAM: No.GEIST:
Categorically not a muslim.GRAHAM: I can't say categorically. Islam has had a pass under Obama




GEIST: I do want to ask you a question. Do you believe that rick santorum is christian?

GRAHAM: I think so.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794154 Date: 11/30/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794154 Date: 11/30/2015




GEIST: Why is it different for rick santorum?

GRAHAM: Well, because his values are so clear on moral issues. No question about it. I just appreciate it the moral
stance he takes on things. He comes from a catholic faith. I'm protestant. There are a lot of differences between what he
believes and what I believe. I think he's a man of faith.

HALPERIN That's an amazing double standard. Your reaction to the difference. The question about rick santorum and
president obama, I think, just exposes an incredible double standard you're applying to the two people. They're exactly
the same situation.

GRAHAM: No, I asked president obama how he came to faith in christ. He said, I don't go to church.

GEIST: Have you had that conversation with rick santorum?

GRAHAM: I talked to rick santorum, yes.

BARNICLE: And he was just more persuasive to you on the depth and sincerity of this question?

GRAHAM: I think so. You have to look what a person does with his life. You look at the way they live. Where do they go
and act? He's a nice man. His wife is a class act. His kids are class act. You can't help but like them. I have no idea what
he really believes. I have no idea what rick santorum stands for of what he really believes. I just feel in my heart. You're
asking my opinion. I'm just giving you my opinion.

WAGNER: Reverend, what about mitt romney?

GRAHAM: I like him.

WAGNER: Is he a Christian?

GRAHAM: He's a mormon.

WAGNER: But he said he's part of the christian faith. Do you take him at his word on that?

GRAHAM

Most Christians would not recognize mormonism as part of the christian faith.WAGNER: So he is not a Christian.

GRAHAM: Most christians would not recognize that. Of course, they believe in jesus christ. But they believe in a lot of
other things, too that we don't accept. He would be a good president. He's a sharp guy. And he's proven himself.... Newt
has married many times. We think he's a candidate.

GEIST: So Newt gingrich is a christian. But you're not sure that president obama.

And you said that's based on the way they've lived their lives.GRAHAM: All I know is under Obama, President Obama,
the muslims of the world. He seems more concerned about them than the Christians that are being murdered in the
Muslim countries



Burns Strider




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794154 Date: 11/30/2015
