      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794316 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                            H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                            Thursday, April 19, 2012 3:55 PM
To:                              'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                         Fw: Advanced Copy of DRC Report Taking a Stand on Security Sector Reform
Attachments:                     DRC_SSR-Report_2012.pdf



Pls print.


From: bena                     [mailto                                                                                B6
Sent: Monday, April 16, 2012 12:34 AM
To: H
Subject: Advanced Copy of DRC Report: Taking a Stand on Security Sector Reform



Dear Secretary Clinton,

In partnership with an international coalition of civil society organizations, Eastern Congo Initiative (ECI) is
launching a joint report on security sector reform in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and I've
attached an advanced copy for you.

The report discusses the opportunity that now exists for the international community to partner with the
Government of the DRC to reform the security sector and, in doing so, take concrete steps towards creating a
better future for the country. This report describes a path towards greater security if reform of the military,
police and judicial sector is supported by firm commitments from the government of the DRC and the
international community.

The report maintains that the underlying reason for many of the problems in the DRC is the pervasive lack of
security throughout the country. It offers a critical look at the symptoms that a weak military, police and justice
system project on the population as well as the root causes of the horrible reality of daily life in the DRC; lack
of political will. Past attempts at military reform have failed mainly due to the lack of political will from the
Congolese government, and the international community's shortfalls in supporting and encouraging the
momentum needed for reform.

Yet we believe this can change, and the time for that change is now. The recent conviction of Thomas Lubanga
by the International Criminal Court and the call or the arrest of Bosco Ntanganda by the President of the DRC
proves that progress is possible.

At ECI we see the hope and inspiration in the Congolese people in our everyday work. We are committed to
finding the path forward and partnering with those who also want to build a brighter future for the Congolese.

Thank you for doing your part,



Ben Affleck

Writer, Director and Founder of Eastern Congo Initiative

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794316 Date: 11/30/2015
