UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769943 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL




                                          CONFIDENTIAL



                                                 June 22, 2010



   For: Hillary
   From: Sid
   Re: McChrystal, like a rolling stone


   For what it's worth, my two bits on the choices:

   Option 1. Unless McChrystal is being retained there is nothing good that can come of having him
   return to Washington to see the President. A personal confrontation humilates McChrystal—and
   will be taken as a staged humiliation by those in the military who share his denigrating attitudes.
   McChrystal retained becomes the indispensable man; Obama becomes his hostage. McChrystal
   rebuked will be silent in the future, but the Afghanistan operation will be personalized:
   McChrystal will become the crucial theoretician, general, and receive either credit or blame. If
   there are shortcomings he and his epigones will attribute it to the slightest deviation from his
   prescriptions and resentment will spread against those who supposedly stabbed the military in
   the back—the Dolchstosslegende, a poisonous myth used by the right-wing in Germany after
   World War I—and then in France against DeGaulle on Algeria (See: "Day of the Jackal") to the
   U.S. in the McCarthy era and post-Vietnam. That is the turf McChrystal is treading with his
   insubordinate comments.

   Option 2. On the other hand, if he is replaced, he should not see the president in person. Petraeus
   should summon him in that case and relieve him. That is the proper chain of command. Petraeus
   should recommend replacements. Instead of Obama appearing with McChrystal (optics:
   photographed going in and out of the White House), he should appear with his replacement and
   Petraeus. The President is the commander-in-chief This is his policy. McChrystal failed to
   implement it: he diverted himself into friction with civilians rather than devoting himself entirely
   to the task decided and assigned by the President.

    What would Truman do?




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769943 Date: 11/30/2015
