      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797898 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL




From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                               Wednesday, October 24, 2012 8:59 PM
To:                                 'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject                             Fw: Fwd: Message of Felicitation of the Esteemed Amir-ul-Momineen (May Allah protect
                                    him) on the Occasion of the Eid-ul-Odha



Pls print.


From: Sullivan, Jacob J [mailto:SullivanJJ©state.gov]
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2012 04:29 PM Eastern Standard Time
To: H
Subject: FW: Fwd: Message of Felicitation of the Esteemed Amir-ul-Momineen (May Allah protect him) on the Occasion
of the Eid-ul-Odha

Mullah Omar's Eid statement.


From: Guha, Sumona
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2012 1:30 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: FW: Fwd: Message of Felicitation of the Esteemed Amir-ul-Momineen (May Allah protect him) on the Occasion
of the Eid-ul-Odha


          Jake, fyi, here is Mullah Omar's Eid-al-Adha statement. AP has picked up the call for increased insider
          attacks. Other notable things I see from a quick scan: call for Sharia law "after the independence of the
          country;" call for release of prisoners from Guantanamo and Bagram; reference to political activities that
          are coordinated through their political office; accusing the West as viewing desecration of the Koran as
          freedom of speech. Will keep you posted when there is further analysis or comments from Barney and
          others in SRAP.




              Message of Felicitation of the Esteemed Amir-ul-Momineen (May Allah
                        protect him) on the Occasion of the Eid-ul-Odha.

                            In the Name of Allah, the Most Merciful, the Most Compassionate.

               Praise be to Allah, the Sustainer of the Worlds and peace be on the leader of the two
            dominions, the noblest of the apostles, the Leader of Mujahideen, our prophet, Mohammad,
          the Chosen one (peace be upon him) and on his offspring and all his companions. Having said
               that, I would like to further say: I seek refuge in Allah from Satan, the rejected one.

          "Those who disbelieve, spend their wealth to debar others from the path of Allah. They will
          continue to spend it tillit will become a cause of regret for them and in the end, they will be
          overcome. And those who disbelieve shall be gathered in Hell Holy Quran (8:3 6)




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797898 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797898 Date: 11/30/2015




 When Jesus son of Mary said: "Children of Israel! Verily, I am the Messenger of Allah to you,
 confirming that (which came) before me and giving good news of an apostle that will come
 after me whose name shall be Ahmad "Holy Quran 61:6

 I extend my felicitation to all Muslim people of Afghanistan, to the gallant Mujahideen who are
 now arrayed against the invasion, to the families of the martyrs, to the disabled and the esteemed
 pilgrims in every part of the world, on this occasion of Eid-ul-Odha, a great day of selflessness
 , sacrifice and joy.

 I pray to the Almighty Allah to bless the Islamic Ummah to spend these days of the Eid of
 Sacrifice, in joy, serenity and a feeling of euphoria. Similarly, I congratulate, the honor-loving
 and high-spirited Mujahideen brothers on the unprecedented military victories of the current
 year. May Allah, the Almighty give us and you(further) steadfastness and persistence and
 salvage our oppressed people from this unlawful invasion. Surely, the moments (of victory) are
 close at hand nowrather than any other time else.

 Mujahideen brothers!

  You are in the scene witnessing that the ranks of Jihad dostrengthen, experiencing expansion in
  every part of the country because of the close support of( our) brave people with the Mujahideen
  and their sacrifices . Massiveaggressive and Jihadic tactical attacks are carried out against the
  grand bases of the invaders. The (enemy) evacuate military bases and barracks in awe of
  Mujahideen. Some conscious daring Muslims from among the ranks of the regime installed by
  the invaders, launch decisive attacks against the cunning invading enemy. Those Afghans who
  have been deceived are now turning to the peaceful lap of the Islamic Emirate in groups as a
  result of the efforts underway by the Call and Guidance Commission. Other self-
  same developments and transformations are some of the achievements that we and you should,
  as an obligation, have to thank Allah (swt) for having them bestowed on us.

  We ask the Almighty Allah with deep humbleness to grace us with further ability to achieve our
  goals , to remain committed to the aspirations of our Jihad, neither become arrogant ( to gloat)
  nor become heedless about the goals and sacred path of Jihad. We should seek the pleasure of
  Allah in the conduct of all affairs and make it our resolution to obey our superiors, to implement
  the bye-law of Jihad, and to work for the establishment of the Islamic system, the comfort and
  prosperity of our people, our nation of which you and we are a part and parcel , has gone through
  hardships, sufferings and oppression in the past over thirty years They deserve it as an obligation
  on us to behave with them with tolerance and good manners. It is because of the sacrifices,
  selflessness and daring feats of this very nation that you and we become able in keeping up the
  battle against such an arrogant power for eleven years triumphantly and face the enemy with
  defeat at all fronts. You and we should feel the pain of the nation and share its grief. We should
  realize that complete victory and quashing of the enemy become possible only through the help
  of the Almighty Allah and the bilateral cooperation of our people. The superiors and
  subordinates of the Islamic Emirate should try to cement their unity, coherence and intimacy,
  avoid internal differences, conduct the affairs of Jihad with mutual sympathy and consultation,
  work out good plans for the quashing of the enemy and implement them; provide facilities for
  the common people, save them from the atrocities and brutalities of the invaders and the
  Arbakis, pay full attention to the prevention of civilian casualties. The enemy has tried and is
  trying to blame the Mujahideen for the civilian casualties. Increase yourefforts to expand the
  area of infiltration in the ranks of the enemy and to bring about better order and array in the
  work. This tactic will achieve more fruitful results, if God willing. Focus on honing behavior.
  and raising level of knowledge of the Mujahideen. Explain to them all essential injunctions and
  ethics of Jihad, and pay attention to their education, vastness of insight and moral upbringing.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797898 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797898 Date: 11/30/2015




  Give a hand of help to the orphans, the disabled and the prisoners. This should remain inculcated
  in your mind that every action contrary to the religious requirements, and being based on sheer
  emotions bring in only wicked consequences.

  We call on the Afghans who still stand with the stooge regime to turn to full-fledged cooperation
  with their Mujahid people like courageouspersons inorder to protect national interests and to
  complete independence of the country. Jihadic activities inside the circle of the State militias
  arethe most effective stratagem. Its dimension will see further expansion, organization and
  efficiency if God willing.

  I urge every brave Afghan in the ranks of the foreign forces and their Afghan hirelings who may
  find an opportunity to utilize this opportunity effectively and quash the enemies of Islam and
  country in their centers and use all possible means, opportunities and tactics to strike them. This
  is because Jihad is an obligation enjoined on every one. It is the duty of every individual of the
  nation from religious perspective and on the basis of his conscious to strive for the liberation and
  independence of his country.

  The (local) chiefs of Mujahideen are instructed to submit (the names of) those heroes who have
  performed such exploits to the leadership for further recognition and acknowledgement of their
  daring actions.

  As to the future political destiny of the country„ I would like to repeat that we are neither
  thinking of monopolizing power nor intend to spark off domestic war but only try that the future
  political fate of the country must be determined by the Afghans themselves without any
  interference from big countries and neighbors, and it must be Islamic and Afghan in form.

  After the independence of the country, we should have a sharia-based national regime with the
  help of Allah, the Almighty, which will bring about a sole central authority and be free from
  every kind of discrimination and biases. Jobs will be given onmerits;territorial integrity of the
  country will be protected. Security will be maintained, Sharia laws will be implemented, we
  will guarantee rights of both male and female of the country, build economic structures and
  strengthen social foundations and facilities of education for all people of the country in the light
  of the Islamic rules and national interests, conduct all academic and cultural affairs efficiently
  and will , with the help of the brave nation, foil the effort of those who harbor the notion of
  disintegrating Afghanistan and intend to flare up domestic war to achieve their goals. They
  should not think that the Afghan people are so simple-mined that they would break off their
  deep ideological, cultural, social and historical bonds among the fraternal ethnicities. The former
  Soviet Union pursued the same recipe of disintegration but the result was contrary to their
  effortsand theythemselves became entrapped in their ploy.

   We want to have good relations with all those who respect Afghanistan as an independent
   Islamic country and their relations and approaches are not domineering and colonialist. This is
   what every independent and Muslim Afghan wants.

   About (efforts) to reach understanding with the foreigners, I would like to say that we would
   continue political endeavors along with military struggle in order to obtain our Islamic and
   national goals and aspirations. For this purpose, we have an entity in the shape of political office
   to conduct the politicalstruggle. They interact with the foreigners in view of our Islamic, Jihadic
   and national interests. I should say that we have noother conduit to reach an understanding with
   the other side except through the Political Office, because we do not play politics on this issue
   covertly nor we can tolerate (others) to play this. We have framed our policy to reach the
   understanding on the bases of religious and national values and then we have publicly announced
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797898 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797898 Date: 11/30/2015




  it. If the intelligence agencies and diplomatic circles of the invading countries want to create
  spurious channels of negotiation and fake faces ( imposters) and then make them larger-than-life
  figures and channels through the media, it will be nothing more than a waste of time and duping
  their own people.

  Since independence is the right of every one, so we urge the world, the international community,
  particularly, the Islamic countries and the Islamic conference to help us on the basis of their
  (moral) responsibilityin ending the occupation of our Islamic country and obtaining its
  independence. Similarly, they should carry out their responsibility on the basis of human
  sympathy in releasing our prisoners who have been passing days and nights of miserableness in
  Guantanamo, Bagram, other prisons and in the prisons of the neighboring countries, particularly,
  the human rights organizations should feel their responsibility to find out about the human rights
  violations of those miserable prisoners who are givens various tortures during investigation
  against all laws in the said prisons every day. They extort confession from them forcefully by
  beating them. They are deprived of their basic human rights even some of them have been
  martyred and became disabled.

  About the desecration of the very person of the Holy Prophet, Mohammad ( peace be upon
  him) by the enemies of Islam through the release of a film, I strongly condemn this act and
  would like to say that the enemies of Islam have not left any stone unturned to distort the image
  of the sacred religion of Islam . At last, they resorted to( the heinous) activities to commit
  blasphemy against the personality of the Holy Prophet, Mohammad, (peace be upon him). They
  committed (such abhorrent) acts against the person of the noblest of the prophets that any
  individual with perfect conscious would not tolerate it to be done even against an ordinary
  person.

  The West calls the desecration of the Holy prophet ( peace be upon him) and the torching of the
  Holy Quran, The Divine Book, as a freedom of speech and thought in a time that if a Muslim
  would happen to recite verses of Jihad in the Holy Quran, The Book of Allah, the Almighty and
  translate them or they just demand their rights and freedom, then they put them in detention
  byblaming them as being terrorists and give them the most brutal tortures. Any way, their
  propaganda of the world of their films which is based on their imaginary views and fantasies and
  indicating their narrow-mindedness will only bring them shame and disgrace. "They seek to
  extinguish the light of Allah, with their mouths but Allah will complete His light, much as the
  disbelievers may dislike it "Holy Quran 61:8

   The Muslims should not rely only on verbal protests but strictly adhere to their sacred religion,
   follow the life way and instructions of the Holy prophet (peace be upon him), forge unity among
  themselves and embark on a practical struggle against their enemy , the colonialism. "You have
   a good example (of conduct) in Allah's Apostle (to follow). ( This is) for any one who looks to
   Allah and the Last Day and remembers Allah much. Holy Quran 33:21.

  The Afghans have not committed invasion against anyone else and nor we have made aggression
  against the territory of others but we will continue to wage Jihad against the invaders who have
  invaded our country until the occupation ends completely.

  We told the enemy eleven years ago that their coming (to the country) willbe easy but their
  presence and exit will be full of complications. Today's situation displays the same picture. We
  have enough capability to wage a prolonged struggle against the enemy, have full trust in our
  Lord, great patience and enough man power. We have neither barrowed these capabilities from
  others nor anyone else has bestowed them onus as a favor.

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797898 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797898 Date: 11/30/2015




 If Godwilling, we will foil all plans of the enemy with full capability and sagacity. Our Jihadic
 momentum has reached a phase that enjoys comprehensive global Islamic support, sympathy of
 the people and with the proper hardware having been obtained, we are now in a position to face
 the enemy with a shocking fate in the military front, if God willing.

  In these holy days and nights of Eid, I urge all well-to-do beneficent individuals and
  organizations to have a conduct of ( compassion and intimacy) with the families of Mujahideen
  and the poor as they have with their own children and families, particularly, they should have
  compassion on the children of the martyrs and families and give them assistance either directly
  or through the economic commission of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan and arrange to share
  with them the joy of Eid.

  I ask Allah, the Almighty to bestow on us, thebelieving and Mujahid people of Afghanistan, a
  great

  substitute for thestrong, brave and warm support extended to the Mujahideen against a non-
  believing alliance under the leadership of America for a period extending more than a
  decade,. It is owing to this support, that the Jihad has reached its success. Similarly, I ask Allah,
  the Almighty to grant patience, steadfastness and a great reward to those families whose relatives
  have been martyred, wounded or imprisoned or sustained heavy losses in the way of the sacred
  Jihad or during the blind bombardment and raids of the enemy. I pray to the Almighty Allah to
  enable our nation to reach its ultimateaspirations for the holiness of the pure blood of the martyrs
  and may the flag of Islam stand raised in the country, fluttering. Amen, 0 Sustainer of the
  Worlds! Peace be upon you all.

                             Mullah Mohammad Omar Mujahid

                                       Amir-ul-Momineen

                                         Servant of Islam



  Zabihullah Mujahid




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05797898 Date: 11/30/2015
