     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772191 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART B6


From:                              Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov >
Sent:                              Thursday, September 9, 2010 11:06 AM
To:                                H; Sullivan, Jacob 1; Abedin, Huma
Subject:                           check this out on yesterday's speech


See below from the Daily Beast today -- by a Republican, but still. Shows that we accomplished what we set out to do.
Fair warning: the rest of the piece is about how S would be a better president than POTUS, but the headline is "Hillary's
Home Run of a Speech." AM



From: Anne-Marie Slaughter
To: Slaughter, Anne-Marie
Sent: Thu Sep 09 10:53:19 2010
Subject: check this out

Behold the Hillary Doctrine. And heap abundant gratitude—and rose petals if you have them on hand—on the firm,
unfussy, deeply reassuring woman who has just offered it up to the world.

In the 20 months since this administration began administering (a verb I use only in the loosest sense), the speech on
Wednesday morning by Hillary Clinton, delivered at the Council on Foreign Relations, was the first time we have been
given an unreserved lift of the heart by any of its members. It was, by far, the best speech of this administration. Whereas
her president has frequently wrung his elegant hands, doing the rounds of the world to reassure foreign leaders that
America is a cuddly bunny at heart, the secretary of State declared that we are all living "a new American moment—a
moment when our global leadership is essential." There was no bowing from her to potentates in robes; there was,
instead, a promise that "we will do everything we can to exercise the traditions of American leadership at home and
abroad."

 Try this for size: "The United States can, must and will lead in the new century." In order to do that, Clinton promised "a
new global architecture," "built to last and withstand stress." And in a muscular departure from the way in which this
administration—for fear of seeming Bush-like—has been shrinking from the unembarrassed propagation of American
values, she uttered these plainspoken, unadorned words: "Democracy needs defending."

Tunku Varadarajan is a national affairs correspondent and writer at large for The Daily Beast. He is also the Virginia
Hobbs Carpenter Fellow in Journalism at Stanford's Hoover Institution and a professor at NYU's Stern Business School.
He is a former assistant managing editor at The Wall Street Journal




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772191 Date: 11/30/2015
