     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791196 Date: 11/30/2015



                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Hanley, Monica R <HanleyMR@state.gov>
Sent:                             Tuesday, July 3, 2012 11:14 AM
To:
Subject:                          Congressional call sheet


Want to make sure that you have this.

The Secretary's Call Sheet for Senators Kerry, Lugar, McCain, and Graham

(SBU) Purpose of Call: To update Senators Kerry, Lugar, McCain, and Graham on the reopening of the GLOCs and other
steps with Pakistan.

•    Pakistan has informed the U.S. that the ground lines of communication (GLOCs) are opening, allowing materiel for
the U.S., ISAF, and the Afghan National Security Forces to flow through Pakistan into Afghanistan.

     Pakistan will continue with the past practice —there will not be any new transit fees.

•    This step will assist the international effort in Afghanistan and continued progress towards a stable Afghanistan
able to provide for its own security — a goal that both Pakistan and the United States share.

•  I spoke with FM Khar this morning, and we both noted the importance of taking coordinated action against our
common terrorist enemy.

     I again expressed condolences for the death of Pakistani soldiers in the November 2011 Salala cross-border
incident. I said we are sorry for the losses suffered by the Pakistani military.

•   We each acknowledged that mistakes were made, and we both said we were sorry for losses suffered by our
countries in the fight against terrorism.

•    My phone call with Khar shows that we are taking key steps to get U.S.-Pakistani relations back on track. These will
expedite progress towards a successful transition in Afghanistan and facilitate President Obama's goal of drawing down
U.S. forces and ending U.S. combat operations in Afghanistan by the end of 2014.

•    Additionally, this action by Pakistan on the GLOCs will save the U.S. and ISAF partners many hundreds of millions of
dollars.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791196 Date: 11/30/2015
