    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795808 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                   B5


From:                             Hanley, Monica R <HanleyMR@state.gov>
Sent:                             Sunday, November 25, 2012 8:04 AM
To:
Cc:                               Huma Abedin
Subject:                          Re: Amr Call -- Cairo Sitrep



Subject: Cairo Sitrep 1 for November 25, 2012

(SBU) Summary: The decrees issued by President Morsi on November 22 have enraged the secular opposition, members
of the judiciary and revolutionary and leftist youth movements, prompting violence in Cairo and other cities. Clashes
between rock-hurling protesters and security forces continued today in Tahrir Square and the surrounding streets,
including outside the U.S. Embassy's north perimeter. Morsi's political opponents have called for a sit-in at Tahrir and
for "million-man" demonstrations on Tuesday, November 27. The Muslim Brotherhood, meanwhile, has called on its
supporters to stage marches and demonstrations both this afternoon and on Tuesday to show support for Morsi's
decrees. Some Egyptian judges, believing the decrees undermine the authority of the judiciary, have gone on strike.

(SBU) Situation in Tahrir and Surrounding Streets: Confrontations between security forces and protesters continued for
a seventh straight day on Sunday morning. Protesters gathered near the American University's downtown campus
chanted "down with the regime" and hurled stones at security forces, who responded with teargas volleys. Protesters
also chanted against Muslim Brotherhood (MB) Supreme Guide Mohamed Badie, who they believe "pulls the strings"
instead of President Mohamed Morsi, according to the Egyptian Middle East News Agency (MENA).

      Field hospitals continue to receive wounded persons and cases of suffocation as a result of the teargas being used
by security forces. According to a Ministry of Health source, 58 persons have been injured during clashes today in Cairo
and Beheira Governorate. Three hundred and nineteen persons were reported to have been injured nationwide since
November 22, 261 of them in Cairo.

      At approximately 1200 today, a group of some 100 youths battled police posted at the Embassy's north
perimeter. The group pelted police lines with rocks and some Molotov cocktails. Some rocks landed on the compound,
but their main focus was on the police and not the Embassy. Some young men climbed the wall (erected by police after
the 9/11 breaching of the Embassy) blocking access to our consular entrance and threw rocks at visa applicants waiting
outside. Consular personnel escorted the applicants inside and then sent them home through alternative exits from our
compound. Nearby Qasr al-Ainy Street, a main north-south artery, was calm after the Ministry of Interior (M01) erected
another wall blocking access to the parliament buildings.

•    Clashes by the Omar Makram mosque near the Arab League headquarters featured male and female high school
students in school uniforms throwing rocks at the police.

      In a statement released this morning, the MOI's Media Center said that eight groups of rioters were arrested in
Cairo on Saturday, bringing the total number of arrests since November 22 to 267. The statement claimed that 36
policemen were injured on Saturday, bringing the total number of police injured since November 22 to 164: 28 officers,
two police corporals and 134 soldiers.

(SBU) Planned Demonstrations: On his Facebook page, MB Supreme Guide Mohamed Badie issued a call for "all
patriotic, revolutionary youth and Islamic forces to stand at the main squares of Cairo and other governorates after the
sunset prayers today to express their approval of the President's decisions." He also called on supporters to take part in
a "million-man" rally in Abdeen Square, near the Ministry of Justice in downtown Cairo, on Tuesday, November 27.



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795808 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795808 Date: 11/30/2015




      Meanwhile, thirty-five political parties and movements issued a statement today promising to continue the sit-in
at Tahrir Square until Morsi rescinds his decrees. They also called for dissolving the Constituent Assembly, relieving
Interior Minister Ahmed Gamal Eddin, and restructuring the MOI.

(SBU) Statement by the Minister of Justice: Justice Minister Ahmed Mekki said he agreed with the reservations of the
judiciary over President Mohamed Morsy's constitutional declaration, but added that he trusts the President's
intentions. In an interview November 24, Mekki said he played the role of mediator between the executive and judicial
authorities. He said he would not criticize the decisions of the judges or of the President. Mekki also said that Morsi's
decrees aim to complete the establishment of state institutions, commenting that this would produce freedom and
democracy. He alleged that some of those criticizing the decrees sought to create division in society.

•     Following yesterday's call by Ahmed Al-Zend, President of the Judges Club, for judges to go on strike in opposition
to what dismissed Public Prosecutor Abdel Maguid Mahmoud termed "an attack on the judiciary," local media and
MENA have reported that judges in Alexandria, Beheira, Giza, 6 October City, New Cairo, and Nasr City have walked off
the job.

(SBU) President to meet with advisors: President Morsi will meet today with his advisors and assistants, according to
his spokesman, the second such meeting in the last 24 hours. Local media claim sources close to the President insist
that Morsi will not cancel his decrees.




     Original Message
From: Hanley, Monica R
Sent: Sunday, November 25, 2012 07:43 AM
To: 'HDR22@clintonemail.com' <HDR22@clintonemail.com>
Cc: ihuma@clintonemail.come <huma@clintonemail.com>
Subject: Amr Call

Below is the call sheet for FM Amr which Jake spoke with you about. Would.you like to do this today?



The Secretary's Call Sheet for
Egyptian FM Mohamed Kamel Amr

(SBU) Purpose of Call: To express our concern over the decisions and decrees announced by President Morsi November
22, particularly those that give him the power to rule largely by decree until a new parliament is in place.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795808 Date: 11/30/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795808 Date: 11/30/2015




(SBU) Background: President Morsi's November 22 decree removes judicial oversight of any presidential decisions from
the time he assumed power until a constitution and parliament are in place; reopens all investigations into the killing of
protestors during the revolution, including new trials for defendants who were previously acquitted (a broadly popular
measure, except among the judiciary); declares that the public prosecutor will be appointed by the president for a fixed,
four year term; prevents the judiciary from dissolving the Constituent Assembly and the Shura Council and extends the
work of the committee drafting the constitution by two months; and authorizes the president to take any measures he
sees fit in order to "preserve the revolution."

(SBU) The decree was immediately criticized by opposition groups and spurred country-wide demonstrations both for
and against President Morsi. Opposition politicians accused Morsi of acting as a "pharaoh" and a "dictator," and several
parties, including those led by Mohammed al-Baradei and Amr Musa, announced the formation of a "National Front" to
fight the President's declarations. The Front said it would also coordinate on demonstrations. Egyptian judges declared
a strike in all courts to protest what they see as the President's expanding his powers at the expense of theirs. Previous
clashes between secularists and Muslim Brotherhood (MB) supporters have turned violent, and protestors attacked MB
headquarters in Alexandria, Port Said, and Ismailiya November 23. The National Front condemned these attacks and
called for peaceful protests. Media reported that protests had begun across eight governorates; media report more
than 300 injured in all. In Cairo's Tahrir Square, police used tear gas to control the demonstrations. President Morsi
appeared before a crowd of supporters in front of the Presidential Palace November 23 to deliver a 45-minute defense
of the decree. The Department Spokesperson issued our statement on the decrees (attached) November 23; the offices
of the UN Human Rights Commissioner and EU High Representative Ashton Affairs also criticized the decree.




Attachment: November 23 Department Spokesperson Statement on the Decrees




U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Office of the Spokesperson



For Immediate
Release                                                                                               November 23, 2012
2012/1836



STATEMENT BY VICTORIA NULAND, SPOKESPERSON

The United States' Reaction to Egypt's November 22 Decisions

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795808 Date: 11/30/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795808 Date: 11/30/2015




The decisions and declarations announced on November 22 raise concerns for many Egyptians and for the international
community. One of the aspirations of the revolution was to ensure that power would not be overly concentrated in the
hands of any one person or institution. The current constitutional vacuum in Egypt can only be resolved by the adoption
of a constitution that includes checks and balances, and respects fundamental freedoms, individual rights, and the rule
of law consistent with Egypt's international commitments. We call for calm and encourage all parties to work together
and call for all Egyptians to resolve their differences over these important issues peacefully and through democratic
dialogue.

###




SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795808 Date: 11/30/2015
