         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791166 Date: 11/30/2015


                                                                                                                                RELEASE IN
                                                                                                                                FULL




From:                                         Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                                         Monday, June 11, 2012 6:41 PM
To:
Subject:                                      FW: Iran agrees to discuss nuclear proposal in Moscow-EU officials (Reuters)



FYI — the outcome of the Ashton-Jalili conversation.


From: OpsNewsTicker@state.gov [mailto:OpsNewsTicker@state.gov]
Sent: Monday, June 11, 2012 6:19 PM
To: NEWS-Iran; NEWS-Mahogany; SES-O; SES-O_OS
Subject: Iran agrees to discuss nuclear proposal in Moscow-EU officials (Reuters)

BRUSSELS (Reuters)      - European Union officials said that Iran has agreed to discuss a proposal from six world
powers to curb its production of high-grade uranium at a meeting in Moscow next week in an apparent de-
escalation of tensions ahead of the talks.

   The development follows more than two weeks of wrangling between Iranian diplomats and Western
negotiators over preparations for the closely-watched round of nuclear talks which had cast some doubts over
what can be achieved in Moscow.

   A tense exchange of letters between EU diplomats, who deal with Iran on behalf of the six powers, and
Iranian officials had earlier appeared to suggest Tehran may be backtracking on its expressed willingness to
discuss their most pressing concern - high-grade uranium enrichment even in broad terms.

  Iran's chief nuclear negotiator Saeed Jalili agreed to focus on the six powers' demands at the Moscow
meeting, during a one-hour phone conversation with EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton.

   "The Iranians agreed on the need for Iran to engage on the (six powers') proposals, which address its
concerns on the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme," a spokesman for Ashton said.




NewsTickers alert senior Department officials to breaking news. This item appears as it did in its original publication and does not contain analysis or commentary
by Department sources.




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05791166 Date: 11/30/2015
