UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795252 Date: 11/30/2015




                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL

         THE WALL MEV JOURNAL.
     •   WSican

     •   POLITICS
     •   Updated March 14, 2012, 5:23 p.m. ET


  Birth-Control Rule Debate Intensifying
  By GERALD F. SEIB

  New polling data are sparking a vigorous debate over whether an Obama administration rule
  requiring employers to offer free birth control is a political winner for the White House,
  particularly among women, as many Democrats have assumed.

  New polling data are sparking a vigorous debate over whether an Obama administration rule
  requiring employers to offer free birth control is a political winner for the White House,
  particularly among women. Jerry Seib has details on Lunch Break.

  Two new surveys, one by The Wall Street Journal/NBC News and the other by the New York
  Times/CBS News, show overall opposition to the rule's requirement that religious institutions
  offer contraceptive drugs free of charge. The Journal/NBC survey—conducted by Republican
  pollster Bill Mclnturff and Democrat Peter Hart—found opposition to applying the rule to
  religious institutions higher among men, but it also recorded significant numbers of women
  opposed.

  When asked whether employers overall should be required to offer free birth control,
  Journal/NBC poll respondents favored the rule by 53% to 33%. Approval was slightly higher
  among women, 58% to 28%.

  But when asked whether the government should mandate that Roman Catholic and other
  religiously affiliated hospitals and colleges offer birth control paid for by the institutions'
  insurance companies—as required by the rule—Americans were opposed by 45% to 38%.
  Women split evenly, with 40% in favor and 40% opposed.

  When Journal/NBC pollsters asked more specifically whether the government should require
  religious institutions to provide such contraception coverage—including the morning-after pill,
  which would be covered under the rule opposition rose further. Americans overall were
  opposed 49% to 34%, and women were opposed by 46% to 35%.

  Catholics in the survey favored employers in general providing free birth control by 52% to 34%,
  but they opposed a government requirement that Catholic institutions specifically provide the
  coverage, 48% to 36%.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795252 Date: 11/30/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795252 Date: 11/30/2015




  "These questions provide a pretty good road map for how the Republicans can frame the issue to
  their advantage," said Jay Campbell, a Democratic pollster who helps conduct the Journal/NBC
  News survey.

  "When the debate is focused on a health frame, whether there should be access to inexpensive
  birth control, it's very clearly in the Democrats' wheelhouse....But when the frame is more
  skewed toward abortion and religion, it's much more in Republican territory," he said.

  Mr. Campbell also said that the poll offered little evidence the findings affected respondents'
  preferences in the presidential race.

  The debate over the effect of the rule has been fueled this week by the Times/CBS poll, which
  showed Mr. Obama's job approval overall at 41%—a drop of nine points from a month earlier—
  and at that same number among men and women alike.

  In February, 53% of woman polled approved of the president's handling of his job. The finding is
  unusual because the president has consistently won a higher approval rating among women than
  among men.

  The poll also showed women by 53% to 38% said religiously affiliated employers should be able
  to opt out of the birth-control rule that requires employers, including religious institutions, to
  offer contraceptive drugs free of charge. Men favored a religious opt-out by a slightly wider
  margin.

  The new numbers prompted conservative analysts on Tuesday to assert that the president's poll
  decline could be an outgrowth of controversy over the recent rule, which is being vigorously
  opposed by Catholic bishops. "It's hard to read this poll and not conclude that, contrary to some
  accounts, Obama wasn't such a genius to pick a fight over mandated contraception coverage—
  because he appears to be losing the public debate on the question," Mickey Kaus wrote on the
  Daily Caller website.

  Other analysts, though, suggested that rising gas prices are a more likely cause of any decline in
  Mr. Obama's poll numbers. Still, they also say it's difficult to attribute a change in presidential
  job approval to any individual factor. The Journal/NBC News poll had the president's approval
  rating at a relatively high 50%. The pollsters also found Mr. Obama with higher ratings among
  women than among men.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05795252 Date: 11/30/2015
