UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767858 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL

      FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
      Contact: Stephan Miller
      Office of the Mayor of Jerusalem
      miller@jerusalem.muni.il


                 The King's Garden (Gan Hamelech, Al Bustan) — Development Plan

      Tuesday, March 2, 2010, Jerusalem, Israel - The King's Garden area will be developed
      into a tourist and residential district. Commercial sections, restaurants, and art galleries
      will be built, turning it into a bustling tourist zone. For the first time, the local residents
      will have the legitimate right to live in this neighborhood.

      The Mayor of Jerusalem, Nir Barkat, has introduced his new development plan for the King's
      Garden area, located south of the Temple Mount in Jerusalem.

      The proposal — soon to be brought before the local and regional planning committees for
      discussion — aims to create a mixed use of the area, making it attractive to both tourists and
      the local residents. The project will comprise several interlaced elements:

      I. Restoration of the garden: The western part of the Gan Hamelech area will be restored
         to its historical condition as a site of international as well as national prominence. The
         Gihon Spring will once again flow along the Kidron Valley, the orchards will be
         replanted, and a blooming garden will be grown, which would be open to both visitors
         and the neighborhood residents.

      2.   Development of commerce, restaurants and tourism: In the eastern part of the
           neighborhood, about 3000 sq.m of land will be approved for the construction of
           commercial areas, restaurants, artists' workshops, souvenir and local art shops, all on the
           ground level.

      3. Housing units for the welfare of the district residents: On the eastern side, above the
         commercial level, housing units will be built to satisfy the needs of the local residents.

      4. Infrastructure: The area, having been designated in the past to be an open recreational
         space, has not been planned or developed. The Jerusalem Municipality intends to design
         urban infrastructure, including the upgrade of the road and sewage infrastructure and
         other local facilities.

      5. A public facility building: According to the plan, large building for the welfare of the
         neighborhood residents will be constructed on a 2000 sq.m site designated to include
         public areas, schoolrooms, day care centers, kindergartens, workout gyms, infant welfare
         centers, etc. The center, in addition to other establishments promoted by the municipality
         for the welfare of the residents of the eastern part of the city, will provide suitable
         solutions for the neighborhood residents. Underground a parking lot will be built for
         about 140 vehicles.

      This plan constitutes a precedent inasmuch as apart from enforcing the law upon illegally
      built houses, it also enables and helps residents to build new homes in accordance with the
      law.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767858 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767858 Date: 08/31/2015




      This plan is considered a bold move due to the following reasons:

          According to the national law, the King's Garden is at present classified as an open
          recreational space. Some of the neighborhood houses are under continuous legal
          proceedings, including fines, demolition orders, etc.

          Throughout the years and especially after regulating the sewage infrastructure in 1992,
          extensive parts of the park have been destroyed, and dozens of structures have been
          erected without permits. Thus, within a short time another greenbelt has ceased to exist in
          the city.

          The area, which for centuries has been preserved as an open space, and until 1967 had
          included no more than four buildings, has turned into a slum, lacking infrastructure,
          public institutions, and devoid of any planning.

          The municipal plan for the King's Garden neighborhood intends to restore the area to its
          natural state, the way it used to be as an open space for the benefit of residents and
          tourists, while providing an appropriate solution to the needs of the inhabitants of the area
          and creating tourist and business opportunities for the entire district.

          The proposal considers the long lasting present situation whereby about 120 families
          inhabit the neighborhood under difficult housing conditions.

          The realization of this program is a particularly difficult process, in view of the fact that
          the land in this area is not regulated.

          The process requires shifting some buildings from the western side of the Kidron Valley
          to its eastern side, which involves special legal procedures.

          The process requires designing and judiciary creativity as well as the cooperation of
          numerous factors. The Jerusalem Municipality acts vis-à-vis all these factors, among
          which are the municipal legal department and the State Attorney, for the purpose of
          finding a legitimate solution suitable for the recent design and enforcement of the
          Jerusalem municipality.

          The process requires determination on the part of government factors and cooperation on
          the part of the local residents and their representatives. Whenever the residents cooperate,
          the municipality will be flexible, but when they attempt to undermine the plan, the
          municipality will remain firm in its implementation.

          In the course of last year, dozens of meetings and debates were held with the
          neighborhood residents and their representatives, with the intent of formulating a fair
          program which would consider their needs as well as the extensive public interest, and
          with the objective of establishing a fundamental trust in the intentions and the program of
          the municipality.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767858 Date: 08/31/2015
