        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774959 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL



From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com>
Sent:                               Monday, April 19, 2010 5:19 PM
To:                                 'JilotyLC@state.gov.
Subject:                            Fw: Secretary's Video Speech



PIs print.

    Original Message
From: Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
To: H
Sent: Mon Apr 19 10:18:03 2010
Subject: FW: Secretary's Video Speech

FYI



From: John, Eric G
Sent: Monday, April 19, 2010 4:29 AM
To: Campbell, Kurt M; Marcie!, Scot A; Smith, Demian
Cc: Sullivan, Jacob
Subject: Secretary's Video Speech

Kurt:

You'll be happy to know that the Secretary's video message was the subject of a great op-ed in today's Thai Rath, the
leading newspaper in Thailand. They took exactly the line that we hoped they would — seeing her message not as the
U.S. intervening in politics, but, rather, as a very personal message from someone who cares deeply about Thailand. The
writer even referred to the Secretary's autobiography.

Thai Rath (leading Thai language daily), a commentary on Thai politics, April 16, referenced Secretary Clinton's video
statement calling for a peaceful solution to Thailand's political crisis: "I would like to thank U.S. Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton for making a request herself and on behalf of President Obama for the two opposing parties to return to the
negotiating table so as to end their conflict. The short video message in which she mentioned Thailand was full of
sincerity. She started by saying that she was making this request as "a long-standing friend of the Thai people" She
referred to the Songkran festival which is the Thai New Year and said the opposing parties should consider this an
opportunity for a new round of talks. She emphasized that violence cannot bring happiness and peace and that the
opposing parties should talk in order to solve the problem. I believe Mrs. Clinton said this with sincerity. I have read a
book in which she wrote about her brief visit to Thailand as First Lady several years ago and showed her goodwill toward
the Thai people and Thailand in the book. During her most recent visit to Thailand last year, Mrs. Clinton gave an
interview and expressed her opinion about Thai politics in the most amicable way. Normally, I do not quite approve of
the U.S. because I think it often meddles with other countries' affairs. But I wholeheartedly agree with Secretary
Clinton's request and would like to sincerely thank her for it." (To see the video, click here.
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LPGYKyoDma8> To read the original article in Thai, click here.
<http://www.thairath.co.th/column/pol/hehapatee/76917> )




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774959 Date: 08/31/2015
