       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768527 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL




From:                               Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                               Tuesday, April 20, 2010 9:40 AM
To:
Subject:                            Statement for sign off



Joint Statement by Former President Clinton and Secretary of State Clinton on the Passing of Dr. Dorothy Height We are
deeply saddened to learn of the passing of Dr. Dorothy Height, an icon of America's long march toward equality and a
personal inspiration to us both. As the only woman among the "Big Six" civil rights leaders, Dr. Height helped galvanize a
movement that changed our country forever. She organized the "Wednesdays in Mississippi" meetings that brought
black and white women together to find common ground and break down barriers. She never stopped fighting for what
she knew was right. And through it all, she was always the best dressed woman in the room. We were blessed to know
Dr. Height, to benefit from her grace, passion and wisdom, and to call her our friend. For decades, starting with the early
days at the Children's Defense Fund, we worked with her, learned from her, and drew inspiration from her example.
From the Presidential Medal of Freedom, to the Congressional Gold Medal, to the unveiling of a long-sought-after bust
of Sojourner Truth in the United States Capitol, we had the privilege of helping honor Dr. Height and her
accomplishments. Born before women had the right to vote, denied access to the college of her choice because of the
color of her skin, and witness to nation divided, Dr. Height dedicated her life to the proposition that all Americans should
have the opportunity to live up to their full God-given potential. Our nation is poorer for her loss but infinitely richer for
the life she led, the progress she achieved, and the people she touched. Our thoughts and prayers are with Dr. Height's
family today, and with her many loving friends and colleagues. She would be the first to tell us that the best way to
honor her memory is to carry forward the work she started and the causes she championed, to open wide the freedom
gates. May we all find the strength and the wisdom to live up to her legacy.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768527 Date: 08/31/2015
