UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766664 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                          RELEASE
                                                                                          IN FULL

                               New Life Children's Refuge
                               Haitian Orphan Rescue Mission

   Purpose: Rescue Haitian orphans abandoned on the streets, makeshift hospitals or from
    collapsed orphanages in Port au Prince and surrounding areas, and bring them to New Life
    Children's Refuge in Cabarete, Dominican Republic.

   The Urgent Need: The number of Haitian orphans is estimated to have increased by 300% as a
    result of the catastrophic earthquake this past week. Thousands of children have lost their
    parents, and are injured, hungry, thirsty and alone with limited chance of survival without help.

   The Plan:

       Rescue Orphans from Port au Prince, Haiti

       •    Friday/Saturday, Jan 22nd: NLCR team fly to the DR
       •    Sun Jan 23r1: Drive bus from Santo Domingo into Port au Prince, Haiti and gather 100
            orphans from the streets and collapsed orphanages, then return to the DR
       •    Mon Jan 24th : Bus arrives in Cabarete, DR at New Life Children Refuge
       •    Haiti Team: Laura Silsby, Charisa Coulter, Carla Thompson, Nicole & Corrinna Lankford
            Paul Thompsons Team from East Side Baptist Church, Twin Falls

       Provide love and care for the children

       •    Interim New Life Children Refuge Location: NLCR is in the process of buying land and
            building an orphanage, school and church in Magante on the northern coast of the
            Dominican Republic. Given the urgent needs from this earthquake, God has laid upon
            our hearts the need to go now vs. waiting until the permanent facility is built. He has
            provided an interim solution in nearby Cabarete, where we will be leasing a 45 room
            hotel and converting it into an orphanage until the building of the NLCR is complete.
            This interim location will enable us to provide a loving environment for up to 150
            children, from infants to 12 years old.
        •   Team Needed: NLCR is praying and seeking people who have a heart for God and a
            desire to share God's love with these precious children, helping them heal and find new
            life in Christ. Please prayerfully consider a 2 week or longer mission trip to help NLCR
            provide rotating staffing for the care of the children over the next 6 months.

    Prayer Requests

        •   For discernment of God's will and direction throughout this trip and for Him to prepare
            the way before us
        •   For God to continue to grant favor with the Dominican Government in allowing us to
            bring as many orphans as we can into the DR




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766664 Date: 08/31/2015
