       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769626 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                RELEASE
                                                                                                IN FULL


From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ©state.gov>
Sent:                              Wednesday, June 2, 2010 5:10 PM
To:                                H
Subject                            From Bob Blake



FYI:

USIBC Launches New Education Initiative to Strengthen K-12, Vocational, and Higher Education Linkages in the U.S. and
India

June 2, 2010 - Washington, DC - On the occasion of its 35th anniversary, and looking ahead to the global economy of
the future, the U.S.-India Business Council (USIBC) today announced the launch of a new initiative aimed at
strengthening institutional linkages between academia, industry and NGOs focusing on the elementary, vocational and
higher education sectors in both countries.

"The United States and India must be committed partners in building the workforce of tomorrow, a partnership that will
unleash opportunity, spur growth and sustain prosperity not just in our countries but across the global community," said
Harold McGraw III, incoming USIBC Chairman and Chairman, President and CEO of The McGraw-Hill Companies. "To do
this, we must focus on strengthening our educational ties at every level. By working together our two countries can
equip the next generation with the education and skills necessary to compete and win in the global economy."

Mr. McGraw gave the keynote address before a packed audience of over 400 U.S. and Indian business, government, and
education leaders at USIBC's 35th Anniversary Summit, entitled "A Pivotal Period in U.S.-India Relations: Tackling
Education, Infrastructure and Inclusive Growth."

On the eve of the first-ever U.S.-India Strategic Dialogue, India's Union Minister of External Affairs, SM Krishna, U.S.
Education Secretary Arne Duncan, India's Minister of Human Resource Development, Kapil Sibal, and India's Ambassador
to the United States, Meera Shankar, joined hundreds of top business leaders in Washington to participate in the U.S.-
India Business Council 35th anniversary deliberations.

USIBC's Education Initiative will serve as a dynamic platform for business, NGOs, and academia to provide vital input into
both the U.S. and Indian governments - such that the synergies between American and Indian business and educational
communities are unleashed.

"We can talk about strategic, defense, civil nuclear, renewable energy and every other type of commercial cooperation,
but if we do not develop the skill sets in our respective societies to sustain such collaboration, all this talk will never be
successfully converted to action," Ron Somers, President of the U.S.-India Business Council, noted. "How fortunate it is
that families across all walks of life in both our societies so highly value education. We have much to learn from one
another, and much to accomplish - to prepare for the challenges of the 21st Century," Somers said.

The USIBC Education initiative will focus on three thrust areas:

1.   Higher Education: USIBC will host the U.S.-India Higher Education Forum (HEF) at the invitation of the U.S. and
Indian governments. The HEF will serve as the premier platform to enlist academia, industry and NGOs to strengthen
linkages between U.S. and Indian educational institutions from both countries. The HEF will provide a formalized
network for industry, academia and the NGO community to provide direct policy input to the U.S. and Indian
governments in all areas of education, with an aim to facilitate greater collaboration, including the opening of India's
higher education sector.


       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769626 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769626 Date: 08/31/2015




2. Elementary K-12 Education : USIBC has embarked on a survey of rural and urban, private and public K-12 schools
throughout India to identify best practices that are working well in educating students, while assessing needs where
industry, NGOs and government may join together to fill gaps. With the support of Ryan International Group, one of
India's leading educators, both financial and intellectual resources will be mobilized to transform these and other
schools in a manner that promotes replication of successful models across India.

3.    Vocational Training and Skills Development : USIBC will partner with its member-companies to feature Case
Studies of Vocational Training and Skills Development that are being implemented across India. The exercise will
attempt to enlist more corporations to participate in this important area of human capacity building. Programs helping
to train thousands of workers will generate employment opportunities and sustain economic growth now and for the
long future - in both countries.

India is embarked on expanding its community college system, including technical training institutions, as well as inviting
interest in implementing 30,000 new colleges and 1,500 universities over the next decade.
The United States continues to be the most sought after destination for Indian students studying overseas, attracting as
many as 113,000 each year to American universities and colleges. The U.S. wishes to remain a magnet for attracting the
best and the brightest from around the world by promoting institutional partnerships between U.S. based educational
institutions and new counterparts. Integral to this core knowledge infrastructure, industry must be involved in this
enterprise.

The McGraw-Hill Companies (NYSE: MHP) is a global information and education company providing knowledge, insights
and analysis in the financial, education and business information sectors through leading brands including Standard &
Poor's, McGraw-Hill Education, J.D. Power and Associates and Platts. McGraw-Hill established business operations in
India 40 years ago. Through its partnership with CRISIL, India's leading ratings, research, and risk and policy advisory
company, Standard & Poor's is helping facilitate access to capital to drive economic growth and job creation in the
country. Through its partnership with Tata, McGraw-Hill Education is delivering innovative, digital solutions to help
workers acquire the 21st century skills they need to succeed in today's global economy. India is home to McGraw-Hill's
largest employee population outside of the U.S. and is the company's fourth largest market.

The U.S.-India Business Council, formed in 1975 at the request of the Government of India and the U.S. Government to
advance commercial ties between the world's two largest free-market democracies, is hosted under the aegis of the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is the world's largest business federation representing more
than 3 million businesses and organizations of every size, sector, and region. The U.S.-India Business Council celebrates
its 35th Anniversary at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce on June 2, 2010 in Washington, D.C. For more information please
visit www.usibc.com .
www.usibc.com




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769626 Date: 08/31/2015
