      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767805 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Tuesday, January 12, 2010 12:44 PM
To:
Subject:                          FW: To Heilemann, Halperin and Politico: I'll Proudly Defend Hillary Clinton, On the
                                  Record



See below


From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Tuesday, January 12, 2010 12:36 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: To Heilemann, Halperin and Politico: I'll Proudly Defend Hillary Clinton, On the Record

The Huffington Post January 12, 2010




Peter Daou
Political consultant, former adviser to Hillary Clinton

Posted: January 12, 2010 11:26 AM



To Heilemann, Halperin and Politico: I'll Proudly
Defend Hillary Clinton, On the Record
Ben Smith writes a cover story for Politico titled Game over: The Clintons stand alone. The piece is based on
John Heilemann and Mark Halperin's 'Game Change', the latest in an ever-expanding series of 2008 campaign
books -- none of which, in my view, capture the entire story of what happened in that historic Democratic
primary. (I include in that assessment David Plouffe's The Audacity to Win, which is undeniably a definitive
version of what transpired inside the Obama campaign from the perspective of an exceptional campaign
manager, but overlooks key reasons for Hillary Clinton's defeat and doesn't articulate the full scope of the
online commentariat's impact.)

I am reading Game Change now and will update this entry once I've completed the portions about Hillary
Clinton but I wanted to post something immediately in response to the Politico story.

Ben Smith is a savvy, well-connected reporter and Heilemann/Halperin are about as plugged into Beltway
culture and DC power centers as anyone can be -- whether that's good or bad I'll let others judge. I became
acquainted with Halperin during the campaign -- and with Smith -- but never spoke to the former about the
book, nor with the latter about his article, so I'm coming to this as an outside observer. I don't dispute that
Heilemann/Halperin have high level sources. I just want to be sure their readers get an accurate picture of
Hillary Clinton's conduct during the campaign.

Smith's Politico article makes the case that the Clintons have few remaining defenders:
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767805 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767805 Date: 08/31/2015




What's notable about the highly publicized release of "Game Change," however, is the virtual silence from the Clinton
camp. The lack of public outrage seems to mark the sputtering end of what was once known as the Clinton political
machine and underlines a fact that onetime Clinton loyalists acknowledge: The book's primary sources about the former
candidate and current secretary of state are her own former staffers and intimates. As a result, there is no campaign of
veteran Clintonites spinning the press corps and trying to pre-emptively discredit the book's scathing depiction of Hillary
Clinton as a rudderless candidate and a cheerleader for vicious tactics against eventual winner Barack Obama.... "Game
Change" peels back a decade of careful renovations off Hillary Clinton's carefully constructed public face, casting her in
the terms that defined her at her lows in the mid-1990s: scheming, profane, sometimes paranoid, often tone-deaf.


Here's my response: as a former adviser and a senior staffer/department head at her presidential campaign, I'll
proudly defend Hillary Clinton and I'll do whatever I can to counter lies, smears and mischaracterizations.

Let me start by recounting how I first got to know her. Nearly four years ago, I was asked by her long-time
communications maven Howard Wolfson to join her senate campaign. I was very happy running my site, the
Daou Report, and advising a number of organizations in the then-nascent field of digital media consulting. I
considered it an honor to be asked, but I knew it was a life-changing decision. Heeding Howard's warning that
once I became part of 'Hillaryland' anything I said or did could become a media story (examples here and here),
I had a series of conversations with people I trusted and whose unique perspective could help me make an
informed decision.

I discussed it first with close friends and family.

I then spoke to Joan Walsh at Salon, who hosted/supported my site and always gave great advice. I spoke to
Arianna Huffington, who openly warned me against giving up the world of blogging to join the Clinton team. I
spoke to David Brock at Media Matters, who had a long history with the Clintons and understood the media
landscape in great depth. I spoke to John Kerry, who I respect deeply and for whom I worked in the bitterly
contested 2004 election. I fought on his behalf when he was trailing badly going into the 2004 primaries, and
after he won the nomination, I lived, worked, ate and slept in his war room for the epic battle against
Bush/Cheney/Rove. He understood and taught me the rigors of a campaign better than anyone I knew. And
because one of my overarching tasks for Clinton was to connect her to the netroots, I spoke to bloggers like
Digby, Markos (Kos) and others to get a sense of the challenge ahead.

In the end, I couldn't miss the once in a lifetime opportunity to work with one of the most dynamic, inspiring
women in the world. And even though the entire focus when I joined her was on the senate campaign, I, like
many others, was looking ahead to the 2008 race. I've blogged for years about the pervasive abuse of women
and the rampant sexism that affects our world, and the idea of electing a woman president was beyond exciting.

Our first meeting was set for 15-30 minutes but lasted over an hour. Contrary to the myth that she was clueless
about the Internet, Hillary was well aware of the importance of technology, of the role of the online community,
and most importantly to me, the value of a strong progressive infrastructure centered around blogs, CAP, Media
Matters and the like. We discussed the Middle East and my childhood in Beirut during Lebanon's bloody civil
war. Not unexpectedly, she knew virtually everything about every topic we discussed. And she was as down to
earth and funny as anyone I'd ever met in politics -- or outside politics.

A week later, fighting flared up in Lebanon. Very early on a Sunday morning, my home phone rang. I answered
groggily. It was Hillary, calling to make sure my friends and family in Beirut were OK. That's the person she is,
the person I encountered throughout the campaign, privately and publicly.

But this is not about psychoanalyzing Hillary Clinton or probing her personal attributes -- others have made a
living doing that. It's not about making her out to be a saint. Nobody is. This is about describing how she ran her
campaign and how she treated her opponents when the cameras and microphones were off.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767805 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767805 Date: 08/31/2015




Was I on every call and at every strategy session? No. Can I vouch for every single thing said and done at the
campaign. Of course not. But having participated in countless senior strategy meetings, crisis management and
rapid response drills and emergencies, "war rooms within war rooms" (a term used by Heilemann/Halperin),
debate prep, calls, emails and private conversations with the candidate, and having slept with my BlackBerry
under my pillow and been stationed at the center of her communications operation for the duration of the
campaign, I can confidently state that Hillary Clinton did not push for 'vicious' or dirty tactics against any of her
opponents, nor did she encourage or 'cheer on' that behavior from her staff. The ethos of the campaign, which
she conveyed in word and deed, was that she would win because she was best prepared, worked the hardest and
had the most compelling ideas.

She was centered, dignified and focused throughout, although her frustration and pain did show through at some
moments. She knew the media environment was stacked against her, against any woman. She knew what she
was up against and drove forward into the furious headwinds of sexism and rightwing-fueled Clinton-hatred.

For Hillary Clinton, it wasn't about being a woman, it was about being the best.

The unraveling of her huge lead in the polls in late 2007 is an incredibly convoluted and harrowing tale of
words, actions, decisions, interpersonal dynamics, internal campaign struggles, dysfinictionality, careless
mistakes, leaks, "surrogates gone wild," (my term for overzealous supporters), reactions, underreactions,
overreactions, strategic/tactical brilliance and incompetence, emotional highs and lows on the part of all the
candidates and campaigns. Anyone who tries to reduce it to a few pivotal moments or to a simple character
narrative does history an injustice. It was literally a minute by minute unfolding, accelerated and complexified
by millions of online activists and commentators, who could shape and reshape conventional wisdom in a
matter of moments. Any single decision could have changed the course of events -- and of history. I have little
tolerance for critics who simplify the whole election as some sort of reflection of the supposedly terrible
character of Bill and Hillary Clinton, conveniently ignoring the Obama campaign's brutally effective hardball
tactics and overlooking the infinite dimensions -- and messiness -- of a presidential image/message war.

The fact is, both campaigns slogged it out, played rough, and one came out victorious. And it would be wrong
to act like only Hillary faced historic obstacles. Barack Obama was a formidable candidate and opponent who
faced almost insurmountable odds. He deserves all the credit for winning and even more credit for appreciating
Hillary's value when the contest ended.

Still, it's important to state for the record, contra Game Change (or at least Politico's interpretation of the book),
that if anything, Hillary's campaign let her down, not the reverse. Nor was it just one person's fault. Her entire
senior team bears responsibility. I take responsibility for the role I played. It's easy to demean her when you're
an anonymous source for a book (and an easy way to absolve oneself of guilt), but let's get real: far too often,
she carried the campaign through sheer force of will and through an endless wellspring of personal fortitude.

Nobody wants to relive 2008, but history is being written now. Generations from today, students will read about
a historic campaign where barriers were shattered, and I for one, don't want the wrong story to be told.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767805 Date: 08/31/2015
