UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768547 Date: 08/31/2015




                         Dick Lugar                                                     RELEASE
                                                                                        IN FULL


                      U.S. Senator for Indiana
                             Date: 3/10/2010 • http://luciar.senate.gov
                     Andy Fisher • 202-224-2079 • andy_fisher@lugar.senate.gov



       Administration should include education assistance in
        supplemental funding request for Haiti, Lugar says
 Getting Haitian children back in classrooms should be a priority in U.S. assistance to Haiti, U.S.
 Sen. Dick Lugar said today after attending the White House Rose Garden ceremony with
 President Barack Obama hosting Haitian President René Preval. Earlier in the day, former
 President Bill Clinton also told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that this should be a
 priority.

 "As the Administration prepares to present its supplemental appropriations request for Haiti, a
 top priority for recovery and long term reconstruction efforts in Haiti should include significant
 assistance to get Haitian children quickly back into the classroom," Lugar said. "Assistance for
 infrastructure, technical assistance for instruction and curriculum development especially should
 be included. Only with a strong education initiative will Haiti have a chance at a better future."

  Lugar directed two staff members to accompany a Congressional Delegation to Haiti on Friday,
  March 5. During the visit, staff saw firsthand the devastation experienced by Haitians and
  reported to Lugar that thousands of schools in and around Port au Prince could remain closed for
  months or never reopen. As a result, Haitian children could be left languishing in refugee camps.
  Before the January 12 earthquake approximately one-half of Haiti's school-age children were
  enrolled in classes. Children make up about 45 percent of Haiti's population.

  "The relationship between the United States and the Haitian government should be a consensual,
  cooperative arrangement that preserves Haitian participation in decisions, while ensuring that the
  resources and expertise of the United States Government and international community are
  brought to bear on the daily problems of Haiti. Education of the Haiti's youth is an appropriate
  starting point," Lugar said.

                                                  ##




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768547 Date: 08/31/2015
