      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771195 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                          RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                              McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sent:                              Friday, August 20, 2010 8:39 AM
To:
Subject:                           FW: Impact of US assistance in Pakistan



See below. Terrific piece from the BBC which I will circulate.

Meant to mention yesterday that I am going to Buenos Aires, Montevideo and Santiago next week. In Buenos Aires and
Montevideo I will speaking at two business conferences being hosted by Council of the Americas and in Chile I will be
visiting some of the public diplomacy programs we launched after the earthquake.

You may recall that I have a long-standing relationship with Christina Kirchner going back to my Discovery days. We had
quite a large and successful business there. We are trying to arrange for me to meet with her when I am in BA
and Arturo has briefed me on points he would like me to make if I get to spend some time with her.

I thought yesterday went well although I think it is going to be hard going to keep the world interested and committed
to raising the necessary funding.




im
From: Mellott, Joseph
Sent: Friday, August 20, 2010 6:50 AM
To: McHale, Judith A
Subject: Fw: Impact of US assistance in Pakistan

Judith -

See below from                   at BBC.

Joe
Joe Mellott
Sent from my Blackberry



From
To: Mellott, Joseph
Sent: Fri Aug 20 06:29:43 2010
Subject: Impact of US assistance in Pakistan

Joe

 How are things?

 I thought Judith might be interested in this piece by the BBC's Islamabad editor.                       The piece
 should be on BBC News website soon.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771195 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771195 Date: 08/31/2015




 Haroon Rashid,
 Kalam Valley, NorthWeat Pakistan


 A population of around 70,000 in Pakistan's remote Kalam valley in Swat district is cut off after
 road links were swept away by flood waters three weeks back. Dozens of multi-story hotels
 perched on the river banks can't be seen anymore. The people are without electricity and
 telephone services too.

 But despite this dismal picture, what follows natural disasters is not always all bad.

 International assistance led by the US forces here is changing people's perceptions while local
 volunteers have joined hands to start rebuilding bridges and roads to restore their connection
 with the outside world.

 Until last year Kalam, as rest of the Swat district, was hit hard by Islamic militancy. They
 espoused anti-US agenda. But Pakistani troops helped by local people flushed the Taleban out of
 the picturesque valley surrounded by tall green mountains. The incident of a few women too
 killing some Taleban is still proudly told here.

 With the routing of Taleban last year and arrival of the US Marines helicopters in Kalam, local
 perception of the Americans is changing fast. Suddenly the local population, mostly Pashtoon,
 now appreciate the American presence.

 Thirty-year old Habib Rasul, a local Taxi driver, says before floods they used to consider
 Americans enemy. "We used to consider them bad, our enemies. Muslim countries did not give
 us any assistance but they did so they're good."

 Kalam is cut off by road. Depending on weather, US military helicopters are bringing in relief
 goods, mostly flour and medicines in a number of sorties each day. They land at Kalam's green
 Shahi ground where hundreds of affectees' sit around the helipad waiting for their turn for aid or
 to be taken on board.

  Despite the helipad open to general public, no untoward incident has so far taken place. But the
  Pakistani authorities it seems don't wish to take any chances. Apart from two Pakistani military
  commandoes on each chopper, the helipad's security is in the Pakistani military's hands.

  On their way back, these Blackhawks take the sick and the wounded out of the secluded valley.

  'A friend in need is a friend indeed. In the past we thought the Americans were supporting
  militants, that it was their game, but now I am sure ninety-five percent of people in Kalam
  believe they are friends," says a local social worker Ehsanul Haq. "We're grateful to them."

  Kalam is a place for leisure lover and hikers. The small tourist resort had around 300 small and
  medium sized hotels. But the spread of militancy had badly affected the local hotel economy for
  two years. In a bid to attract tourists and restore their confidence, the military in July held a
  festival in Kalam. But a few days later, floods wreaked havoc with the local hotel industry. Over
  4000 tourists had to be evacuated in helicopters. The local hoteliers fear getting the tourists back
  now would take a lot of time.


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771195 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771195 Date: 08/31/2015




 Another positive thing to come out of the current disaster is the local population's decision not to
 wait for any government help and start rebuilding bridges and clear roads.

 Malik Ghazan Khan, head of local volunteers, told the BBC they know if they look towards the
 government it could take months or even years. "We are doing it on the basis of self help
 because who else can assist us at this moment except God. The Chief Minister has told us they
 can't do it immediately. He said they had to go through processes and procedures so it takes time.
 So we have decided to do it ourselves by taking God name. I salute the brave people of Kalam,
 they have so far reconstructed six bridges. We have made 18 to 20 kms road useable now."

 These volunteers have their own problems. Three fell in the gushing river Swat in front of us
 while putting a log across the river. Luckily all three were rescued but one had his leg broken
 and had to be evacuated the next day.

 Like food and medicines, fuel is in short supply too. A volunteer Noorul Ahad told me they don't
 have the fuels. "While fasting its impossible for us to travel 20 krns up and down a day."




 Haroon Rashid,
 BBC Pakistan.

 www.bbcurdu.com




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771195 Date: 08/31/2015
