      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771090 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                              Sullivan, Jacob 1 <Sullivan11@state.gov>
Sent:                              Tuesday, August 17, 2010 7:50 PM
To:
Subject:                           FW: talk with Qureshi



FYI. We are working some of this into the remarks.

    Original Message
From: Holbrooke, Richard
Sent: Tuesday, August 17, 2010 5:50 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Fw: talk with Qureshi

Jake--pls share this immensely worrying email on vali's talk in NY this afternoon with Hillary asap, and make sure it is
reflected in her remarks Thursday. RH

     Original Message
From: Nasr, S Vali R
To: 'HolbrookeR@state.gov' <HolbrookeR@state.gov>
Sent: Tue Aug 17 17:44:22 2010
Subject: talk with Qureshi




    Original Message
From: Vali Nasr
To: Nasr, S Vali R
Sent: Tue Aug 17 17:36:06 2010
Subject: talk with Qureshi

I just spoke at length with Qureshi--he had just checked into his hotel. Some of what he said may be useful for
Secretary's speech, others are generally
instructive:

1- He has a 3.5 minute curtain raiser comment planned about what has happened followed by a five minute
"documentary" on the floods that they plan to distribute as CDs.

2-The flood is the biggest since 1929 (almost two decades before Pakistan was
born)

3-The Monsoon season will last another 3-4 weeks, and if rains continue things will get a lot worse. He says we are only
witnessing the effects of the first flood wave, the second is about to happen, and they are expecting a third wave before
the end of the monsoon. The current flood is largely caused by the swelling of Kabul and Indus rivers, the next waves will
include the major rivers running from India through Azad Kashmir and Punjab into Sind. The pressure is already building
in Indian dams and soon they have to release the water.
Pakistan is talking to India, but there is little India can do about the issue.
Flooding in eastern rivers will engulf Baluchistan and Punja as well, more agricultural lands, creating more refugees and
forcing the first wave of refugees to move again.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771090 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771090 Date: 08/31/2015




4-The greatest damage is done in the two areas of the country where the security problem is worst: Khyber-
Pakhtunkhwa and Southern Punjab. Devastation is not just by the water but also by the refugee problem (major issue in
Punjab and Baluchistan). As a result tents and refugee relief is the most needed follow up to helicopter support. The
problem in these areas will impact fight against extremism, but he said that exodus to larger cities, and dryer rural
districts is bound to cause a variety of other social and political problems.

5-The Pakistan government was caught by surprise by the magnitude of the problem, especially at local level. Local
authorities in may cases were busy evacuating their own families, and then were overwhelmed by the size of the
problem. The only functioning effort was by the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) that was created as
part of 2005 earthquake relief, and is led by General Nadim (working closely with ODRO). But Qureshi says that while
NDMA functions well at national level, at local level it lacks capacity.

6-The largest challenge is complete collapse of local government (the level at which implementation is and will have to
happen. And this involves not just PPP, but PMLN and MQM and ANP as well. As a result, the flood has created interest
in cooperation between all political parties, since local governments of all of them are lacking and face protest.

7-In Islamabad Gilani is in charge, but in effect the army has stepped in to fill the vaccuum for lack of local government.
But even the army is not up to the task.

8-Because of collapse of local government and infrastructure, helicopters were the single most important thing, and
there the US contribution was singularly important.

9-He said friend and foe in Pakistan praises what US has done. The eprception is that the US was first out of gate to help
Pakistan. What has impressed Pakistanis is not just the assistance, but what US officials have said publicly, and the very
visible compassion they have shown for Pakistan. He singled out Ambassador Holbrooke's passionate plea for assistance
to Pakistan as having made an important impact.

10-Qureshi said he is deeply worried that the international community may not understand that the worst is yet to
come, not just floods but what comes after.
He said: Pakistan will have tom revise its budget, its cotton exports are gone and it will ahve to import food it once
produced to feed its own. It will have to invest hugely in infrastructure and rural development, He said the "economic
future is bleak" and if "we don't act quickly the consequences will be disasterous". Pakistan he said needs immediate
relief, but also investment in capacity building and reconstruction.

11-He is considering skipping DC this trip (to be confirmed), and organizing a separate trip there later that would include
visit to the Hill and doing the think tank round.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771090 Date: 08/31/2015
