      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768938 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                   B6




From:                            Muscatine, Lissa <MuscatineL@state.gov>
Sent:                            Tuesday, January 19, 2010 10:46 AM
To:
Subject                          message from Jerry Hauer re Haiti coordindation



Jerry, as you may recall, was Guiliani's homeland security guy in NYC                                      and became   B6
one of the world's experts. He also worked for Clinton Admn and helped with disaster relief (including earthquakes)
around the world. He called me today with some suggestions (some of which may be moot), so I asked him to put them
into a memo. Here it is, for what it's worth:

I think the fundamental issue is that no one seems to be in charge and no
one person has been tasked with trying to pull all of the pieces together
into a short term and long term plan. Obviously in the short term, search
and rescue and food and water are the main priorities. There seems to be
little communication between the various areas where people have congregated
and a central command post where agencies can call or radio for additional
supplies including food, water and medical.

I don't recommend DoD be put in charge of this. They rarely have the kind of
touch that brings together all the necessary agencies under one roof. I
would set up a central command that has representatives from all federal
agencies in one place. There is no reason things should be this
disorganized. I would break the island into grids and assign one person to
be the coordinator for each of the grids. That person will be responsible
for all activities within their grid and will report activities to the
island on-scene coordinator. We should get a radio company like Motorola to
set up temporary towers and give the State Department several hundred radios
so everyone involved in the response is able to communicate with the command
post and with each other.

I think one of the most important roles for DoD is to provide security for
the rescue teams and medical teams. They also should be responsible for the
operation of the airport, for off loading planes and for scheduling all
incoming flights so there is no lost time waiting for planes to land. I also
think DoD should be responsible for airlifting supplies that are requested
by each one of the grid coordinators. Additionally, the helicopters should
be used to move critical patients to the hospital ship on the way and to the
aircraft carrier currently on station. At least once a day, the coordinator
assigned by the President and the Secretary of State should be responsible
for getting situation reports from all agencies on site, particularly
regarding food and water, security, medical and search and rescue.

The lack of command and control is allowing the situation to become more
chaotic rather than more coordinated. I believe that if the Secretary were
to talk to the other nations involved through the UN, they would be
supportive of better coordination.

Bottom line is that there is no order to the operation and you need strong
people in there who can speak on behalf of the President and the Secretary
and get things under control quickly.

I hope this is helpful. If you or the Secretary have any questions please
feel free to call me on my cell               We leave for Tokyo at 7:15 am                                             B6
tomorrow and transfer to a United flight due back in DC at 2:30 pm tomorrow.

Please give the Secretary my best regards. I hope to see you soon.
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768938 Date: 08/31/2015
