      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774027 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                    B6



From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov >
Sent:                              Wednesday, December 29, 2010 11:15 AM
To:
Subject:                           FW: Ynet: Erekat: PA to ask UN to recognize state soon
           •

FYI — see below. Dennis is on a plane today but we will talk secure this evening.

From: Hoyer, Kurt J
To: Cunningham, James B; Goldberger, Thomas H; Silverman, Robert J; Burnett. David R. Hale D vid M; Olsin-
Windecker, Hilary 5; Levin, Jan; Offil, Todd A; Harvey, Michael (WBGAZA/DIR);

cc: Otto, Jeffrey L; Baldwin, Virginia E; Brooks, Judith A; NEA-Press-DL
Sent: Wed Dec 29 07:59:18 2010
Subject: FW: Ynet: Erekat: PA to ask UN to recognize state soon




Erekat: PA to ask UN to recognize state soon

Chief negotiator says Palestinians will submit request as soon as Bosnia take over Security
Council presidency. 'Israeli government is witnessing an international isolation that it hasn't
witnessed before,' he says

The Palestinians will ask the United Nations Security Council to unilaterally recognize an independent Palestinian
state within the 1967 borders early next month, chief negotiator Saeb Erekat was quoted as saying by the Maan
News Agency Wednesday.

Speaking to reporters in the West Bank town of Jericho, Erekat said the Palestinians are waiting for Bosnia to take
the presidency of the Security Council before submitting the proposal.

"The Israeli government is witnessing an international isolation that it hasn't witnessed before," Erekat added. "And
this is due to the efforts exerted by the Palestinian leadership and by President Mahmoud Abbas."

According to the report, Erekat expressed hope that the US would not veto the proposal, and also called for South
Korea, Japan, New Zealand and Australia to unilaterally recognize a Palestinian state.

Brazil, Argentina, Ecuador and Bolivia have all recognized a Palestinian stare over the past few weeks.

The Palestinians have recently announced their plan to introduce a draft resolution at the UN Security Council
condemning Jewish settlements in the West Bank.

On Friday the London-based Arabic daily Al Hayat quoted Erekat as saying "the negotiations (with Israel) are over.
Now is the time for decisions, not negotiations."


This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774027 Date: 08/31/2015
