      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769333 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART B6


From:                             sbwhoeop
Sent:                             Friday, January 22, 2010 3:42 PM
To:
Subject:                          H: May head your way, you might be asked, and you might develop a response give
                                  that many firms are owned by nations. Sid


http://blog.newsweelocom/blogs/thegaggle/archive/2010/01/22/should-foreign-corporations-spend-money-on-u-s-political-
candidates.aspx

Posted Friday, January 22, 2010 1:05 PM
Newsweek

Should Foreign Corporations Spend Money on U.S. Political Candidates?

Krista Gesaman
Foreign businesses might be the real winners in Citizens United v. Federal Elections Commission, the landmark case that
allows corporations and unions to spend limitless amounts of money on presidential and congressional political
campaigns. A majority of large businesses are now owned by foreign entities, and this means international corporations
could pour tons of money into the United States political scene, potentially swaying the political climate.
The biggest questions with this ruling is the scope of the term "corporation," says Edward Foley, law professor at the Ohio
State University College of Law and director of the election-law program. Does the high court want this decision to apply
to foreign corporations as well as domestic ones, he ponders? The truth is, the court didn't make a decision one way or
the other.
Foley best explains the potential issues by talking about the electronic, video, and communication giant, Sony. The
corporation is headquartered in Japan, but a large number of its shareholders reside in the United States. In fact, people
can even buy and trade Sony's stock on the New York Stock Exchange. The issue is whether this corporation, with strong
ties to a foreign country and the United States, should be permitted to independently contribute money to presidential and
congressional campaigns.
The court sought to expand First Amendment protection for corporations, but did it really mean to promote the free flow of
ideas from Russian or Chinese corporations, Foley asks? Justice John Pau! Stevens focused on the same concerns in his
dissenting opinion. The majority's position "would appear to afford the same protection to multinational corporations
controlled by foreigners as to individual Americans," he writes.
This afternoon, President Obama asked Congress to "develop a forceful response" to the ruling. But with Congress
juggling so many other important issues, it's unlikely that a change will be made in the immediate future. This could mean
that foreign cash could be supporting political candidates in next year's congressional midterm elections.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769333 Date: 08/31/2015
