     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767363 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL




From:                           McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sent:                           Tuesday, February 23, 2010 6:52 AM
To:                             H; Reines, Philippe I; Holbrooke, Richard C
Subject                         FW: TV Talk Shows' Summary - February 21-22, 2010



Interesting. Slight change of tone.



From: Baber, Suhail On Behalf Of Islamabad, Information Section
Sent: Tuesday, February 23, 2010 6:23 AM
To: Snelsire, Richard W
Cc: Schwartz, Larry; Gill, Muazzam; Wade, Joseph W (Peshawar)
Subject: TV Talk Shows' Summary - February 21-22, 2010


                                            TV Talk Shows' Summary

                                          February 21-22, 2010

Program: "Policy Matters" Dunya TV (01/22)

Host: Nasim Zehra

Participants: Hussain Haqqani (Pakistani Ambassador To United States)

Topic: Future Of Pak-U.S. Relations

Host: It is a common perception that you had advised the American authorities to include some clauses in the
Kerry-Lugar Bill which were deemed against the armed forces of Pakistan. Did your recent meetings with Army
Chief General Kayani and DG Inter-Services Intelligence (151), Lt. General Ahmed Shuja Pasha, improved your
strained relations with these military leaders?

Hussain Haqqani: I have never had bad relations with the military. I had played no role in the draft of the
Kerry-Lugar Bill. It was the Pakistani media which spread such rumors.

Host: In your recent book, you had suggested the U.S. government to link the financial assistance with the
civilian control over the Pakistan Army.

Hussain Haqqani: I had written it in the perspective of Pakistan's situation in 2005.1 argued that if the U.S.
wanted to maintain its influence in Pakistan, it should use its aid to stabilize the democratic institutions in the
country rather than supporting the Musharraf regime.

Host: But you had also alleged that the ISI was providing support and protection to the Taliban.

Hussain Haqqani: You need to understand that everything has some specific perspective. The ISI is playing a
very important role in the national security of Pakistan, but a policy changes with a change in the
circumstances under which it was formulated. At that time, the Taliban were being considered as friends of

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767363 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767363 Date: 08/31/2015




Pakistan but later they became a potential threat to our national security. Hence, we were left with no other
option but to abandon them.

Host: What was wrong with the Kerry-Lugar Bill? Why was it so vehemently opposed by the Pakistani masses
and the armed forces? As the Ambassador of Pakistan, had you expressed any reservations and concerns
during the preparation of this legislation?

Hussain Haqqani: During the drafting of the Kerry-Lugar Bill, I sent as many as 35 telegrams to the Foreign
Office and other concerned institutions including the armed forces. I was against attaching even a single string
to this aid package, and urged that all the assistance for Pakistan should be unconditional. Americans wanted
us to hand Dr. Abdul Qadeer Khan over to them for investigation but we made it clear that it would never be
possible for us, and that this chapter had been closed. Similarly, we rejected the U.S. demand to link the aid
with the performance of our institutions.

Host: But at that time, you said that the Pakistanis had failed to understand the benefits of Kerry-Lugar Bill
because they do not know English language.

Hussain Haqqani: It was just a joke. However, I want to make it clear that the Kerry-Lugar Bill is a U.S.
legislation. It is not an agreement between the two countries and, therefore, is not binding upon us.

Host: Do you think that a donor country has the right to monitor the performance of the national institutions
of the recipient country?

Hussain Haqqani: During the visit of Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi, the explanatory note by the
U.S. Congress diluted this condition.

Host: According to some reports, you have issued visas to the Blackwater personnel and some other
Americans who pose a threat to our national security while the Pakistani intelligence agencies had expressed
reservations in this regard.

Hussain Haqqani: It is a grave misunderstanding. Everyone knows that the issuance of visas is not the
prerogative of an ambassador. The interior ministry gives approval for working visas which also consults the
military authorities on certain issues relating to the security of the country. So far, I have never interfered in
any visa case. I utilize all my energies to lobby for Pakistan. The DynaCorp was allowed to work in Pakistan,
and its owner is a close friend of former President Pervez Musharraf.

Host: Presently, how many U.S. security agencies are operating in Pakistan?

Hussain Haqqani: I think that that DynaCorp and Wakenhut are working in the country but there is no
evidence regarding the presence of other companies.

Host: Will the U.S. give us drone technology?

Hussain Haqqani: Currently, they are offering drone technology for surveillance purposes.

Host: The drone attacks in Pakistan kill innocent people including women and children. Do the American
masses protest these attacks?




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767363 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767363 Date: 08/31/2015




Hussain Haqqani: Yes, they also protest over these attacks. We want there should not be anti-Pakistan
elements in the future Afghan government and the U.S. understands our point of view.

Host: What is the latest situation of Dr. Aafia case?

Hussain Haqqani: We have done our level best, and are still doing, on the diplomatic and legal fronts for the
early release of Dr. Aafia Siddiqui. No doubt, we had to suffer a setback on the legal grounds but we are still
working on other option which cannot be made public at this time.




Program: "Meray Mutabiq" Geo TV (01/21)

Host: Dr. Shahid Masood

Participants: Mushahid Hussain Syed (PML-Q); Lt. Gen Hameed Gul (Former Head ISI)

Topic: Americans Increase Frequency Of Their Visits To Pakistan; Why?

Host: At a time when the PPP government is facing gigantic problems and crises at home, what are the real
motives of Americans' visits to Pakistan? These U.S. dignitaries also go the GHQ in Rawalpindi and meet with
high-ranking military officials. Which institution is the actual policy-maker in Pakistan?

Mushahid Hussain: I think the regional geopolitical situation has changed, and still changing, in Pakistan's
favor. The U.S. economy and Afghanistan are the two cornerstones of President Barack Obama's strategy. For
the former, he needs china's help, and for the latter he depends upon Pakistan. Now, instead of G-7, the G-2,
China and the United States, has become the focus of international economic discussion. It means that, for the
first time, Washington has recognized Beijing as an equal partner, at least in the economic sector. China is our
time-tested friend, in other words, the regional situation is changing in our favor. The present Pakistani
government is incompetent and has no strategy to skillfully use this opportunity. Hence, I do not think that the
Americans will support it.

Host: The U.S. has been entangled in the Afghan quagmire. There are reports that the U.S. negotiating with
the Taliban. Has the U.S. taken Saudi Arabia and Pakistan on board, or it is directly talking to the Taliban?

Hameed Gul: At present, no dialogue is underway between Taliban and the U.S., neither directly nor indirectly,
because Washington has refused to give the deadline for withdrawal of its troops from Afghanistan. In fact,
India is exerting pressure on the U.S. to avoid withdrawing its troops because New Delhi has invested sums in
Afghanistan. Besides, it has also strategic interests there. But Americans can no longer afford to continue their
military presence in this country therefore India fear that it would be the prime loser in case the foreign forces
withdraw from Afghanistan. The U.S. military defeat at the hands of the Taliban has provided Pakistan a
golden opportunity. To face the Indian threat, we are in dire need of a safe and peaceful border in our west.

Mushahid Hussain: We need to be very careful at this moment. Our blind support for the Afghan Taliban may
alienate Iran, Turkey and China, all our best friends, who fear that the establishment of a extremist religious
regime will have serious repercussions for their own security. To avoid such an eventuality, these countries
may opt to join the Indian camp. Hence, we will have to take all the stakeholders on board while formulating
our future strategy regarding the post-war Afghanistan.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767363 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767363 Date: 08/31/2015




Program: "Jawab Deyh" Geo TV (02/21)

Host: lftikhar Ahmed

Participants: Lt. Gen (R) Nishat Ahmed (Defense Analyst); Dr Hassan Askari (Analyst)

Topic: U.S. Role In Pak-India Dialogue

Host: It seems that India has offered to resume peace negotiations with Pakistan under the U.S. pressure. Is it
reality? Do you have any evidence in this regard?

Dr Hassan Askari: Washington and London have been working to convince Pakistan and India to resume talks
in order to remove their mutual misunderstandings. At present, the U.S. enjoys cordial relations with both
India and Pakistan. Particularly, since 2005, Washington is in better position to give advice to New Delhi on
regional and global issues. I think that the fast-changing geopolitical situation in Afghanistan has prompted
India to reduce tension in its relations with Pakistan through dialogue. Moreover, the U.S. thinks that Pakistan
cannot fully concentrate on its border with Afghanistan, which is vital to win the war against terrorism, unless
its eastern borders are not secured. Hence, the perception, that the U.S. is behind the Indian offer of dialogue,
holds water and cannot be dismissed as mere a speculation.

Host: Do you think that the U.S. understands our concerns regarding the Indian threat on our eastern border?

Lt. Gen (R) Nishat Ahmed: Washington and its allies want that Pakistan should deploy its full military power on
its western border in order to deal with the menace of terrorism. I think that the government as well as the
military leadership of Pakistan have succeeded in convincing the U.S. that our country faces serious and
potential threat from its eastern neighbor, India. Hence, it would be impossible for us to fully concentrate on
the war against terrorism as long as the Indian threat on our eastern border is not eliminated, or at least not
reduced. The entire world knows that Pakistan has always been attacked from its eastern border while India
even played pivotal role in the dismemberment of Pakistan in 1971. Hence, I think that the U.S. and its allies
convinced New Delhi that it would be in its own interest to hold dialogue with Islamabad.




The following programs were also monitored, but as they dealt with domestic issues, therefore, were not
summarized:

Program: "Crisis Cell" Geo TV (01/22)

Host: Sana Buchcha

Participants: Khawaja Asif (PML-N); Yasir Hashmi (Psychologist); Musharraf Zaidi (Analyst)

Topic: Growing Confrontation Between PPP & PML-N




Program: "Front Line" Express TV (02/21)

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767363 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767363 Date: 08/31/2015




Host: Kamran Shahid

Participants: Shakeel Awan (PML-N); Sheikh Rasheed (AML); Dr. Kamal (Jamaat-i-Islami)

Topic: By-Elections In Rawalpindi




Program: "Meray Mutabiq" Geo TV (02/21)

Host: Dr. Shahid Masood

Participants: Faisal Raza Abidi (PPP); Insar Abbasi (Investigative Reporter The News)

Topic: Swiss Cases And Immunity To President Asif Zardari




Program: "In Session" Dunya TV (02/21)

Host: Asma Chaudhry

Participants: Kashmala Tariq (PML-Q); Asma Arbab Alamgir (PPP); Khurram Dastgir (PML-N)

Topic: An Overview Of Government's Performance




Monitored by Info Office

Public Affairs Section

U.S. Embassy Islamabad

Pakistan

htto://islamabad.usembassy.gov




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767363 Date: 08/31/2015
