      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770492 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                                                 RELEASE IN
                                                                                                                                 PART B6


From:                                  Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS@state.gov>
Sent:                                  Friday, July 16, 2010 7:13 PM
To:
Subject:                               FW: Karzai meeting
Attachments:                           Karzai meet.docx



Transcript of Malinowski's meeting with Karzai attached.


From: Tom Malinowski [mailtO                                                                                                                  B6
Sent: Friday, July 16, 2010 9:44 AM
To: Ghori, Saba N; Verveer, Melanne S
Cc: Maria McFarland
Subject: Karzai meeting



Dear Melanne and Saba,

I've attached the notes from our meeting with Karzai; they may be helpful in preparing for next week

On the positive side, he committed to including women in any formal negotiations with the Taliban. Hopefully we can nail that down
firmly -- it would be both a good safeguard and a signal to the Taliban of the kind of Afghanistan they will be joining if they do indeed
ever want to join it

Beyond that, he was in "women's lives first, women's rights second" mode — speaking passionately about the human cost of the
conflict and the impossibility of Afghanistan enjoying genuine human rights until the fighting ends. He did this to the point of
denying that any real human rights progress had come in his presidency (thus implying that bringing in Taliban would not make
matters worse).

In terms of your messaging, it would be great if, when the Secretary stresses that reconciling insurgents should accept the Afghan
constitution and laws, she specifically mentions the right of girls to go to school and work and take part in the political process. That
would be consistent, I think, with what the administration has said before, but more explicit. Karzai told us that his government
already stresses those specific rights (that's not true --but it suggests that it would be hard for them to disagree if the US and
international community made it part of their mantra).

It would also, of course, be great if she could find a way to express concern about giving reconciling Taliban leaders who have a track
record of brutality, including attacks on girls schools and killings of women who defy their threats, positions in local or national
government. One can support negotiations even with the worst of the worst of the Taliban, and offer them other kinds of
incentives. But we should draw the line at offering positions of authority over the lives of the people they have been terrorizing (as
the Pakistanis did, disastrously, in Swat).

Hope this helps,

Tom




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770492 Date: 08/31/2015
