     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767605 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                     B6



From:                              sbwhoeop
Sent:                              Saturday, January 9, 2010 9:42 AM
To:
Subject:                           H: Succinct summary on NI situation at this moment. Details to follow later. Sid




January 9,2010


The First Lady, her young lover, and a scandal
that could hand power to Sinn Fein
David McKittrick reports on the far-reaching consequences of
Iris Robinson's infidelity
The mesmerising saga of the toyboy, the Northern Ireland First Minister and his straying wife threatened to engulf
Belfast's frail political settlement last night.
Following a day closeted with advisers Peter Robinson, head of the Northern Ireland government, broke his silence to
insist defiantly that he would not step down after a day of turmoil. His move is unlikely to stem the clamour for an inquiry
into an affair which has fused the political and the sexual. First indications are that members of his party, the Democratic
Unionists (DUP), are reacting to the disclosures with strong disapproval. The party is highly religious and lays heavy
emphasis on Christian family values. It is also currently highly nervous that the revelations could cost it seats in the
coming Westminster election. If the DUP were to fracture as a result of the scandal it could lead the way to Sinn Fein
becoming the largest party in the Northern Ireland Assembly - allowing it to nominate its own first minister and putting the
peace process in jeopardy.
Disclosures in a BBC television programme on the activities of his wife, Iris, who has exited from public life, led to a day-
long flurry of political calls for inquiries into the Robinson family.
Mr Robinson stands accused of failing to notify the authorities that his wife had been involved in financial transactions
without declaring an interest. She helped a 19-year-old "toyboy" lover to set up a business.
Mr Robinson said he had asked for the appointment of a senior counsel "to ask me any questions he or she wishes to
ask, and to give an opinion as to what I should have disclosed or whether I have breached an obligation".
Insisting he had done nothing wrong, Mr Robinson accused the BBC of broadcasting "smears and innuendo". Saying that
he did not rule out a defamation action, he declared: "I am being tried in the court of public opinion."
 Sinn Fein's Martin McGuinness, who is Deputy First Minister, said he was shocked at the BBC revelations and is seeking
talks with both Mr Robinson and Gordon Brown. Mr McGuinness was publicly sympathetic when news of the scandal
 broke, but his veering towards a tougher line is taken as indicating a calculation that Mr Robinson may not survive the
 storm.
 Mr Robinson, who has been First Minister for 18 months, is regarded as a pivotal figure in the peace process since he
 was prepared to follow the Rev Ian Paisley into government with Sinn Fein.
 But the state of the political settlement has appeared increasingly rocky as Mr Robinson has resisted pressure from
 almost all points of the political compass to complete devolution by accepting a transfer of responsibility for policing from
 London to Belfast.
 His reluctance to move on the policing issue was attributed to nervousness about challenges from hardline opponents in
 the Westminster general election. Now opponents are speculating that it might instead have at least partly been due to the
 family scandal which has just become public but which he knew of for months.
 In recent days Mrs Robinson dramatically announced that she was leaving politics. She is currently Westminster MP for
 east Belfast, a councillor and a member of the Belfast Assembly. Yesterday there were calls for her to depart immediately
 and stop drawing her salaries.
 These reflected the fact that, while her husband might have a faint chance of political survival, her behaviour is regarded
 as inexcusable.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767605 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767605 Date: 08/31/2015




She had been a friend of Kirk McCambley's father, Billy. Before he died, he asked Mrs Robinson to look after his son. The
BBC programme, Spotlight, revealed that her relationship with Kirk had developed into a sexual one. It said she
suggested to him that he go into a business venture which was partly organised by Castlereagh council, where she is an
alderman.
She is said to have obtained £50,000 from two property developers, to be used to set up the business. She is also said to
have helped approve the McCambley proposal without declaring a financial interest. The council said yesterday it was
investigating.
The young man was interviewed for the programme. So too was Mrs Robinson's one-time political adviser Selwyn Black,
a former Methodist minister, who gave the BBC access to 150 text messages allegedly sent to him by Mrs Robinson.
Among those calling for a public inquiry yesterday were Jim Allister of Traditional Unionist Voice, a hardline critic of Mr
Robinson. He said the issues in the programme must be addressed "with utter transparency and candour".
Ulster Unionist leader Sir Reg Empey called for Mrs Robinson's immediate resignation, saying: "It is clear that Iris
Robinson's continuing position as an MP, Assembly member and councillor is utterly untenable. She should resign all her
positions with immediate effect."
He added: "It is also unfortunately the case that the office of the First Minister is embroiled in these matters. My party will
study the events outlined by the BBC and the very serious allegations that have been made with regards to the conduct of
the First Minister. Inevitably the appropriate authorities will be required to investigate the allegations made against the
First Minister."
* Northern Ireland Secretary Shaun Woodward refused to speculate about Mr Robinson's future.
But he said: "It is a responsibility on everyone in the Assembly to understand that the consequences of allowing the
 political process to slide would undoubtedly have an impact on the broader canvas.
"And that if anybody were to be selfish enough to think this is a moment when that can be allowed to be put in the deep
 freeze, even some may wish to unpick, they would be extremely irresponsible, foolish and would be playing very, very
 dangerous games."
 Speaking to BBC Radio 4's Today programme, Mr Woodward said that the First Minister had to be allowed the opportunity
 to clear his name.
 But he went on: "I'm very conscious of the fact that while all that is happening, he is First Minister and the business of
 devolution, the business of the Executive must go on.
 "I hope he will be able to resume the responsibilities as First Minister to ensure that the work of the Executive continues
 and that includes the talks on policing and justice devolution." PA




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767605 Date: 08/31/2015
