      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768332 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Sunday, March 7, 2010 2:20 PM
To:
Subject:                           Iraq



Below is a proposed statement to go out in an hour or so. Also, did you see the Pakistanis arrested Adam Gadhan, the
American al Qaeda spokesman?

STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON

IRAQI NATIONAL ELECTIONS

I congratulate all the people of Iraq who participated in national elections today and over the past three days. There is
no better rebuke to the violent extremists who seek to derail Iraq's progress. Our thoughts and prayers are with the
families who lost friends and loved ones, and we salute the determination of the Iraqi people to reaffirm their
commitment to democracy and to charting their own future free of fear and intimidation.

Thanks to the efforts of the Iraq High Electoral Commission and the Iraqi Security Forces, which organized the voting and
ensured security at thousands of polling sites throughout the country, Iraqi men and women from all parts of the
country were able to go to the polls and choose their leaders freely.

I also would like to commend Ambassador Hill, General Odierno and all the U.S. civilian and military personnel who
supported this historic effort.

Iraqis have chosen a new government to lead their country at a critical time. In the coming months, we will work
together with Iraqi leaders as our partnership continues its transition to a primarily civilian focus, with the goal of
building a long-term, multidimensional relationship between our two nations - a relationship that will contribute to
stability in the Middle East and growing peace and prosperity in Iraq.

###




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768332 Date: 08/31/2015
