     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767171 Date: 08/31/2015

                                                                                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                                                                           B6




From:                                    sbwhoeop
Sent:                                    Saturday, February 13, 2010 10:36 AM
To:
Subject:                                 Re: also...


Clemons posted this piece on his dinner with Petraeus, (it's replete with a lot of punditry), but he told me more detail about
his attitude and interest. Among other things, Petraeus recounted a joke about Gates' speech at the Alfalfa Club dinner
that Petraeus couldn't be there because he was in Iowa. Petraeus didn't tell that story to disdain the possibility. He smiled
and watched closely for reaction from others. S

February 13, 2010




Steve Cemons
Publisher of "The Washington Note"



                                                                                                                                           N (1 • " :(1 Jr) F*
                                                   ../T1
                                                  „, • .         Pt r:1:°' t
                              az.,-.1,--anrac,sounga.awarnrmacta=ava-,_rmuacartatmott--=-0....-rmaamaxatiAmasm...u.cnromar........,...r.nocura--uarni.m.rarcnt.r.trnmar.rarti:4.3resecono....riatvars:




                                 I recently had the opportunity to participate in a small dinner with CENTCOM Commander .
General David Petraeus and his wife Holly. These sorts of discussions are nearly always off the record -- but the fact that
they happened is not off limits.
Petraeus was not in uniform but rather wore what looked to me to be a brand new, perfectly tailored dark suit. I joked to
him that if I Twilt.--s,rgc, that out of two dozen or so times I had seen Petraeus that this was the first time I'd seen him out of
uniform, an ice cold shudder of fear would spread quickly through some political circles in DC.
In August of 2007, I wroteoiece, stating that folks should keep an eye out for the possibility that General Petraeus might
run for President in 2012. In April 2008, Steven Lee Myers wrote a solid New York Times follow up titled "The
General" referencing my earlier take.
Recently, legendary newsman Ai:nai4d de 13orchgave resuscitated the topic of an Eisenhoweresque future for the
counterinsurgency guru in his piece, "President ?etraeus7"
Petraeus was recently named as one of Foreign Policy magazine's tip 100 ttzal thinkers, and as U.S. News & World
Reports "Washington Whispers" notes, he is going to be speaking in May 2010 at the annual American Enterprise
Institute dinner receiving the Irving Kristol Award.
In January 2010, Public Policy Pollin.q revealed that while Obama held a ten point lead over a potential wild card race
against Petraeus, the General had some strengths. But the pollsters also noted that many in the American public just
didn't know enough yet about Petraeus to form an opinion:
           Finally our blog readers voted for David Petraeus as our wild card Republican this month and his
           numbers come out as a mixed bag. He has the largest deficit against Obama, trailing 44-34. But at +13
           his net favorability is better than the President or any of the other Republicans we tested. The problem for

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767171 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767171 Date: 08/31/2015



        him is that the numbers break down 25/12- 63% of voters in the country don't know enough about him to
        have formed an opinion. Who knows if Petraeus would actually have any interest in going into politics, but
        if he did he would be introducing himself to many voters for the first time.
President Obama himself, according to what some of his aides have reported to me, is quite taken with David Petraeus
and respects his approach and thinking.
Petraeus has also been respectful of the President -- although when pushed at a recent forum about how he might react
to a Presidential decision on Afghanistan that the General might not have liked, Petraeus offered a cryptic rather than
clear response. (see above video)
At the "First Draft of History" meeting sponsored by the Atlantic Monthly/Atlantic Media Group, the Newseum, and the
Aspen Institute; Petraeus when asked if he would support the President no matter what the result of the strategic review
on Afghanistan responded that he "would continue to give the President the best professional military advice he could."
Contrast that with Defense Secretary Robert Gates resoonOinato_the..saest.ipr.j., "We will salute and execute [the
President's] decisions faithfully and to the best of our ability."
But after spending an evening with General Petraeus and watching him closely for a number of years, there is no way that
this intelligent leader -- with whom I have some disagreements but respect -- could be comfortable with the Tea Party
takeover of the Republican political machine.
There is always the possibility that a core of reasonable Republicans like Michael Bloomberg, James Baker, Olympia
Snowe, Chuck Hegel, Alan Simpson, John Whitehead, Peter Peterson, Rita Hauser and others will try to rekindle classic
Republican sensibilities by fighting to re-hijack their party back in an Eisenhower-like campaign with Petraeus at the lead.
Remember that Eisenhower clinched the Republican nomination by promising to be the President who though he knew
war would end the Korean War. Petraeus knows Afghanistan and Iraq -- and though it seems hard to envision today could
be the kind of leader promising to end those wars if Obama proves unable to do so.
But there is another option that intrigues me and seems more realistic than imagining the iconic David Petraeus running
for President -- and that is his running for Vice President.
I think Vice President Joe Biden has done an outstanding job and of all the big guns in the Obama White House, Biden
has done the best job of outperforming expectations. He had given President Obama much needed counsel, not always
taken regrettably, but counsel that Obama needed to show the American public he was getting. Biden has been the key
agent behind the scenes in moving Iraq's elections forward. He has scored a lot of wins -- not reported -- in the
nuclear/WMD controls arena. Biden has worked with Gates in stabilizing an awkward and complex relationship with
Russia -- and his counterpoints on the Afghanistan surge, in my view, remain compelling.
But Biden is going to have to find a way to hold his spot in 2012 because others are going to be gunning for it.
As I look at it now, Hillary Clinton who has now said that she will not do more than one term as Secretary of State would
be a natural candidate for the Obama VP slot. Her franchise is not completely in the control of the Obama team yet, but
moving Hillary closer to the White House (although her private home on Whitehaven Street is actually a couple of hundred
feet closer to the White House than the VP residence at the Naval Observatory) would finalize Obarna's takeover of all the
key political franchises in the Democratic Party -- starting with Daley's machine, Deschle's machine, Kennedy's machine,
Edwards' machine, and then the Clintons'.
But General David Petraeus, in his business suit, lurks out there. Obama seems to be concerned about looking like he is
weak on national security. The Republicans -- at Cheney's constant goading (and now Sarah Palin's) -- seem to want to
continue to play politics through fear-mongering.
Obama could neutralize the possibility that he faces a Republican party challenge by David Petraeus by inviting the
General on to the 2012 ticket as a Democrat.
Crazy? Perhaps.
But inviting potential rivals into his tent is becoming a standard Obama trademark -- much as he did by appointing
Republican Governor of Utah and former G.W. Bush administration Deputy US Trade Representative Jon Huntsman, Jr.
to serve as US Ambassador to the People's Republic of China.
And get this, we have just learned that David Petraeus has not voted since 2002 -- not because he doesn't care to vote --
but reportedly because he wants to keep his eventual political options and political loyalties open.
This is a soldier for whom all options are on the table and who is keeping his powder dry.
My hunch is that whether Obama sticks with Vice President Biden or pivots to someone else, Petraeus will be on the short
list of those considered.
-- Steve Clemons publishes the popular political blog, The Washington Note.



    Original Message
From: H <HDR22 clintonemail.com>
To: 'sbwhoeop            <sbwhoeop
Sent: Sat, Feb 13, 2010 10:29 am
Subject: Re: also...



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767171 Date: 08/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767171 Date: 08/31/2015




Pls be sure you send me the next article about Podesta from Clemons. And will he

write about Petraeus?



        Original Message

From: sbwhoecy-            <sbwhoeop                                                                B6

To: H

Sent: Sat Feb 13 10:24:53 2010

Subject: also...



H: Steve Clemons called me last night to talk about this, which he's just posted

on his website. Ed. Luce of the FT of course told him. Also, Clemons had dinner

this week with Petraeus, who freely talked about running for president. Sid




John Podesta on Obama team. I am hearing that Financial Times Washington Bureau

Chief Edward Luce <http://en,wikliped                 /Fdwerc Luce> has a pretty

significant interview with Center for American Progress President and former

White House Chief of Staff John Podesta
<hLt. r,-//www                                       t:aJ-)h .html>

coming out on Monday. Luce recently did a video interview with Senator John

McCain <http://www     rn/cms/1644d-f40::.ilac7aad-
000077qfd2ac.html? i referralOhject=14346013&frcmSearch=n>

. One source tells me that Podesta "goes farther" in his critique of the Obama

team than his already pretty direct comments in Luce's recent survey

<htt : //www. ft.croTi/cm0/b6b4700a-10fb-lidf-9a9e-00144fea 49P.html.nclick check-1>

of the Obama White House's inner workings.




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767171 Date: 08/31/2015
