      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771289 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Sent:                              Saturday, September 4, 2010 11:21 AM
To:
Cc:                                Mills, Cheryl D; Steinberg, James B; Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma
Subject:                           For the (FR speech: A New American Century



I read the Roger Cohen piece and agree that it is v smart. And I've been thinking about the need for a headline/bumper
sticker for the speech. How about "A New American Century"? We cd take on the critics directly and right up front and
make the argument this way (a lot of this is already in the intro, but wd need to be pulled together differently).

1) We live in a new age of diplomacy - we are seeing the limits of force and we face collective problems that require
bringing together a wider array of key players rather than any one nation dictating a solution. Active diplomacy is the
only option. (This is the argument david rothkopf was making to mark landler when we thought landler was doing a
profile - it resonated v well w/ landler.)

2) The U.S. is uniquely suited to lead in these circumstances. a) In situations where many nations must be brought
together that do not trust each other, we are still seen as the most honest broker. b) In situations where many nations
are sitting around the table contemplating a common problem, someone has to step forward and take responsibility for
mobilizing action (which also includes the risk of failure). We are the nation most willing to do that, both because of our
history and our values. (Here is where S can offer personal anecdotes re nations waiting for us to do something) c) in a
world of global problems, we are the most global nation, with the greatest global reach, resources, and connections.

3) We see global leadership not only as a responsibility but also as an opportunity, b/c of our native confidence,
optimism and faith that problems can be solved. We have a chance to shape a genuinely global agenda, focusing on
development as well as traditional national security issues, and mobilizing business and civil society as well as
governments. This is our time.

The speech would then go on, as it does now, to outline all the ways in which we are building relationships and solving
problems now with traditional allies and new powers on the global landscape while building a longer term architecture
of cooperation that is both truly global and adapted to solving 21st century problems.

AM




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771289 Date: 08/31/2015
