    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770175 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                            RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                            B6




From:                          sbwhoeop
Sent:                          Friday, May 7, 2010 3:02 PM
To:
Subject:                       H: Here it is! What's really going on. Sid
Attachments:                   hrc memo very, very inside latest 050710.docx




                                    CONFIDENTIAL



                                             May 7, 2010



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: The Downing Street meeting today

Today a seven hour meeting took place at Downing Street to attempt to determine Gordon's strategy. The
participants were Gordon, Shaun, Peter, Alastair Campbell, and Ed Balls (who is close to Gordon).
    Gordon has made a maximum proposal to Clegg through intermediaries, including a referendum on
        proportional representation, program, cabinet slots if Clegg wants them, or not if he prefers to be
        perceived as above dealmaking. The offer is open, too, and can be added to. Gordon is letting Cameron
        and Clegg have their conversation without going public. Clegg in private is in something of a state of
        shock. He actually expected to win about 125 seats—and finished at 57, losing 14 from what the Lib-
        Dems held. While Clegg is out front he cannot make a deal on his own; he requires his party's backing.
        Gordon and his people are in touch with people close to Clegg. Many of Clegg's senior people will not
        support the deal that Cameron has proposed. Vincent Cable, Clegg's number two, the shadow
        chancellor, is unhappy with the Tory deal. Clegg is therefore at sea. Clegg's party base, moreover,
        would not approve a deal that did not represent a "progressive" position. Much of the Lib-Dem base is
        idealistic and subject to disillusionment.
    Gordon is doing whatever he can to hold on to power. Shaun, for his part, is working on an economic
        package for Northern Ireland to win support from the DUP and other parties for Labour—a package to
        be proposed in the Queen's Speech. Peter floats in and out of the meeting and appears on TV. Alastair
        has emerged as a stalwart, providing Gordon with talking points and practical ideas hour by hour.
    The Tories are working overtime to foster the atmosphere that Gordon is repudiated and should leave. This
        perception is gaining ground as the Cameron-Clegg talks go on. Cameron seems to be dragging them out
        in order to undermine Gordon.
    The outcome is highly uncertain largely because Clegg is between a rock and a hard place within his own
        party. More to come later...



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770175 Date: 08/31/2015
