UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775425 Date: 08/31/2015

                                                                                                         RELEASE
                                                                                                         IN FULL




                              A POSSIBLE US DIPLOMATIC INITIATIVE
                     TO UNFREEZE AND DEFUSE GEORGIA-RUSSIA RELATIONS
                                                                              Sunday, October 24, 2010



        Georgia-Russia relations are not just frozen—they're volatile in ways that could
     exacerbate current and prospective dangers regionally and globally. The deadlock over
     Russia occupation and virtual annexation of Abkhazia and South Ossetia already ....
            constitutes an on-going violation of international law;
            highlights the worst, most atavistic, geopolitically assertive trends in Russian
            domestic and foreign policy;
            complicates Russia's relations with the U.S, EU countries, and Russia's
            neighbors
            hinders Presidents Obama and Medvedev's joint aspiration for Russia to join the
            WTO, post-NST progress on arms control in general and CFE in particular and
            the prospects for strengthening U.S. and allied security interests in general.
            undercuts Russia's credibility as a European democracy in good standing and
            worthy of further integration into Euroatlantic and global institutions.
          The aftermath of the Georgia-Russia conflict of August 2008 also has the potential
     to blow up into another conflict between Georgia and Russia and—even short of another
     outright war—spread instability and political violence in the Caucasus (North and South).
         Moreover, the situation, if it remains frozen and dangerous, poses a domestic political
     challenge as well. The Administration's ability to influence Russia's behavior in Georgia
     has become a litmus test of the "reset." For many in Congress and elsewhere,
     the President's efforts to get Russia into the WTO, strengthen the OSCE and European
     security, and move onto next stage of conventional arms control will be judged on
     whether the U.S. is, simultaneously, able to advance the economic and security interests
     of Georgia as democratic NATO aspirant. Conversely, any appearance of U.S. pressure
     on Georgia to accept Moscow's dismemberment of the country will erode support for the
     "reset" in U.S.-Russia relations, including potentially imperiling ratification of the New
     Start Treaty and the 123 agreement.
         In this adversity there is an opportunity for the US to broker improved
     communication between Moscow and Tbilisi, perhaps enabling them to reduce current
     tensions over the territories and make progress on practical economic, humanitarian and
     security concerns, potentially improving the prospects for a longer term process of
     normalization and viable negotiations regarding the restoration of Georgian sovereignty.
         The inter-state conflict is rooted in deep personal animosities at the leadership level in
     Moscow and Tbilisi, a factor that is further complicated by the dynamics within the
     Russian leadership (Putin's close association with the August 2008 invasion). Because
     the two leaderships are not talking to each other—or, when they do, the situation tends to
     get worse—the essence of the US initiative would have to be a shuttle between Tbilisi
     and Moscow.


                                              1
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775425 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775425 Date: 08/31/2015




         The near-term goal of the initiative would be to persuade the two principal and
     legitimate parties, Georgia and Russia, that they have an interest in the taking the
     following steps in three areas:
         1. Humanitarian: alleviation of the displacement that was a consequence of
            occupation/annexation, opening of borders for family visitation and people to
            people exchanges.
         2. Economic: loosening of economic/commercial relations between and among the
            two countries and the occupied territories (including by establishing a consensual
            customs regime on Georgia's Abkhaz and South Ossetia borders with Russia).
         3. Security: resumption of confidence-building and crisis-management measures
            (including CFE style transparency and CSBMs regarding Russian forces, Open
            Skies flights, international/OSCE monitoring in the territories), reinvigoration of
            negotiating channels on consensual security arrangements for the longer term
            (Geneva talks or another forum) and transparency/CSBMs regarding U.S.-
            Georgian military-military relations.
         Under the rubric of security, it would be crucial that the US (and the international
     community) explicitly reaffirm and adhere to nonrecognition of the two entities and to
     insistence on the principle of Georgia's territorial integrity, recognizing that Russia will
     adhere to its own position.
         Modernizing CFE and getting the Russians back into conventional arms control
     compliance are vital to stability, predictability and confidence in Europe and to fulfilling
     the vision of a post-Cold War Euro-Atlantic Community which includes Russia and its
     neighbors into a sustainable, increasingly integrated and cooperative zone of peace. The
     CFE principle of host-nation consent to the stationing of foreign forces would remain
     nonnegotiable even as the U.S. sets aside for later our disagreement about the ultimate
     legal status of the territories. Our longer term goal in CFE is to reestablish consensual
     security arrangements in the territories, not to settle non-arms control questions like legal
     status.
         Indeed, the measures agreed in all three areas above would be taken without prejudice
     to the final settlement on the territorial and legal issues. "Without prejudice" leaves the
     issue of end state open but maintains the opening and continuing US, Georgian, NATO
     and EU positions intact with regard to what the legal end state should be if Russia is to
     have truly "normal" relations with its neighbors and with the international community.
         If there can be movement in these three areas, it might be possible to unlock other
     issues as well, including WTO for Russia and the beginning of movement on CFE along
     the lines of the NATO proposal.
        Both as a matter of principle and US domestic politics—and as a matter of the logic
    of the situation—it is essential that the security dimension be integral to the strategy and
    execution. Security is at the core of the whole problem: Russian troops have, for the first
    time in the post-Soviet period, invaded, occupied, and brought under the control of
    Moscow the territory of a foreign country. While reversing that situation will probably
    take years, the goal of doing so must be part of whatever diplomacy occurs now. And



                                                   2
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775425 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775425 Date: 08/31/2015




    that diplomacy is simply beyond the capability and attitudes of the Georgian and Russian
    leaderships.
         It will be critical to keep key allies—especially France, Germany, Britain (and
    Turkey?)—closely consulted throughout, as well as the EU/Ashton and NATO. But the
    initiative should be US only, and not get bogged down with all the other interested parties
    appointing their own co-mediators.
        Now that the Administration is on record—via the Summers public statements in
     Moscow last week—advocating and predicting that Russia will be in the WTO "well
     before" the passage of 12 months, the initiative should be planned as soon as possible.
     The President might propose it, first, to Medvedev face-to-face in Yokohama on
     [November 141 and then to Saakashvili on [November 201 in Lisbon. The initiative
     would be have the status and support of a presidential mission, with the special
     representative reporting to the President through Secretary of State, with the diplomacy to
     begin in January with the goal of determining by the summer the prospects for success.




                                                  3
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775425 Date: 08/31/2015
