     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771194 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                     B6




From:                                   Neera Tanden
Sent:                                   Monday, November 1, 2010 11:35 PM
To:



Hi Hillary,

I hope you are enjoying your travels. I'm trying to keep the Go, Fight, Win spirit, but I must confess,
it's a bit hard.

I promise I will do this rarely, if at all, in the future, but I am once again sending my column. This
time I am doing so because it references you and also because it created some buzz related to the
primaries.

Looking forward to seeing you in December.

Neera
PO,!T1CS




The Female Factor
 Jcw the Democrats can regain women 3 faith—and fight for their interests.
  era 111"(leP1




  MORE FROM TH!S AUTHOR

  Neera Tanden: How °barna Can Win the Battle Over the Economy

  What Will It Tate For the Left to Rally Behind Obama Again?

  Tanden: Why Liberal Dissatisfaction With Obarna Is Way Overblown




 Last week, as Democratic candidates across the country reached out to female voters in the final swing
before Election Day. the White House released a report on how
         The report highlights the Obama's administration's efforts and accomplishments on behalf of
.‘vomen's economic success—small business expansion that helps female business owners, jobs tax credits
 that    help women (and lnera) find jobs, and laws to enforce equal pay for equal work„ among other
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771194 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771194 Date: 08/31/2015




initiatives. Yet the report passed with little fanfare and even less media attention—like so many other
aspects of the president's remarkably pro-woman policy agenda.

It's almost tragic how this agenda has fallen under the radar during Obama's first two years in office. We
hear too often about abortion's controversial role in the year-long health care negotiations—but not
enough about other women-centered issues that, after being promoted by activists for years, have finally
made it into legislation. These go beyond the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act. The American Reinvestment
and Recovery Act dramatically expanded child care provisions and Head Start. The health cafe bill
contained over $i billion to support nurses visiting new and expectant mothers at home, a program that
women's groups and economists alike have championed as a smart investment. An even bigger victory is
the CLASS Act, also part of the health care bill, which provides a basic cash benefit to people (often
women) who are taking care of the elderly at home.

Yet I can probably count on my hand the number of people, including women, who actually know about
these new laws. Amid the din of bad news about the economy and misinformation about health care
reform, these policies don't stand a chance, sadly, of getting much media coverage. it doesn't help that the
Democrats haven't done enough to shine a public spotlight on them.

But they could soon be lost in an even deeper abyss: The rampant individualism and free-market
fundamentalism support-ed by the Republican Party, which seems on the 1.Drecipice of controlling -die
House and possibly the Senate, could undo these initiatives entirely. What's more, the new Republiicpm
wave could mute the voice of women and their most important advocates on the national stage.



The Ten Parties, fueled by wealthy multimillionaires, are running extreme candidates—including
women like Sharron Angie and Christine O'Donnell—who want to get rid of policies that help women the
most. If the health care bill gets repealed, for instance, the new provisions for !ong-term care would go out
the window, making decades worth of advocacy work moot.

But the Tea Parties threaten women in other ways, too. .ff the Republicans take back the _House, the
Democratic Party will lose one of its most powerful women: Speaker Nanc,„' Pelosi, who currently has more
clout than any woman on the other side of the aisle, Meanwhile, Republicans like Sarah Palin and Nikki
Haley will only gain political power—and, with that .power, attract more attention to their extreme views.
If these Republicans become the nation's loudest voices of seemingly strong women, that could portend
for a shift among younger women's allegiances toward the Republican Party and its platform.

Already, despite the stark realities about what Republicans will likely take away from women once. they are
in power, we are seeing rumbling of such a change: After forming the backbone of Democratic majorities
for years, working-class women are wobbling in theii support the the Obama administration. According to
a                           fron. last week, while femaie college graduates savor Democratic over
Republican control (56 percent to 36 percent), women With only some college or a vocational education
are running almost even k A •             '



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771194 Date: 08/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771194 Date: 08/31/2015




Perhaps, in their growing economic anxiety, this group of women wafits to throw out incumbents they
perceive have not sufficiently focused on their economic progress. But, of course, if the media paid more
attention to Obama's pro-woman agenda—and both advocates and policymakers did more to broadcast
it—these key voters would know that the Democrats, not Republicans, are the politicians who have their
interests in mind.

Democrats can't let this continue—they can't allow Republicans to brand themselves as the party of strong
female leaders, or allow women to gradually become a constituency of the right. That's why it's critical to
have standout women in the party. If Pelosi loses, is there a powerful enough Democratic woman to
compete with these Republicans in the national spotlight? There's Hillary Clinton who, as Secretary of
State, has sent a powerful signal to the country and the world about the importance of female leadership in
the Obama administration, But, as a technically non-partisan international figure, Hillary won't be able to
do public battle with the rising right,

Perhaps a Governor Sink—if she wins—in Florida could be among a new class of strong female Democrats.
The °barna administration would also do well to elevate v.,/onien in the exe.cutive branch and turn public
attention to those who are already there.

In addition to •presenting women as the face of the patty, Democrats must focus on issues like long-term
care, child care, and equal pay, all of which could rise to the legislatle fore in the coming months.
Republicans will likely directly attack or cut beck investments in these initiatives. When this happens, the
White House (and Democrats more broadly) would be wise to e.:;olain what             ili niean for women if these
i nitiatives
  •          are gutted or lost—and to fight tooth and nail to make s-a•.e that doesn't happen.

If it doesn't take these steps, the Democratic Party could lose ts grasr on a cr3-ni‘al. Pveii central 7-,eit of its
coalition. And women, in the long run, would suffer under conservative laws that parrot family -values, but
do nothing to value families.

Neera Tanden is the chiTcoperatina office, of          Center for . ozriefn P—oc,-ress, SJ.e served in the
ObalRe. and C:-:;qton adininistrUHOTZS.

.■1?;;RT :•IAR7.0                          0;n:cr,,




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771194 Date: 08/31/2015
