      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770518 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS©state.gov>
Sent:                              Monday, July 19, 2010 2A0 PM
To:
Subject:                           Readout from Afghan women's conference over the weekend.



The writer is someone who has worked with Afghan women in developing small businesses in Afghanistan and is doing a
book about the experience.
She went back to Afghanistan for the conference that women had over the weekend and wrote the article that follows
for today's Daily Beast.
Soraya mentioned here is one of our Women of Courage. Gayle (the writer) told me in a separate email that De Mistura
was very sympathetic and said they should be consulted, that the current documents are working documents and he
pledged that the women would be more inovled in the follow up. He also told them that he was very impressed that
they had organized themselves in this 2-day conference to be able to play a more effective role. Zakhilwal was gracious,
but said they were adequately consulted. So it goes.

Secretary Clinton may be one of the highest-profile attendees at Tuesday's Kabul Conference, but
Afghan women fear their opinions won't be heard—and they worry new deals with fighters will roll
back their hard-fought rights.
As Hillary Clinton prepares to attend Tuesday's Kabul Conference, Afghan women are delivering a plain message to
government and international officials: Women's voices should be heard.
"We have to be honest. With respect to the Kabul Conference, we have not been consulted," said Soraya Pakzad, founder
of a women's shelter in the western Afghan city of Herat. Her comment came during an unusually heated question-and-
answer session with Afghan Finance Minister Omar Zakhilwal and United Nations representative Staffan de
Mistura marking the end of a two-day women's conference. "We want to be involved in policy-making. We don't want our
presence to be purely symbolic."

    "Women's rights and achievements should not be compromised in any peace negotiations or

                                                         accords."
The Kabul Conference is, in part, built on symbolism. A follow-up to January's London Conference, the gathering marks
the first time Afghanistan has played host to its international donors, a decision that is intended to showcase the transition
from foreign to Afghan ownership of national priorities. More than 65 international delegations are expected to descend
upon the Afghan capital, which is already enduring security crackdowns and traffic gridlock. Workers could be seen
Sunday painting curbs and planting flowers in advance of the foreigners' arrival.
Discussions will center around five topics, including economic development, agriculture, governance, and security. The
goal of the half-day event is to establish a framework for Afghan leadership in the setting—and execution—of the
country's political and economic direction.
Although it remains to be seen how quickly the Afghan govemment, long under-resourced and beset by allegations of
corruption, will be able to take the reins from its international donors, there is no question that Afghan ownership is the
direction in which things are moving, on the political, economic, and security fronts. And that is precisely why women feel
the stakes for this week's meeting are so high, particularly in light of new deals to empower local militias that might
threaten women's rights.
"After the Kabul Conference, no one knows what else could be on the agenda apart from war escalations and
negotiations," said Orzala Ashraf, an Afghan human rights activist. "This is very important for us, to get a serious and
honest commitment from our government in the presence of all witnesses from the world that our voices will not be
silenced."
Ashraf and a number of other women's advocates view Tuesday's talks are their last, best shot at speaking out about their
concerns, with help from European and American officials who have been working hard to help them win a seat at the
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770518 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770518 Date: 08/31/2015



table. In another show of support, Secretary Clinton and Danish Foreign Minister Lene Espersen will meet Tuesday
morning with a group of women leaders.
Regardless of this high-profile backing, many women say they have little faith in the process to produce anything aside
from more paper and more unkept promises.
"Women are very tired of all these conferences; the government is going to have to show commitments," said Selay
Ghaffar, an Afghan Women's Network board member. "We want things to change."
And it remains unclear how many Afghans outside Kabul, men or women, are paying attention to yet another gathering to
discuss their future.
"Women in the provinces don't even know about this," said Zainab, a young math teacher from Helmand province. "I
would say 60 percent of women have no idea this is going on."
Others say the presence of one or two women at the Kabul Conference isn't enough to make a difference. And they say
they fear the recent move from NATO to empower local militias to fight the Taliban, particularly in southern Afghanistan.
"This is very dangerous," said Shahida Hussain, a human rights advocate from Kandahar who worked as a community
organizer during the Taliban years. "We had militias during the communist years and Afghanistan was destroyed. We fear
war again."
Women leaders say that they want peace and are glad to welcome back former fighters, but only if they respect women's
constitutional guarantee to equal protections under the law.
"Women should be a constituent part of all bodies outlined in the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Plan," said the
women in a statement at the end of their meeting. "Women's rights and achievements should not be compromised in any
peace negotiations or accords."
In the meantime, women continue to fight for a voice as Tuesday approaches. After a weeklong flurry of conference calls,
embassy meetings, and lunchtime gatherings, two women aside from government ministers are now slated to speak.
And in a small victory for women, international officials agreed with Pakzad's assessment before pledging that women
would be more involved going forward.
"I agree, you were not consulted," said da Mistura, appearing to contradict the Afghan finance minister, who only a few
moments earlier had said that women's views had and would be included. "As usual, we have been paying lip service to
you and we are all at fault for that."
Gayle Tzemach Lemmon covered presidential politics as a producer at ABC News in Washington. Since 2005, she has
been reporting on women entrepreneurs starting small and medium-sized businesses in post-conflict economies such as
Afghanistan, Bosnia and Rwanda. She is currently working on a book scheduled for 2010 publication by HarperCollins
about a young Afghan entrepreneur whose business supported her family and community during the Taliban years.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770518 Date: 08/31/2015
