       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770296 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Sent:                             Monday, May 10, 2010 8:09 PM
To:
Subject                           Fw: CNN story on S mother's day video - forefront of fighting for fedi employees




    Original Message
From: Klevorick, Caitlin B
To: Reines, Philippe I; Valmoro, Lona J; Mills, Cheryl D; Abedin, Huma
Sent: Mon May 10 20:03:59 2010
Subject: CNN story on S mother's day video - forefront of fighting for fedl employees

On eve of Mother's Day, Clinton pushes for paid leave for new parents From CNN Senior State Department Producer
Elise Labott WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Secretary of State Hillary Clinton pledged to push Congress to get paid leave for
federal employees who are parents of newborn or newly adopted children on Friday, in a videotaped Mother's. Day
message to State Department employees."I know how challenging it can be to balance the demands of work and
family," Clinton said. "Whether you're welcoming a new baby, juggling soccer practice and piano lessons, or even
helping plan your daughter's wedding --parenting can be more than a full-time job."Clinton's daughter, Chelsea, is
getting married this summer. Currently, federal employees do not get paid maternity or paternity leave. Clinton said she
would work with Congress to take "overdue" steps to provide State Department families with the paid time off they
need to recuperate from childbirth, care for the mother, care for a newborn With a serious ailment or disability, or
complete an adoption."We can and should do more to provide public servants with the same maternity and paternity
leave benefits that many private sector employers already offer," Clinton said. "They're standard for many other
governments around the world. It's not enough to just talk about the importance of family-- our policies must reflect our
commitment and our values."Clinton has been at the forefront of the Obama administration in pushing for better
benefits for federal employees. She was the administration's first cabinet secretary to ask for benefits for same-sex
partners of federal employees, requesting the extension for Foreign Service employees. President Obama has since
extended some benefits to same-sex partners of employees throughout the federal government.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770296 Date: 08/31/2015
