      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766243 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                                sbwhoeop
Sent:                                Thursday, December 17, 2009 9:18 AM


http://tpmcafe.talkingpointsmerno.com/2009/12/16/cbama_the_fallen_messiah_and_the_problem_with_secuiindex.php


Obama, The Fallen Messiah and The Problem
 ith Secular Salvation Narratives
F[By Ma): Biurrie.nthal - December 16, 2009, 8:10PM


In responding to my initial post, Sarah Posner, Todd Gitlin, and Fred Clarkson make some very important points about the
appeal of the Christian right to ordinary Americans. I think their points dovetail with one another. Posner argues quite
correctly that those who I described as giving up their individual freedom for the authoritarian structure of the right believe
they are gaining new life in the Kingdom of God, along with a sense of community and belonging. She illustrates this trend
in her excellent book on the rising trend of prosperity gospel theology in evangelical churches, Gpd's
Clarkson adds that the salvation narrative the movement offers to trauma-wracked individuals is one of its key draws. This
narrative often takes an explicitly political form, promising the replacement of a culturally decadent secular government
with a theocratically-inspired authoritarian system (see Newt Gingrich 's retrhatrika at David Horovvitz's Renaissance
Weekend for a recent example of this appeal). Or, as Gitlin said, the salvation narrative may promise eternal life in
Heaven -- after the enemies of God are slaughtered en masse in a display of pornographic violence, as portrayed in Tim
LaHaye and Jerry Jenkins' bestselling Left Behind Series.
During a time of economic decline, persistent cultural strife, deepening American involvement in far-off military conflicts,
and rapid environmental deterioration, is there any wonder that some have turned to apocalyptic salvation narratives
promising both a transcendent, everlasting future and violent retribution against perceived evildoers? A 2002 CNN poll
found that 59% of Americans believe that the prophecies in the Book of Revelations will come true. The startling number
reflected the still-fresh trauma of the 9/11 attacks, but suspect that it has held steady, if not risen. Indeed, mainstream
American culture is permeated by apocalypticism; the blockbuster movie hit 2012 is but one recent example.
   spend several chapters in my book following the Christian right's ascent to the mountain top with George W. Bush's re-
election, detailing how the movement shrouded science and reason in the shadow of the cross, then observing as it swiftly
imploded during the Tern Schiavo charade. Because I completed my book days after Barad< Obama's inauguration, I was
only able to foreshadow the right's plan to undermine the new president. Having watched the right attempt to delegitimize
and literally overthrow Bill Clinton for eight years, I did not harbor any illusions about Obantia transcending partisan
division by becoming the _l'iberei pag:::caddwho o!.4.0._reunite .ArriericLl as many argued.
What I did not include in my book was any sense of where the Democratic left was going, or how this movement had
developed its own salvation narrative during the Bush era. Only a presidency as destructive and radical as Bush's could
have produced such deep levels of anxiety and desperation among progressives. When the Democratic primary began,
some progressives seemed to ache for a secular messiah to descend from the political heavens, reverse Bush's
disastrous legacy and save the country from itself..
in their quest for a savior, progressives discovered Barack Obama. "I serve as a blank screen on which people of vastly
different political stripes project their own views," Obama proclaimed in his book, The Audacity of Hope. As Obama's
primary battle against Hiiiary Clinton intensified, his rhetoric and the language of his supporters grew increasingly
messianic. At a rally in South Carolina, Oprah Winfrey referred to °barna as "The One," a fusion of Jesus and Nleo from
The Matrix. When Obarria defeated Clinton in Iowa, he quoted from a Hopi Indian End Times prophecy that had become
 popular among New Agers: "W:s.              oro?s we've '01:.en waiting. for.',' Moved to the point of ecstasy by Obama's victory
 speech, Ezra Klein declared the candidate, "not the Word made flesh, but the triumph of the word over flesh... Obarna is,
at his best, able to call us back to our higher selves."
(Though he is not a progressive by even the wildest stretch of the imagination, it is worth noting that Louis Farrakhan, who
had consistently ordered his followers to boycott elections and who attacked black politicians from Harold Washington to
 Jesse Jackson as tools of the white power structure, .'je.f.,-.GrE‘id in no uncertain terms that Obama was the Messiah.)
 Now that some of Obama's most zealous supporters are beginning to express grave doubts about his ability to deliver the
 transcendent change he promised, I think it is time for them to consider their role in contributing to the problems °barna
 faces with both his Democratic base and his opponents on the right. They embraced a secular salvation narrative that
°barna cleverly channeled to excite them and distract from his lack of progressive accomplishments. In the end, Obama's
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766243 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766243 Date: 08/31/2015




messianization created false expectations while establishing political space for the right to undermine and delegitimize
him.
To be sure; Obama's salvation narrative was dramatically different than the dualistic, malignant version that prevails on
the Christian right. Obama never, to my knowledge, played to his supporters' dark sides by promising them holy retribution
against their perceived enemies. In fact, part of his appeal stemmed from his repudiation of partisan rancor -- there were
no red states where people reject science, demonize gays and attack minority rights. Until he was inaugurated, Obama
behaved like a secular Messiah in a world without a Devil.
In my book. I detail a series of experiments by a group of political psychologists seeking to provide evidence that the fear
of death inspires extreme conservative beliefs -- including apocalypticisrn. Their study was inspired by a theory of cultural
anthropologist Ernest Becker: "The idea of death, the fear of it, haunts the human animal like nothing else; it is a
mainspring of human activity - designed largely to avoid the fatality of death, to overcome it by denying in some way that it
is the final destiny of man." The professors discovered that time and again, their study subjects would register more
conservative responses to questions if they were first reminded of their own deaths. (See John Judis' excellent artide on
the studies for more).
The use of mortality reminders came in to play as soon as Obama was inaugurated. Almost immediately, the right
attempted to delegitimize him by reversing the phenomenon he relied on to win: While he attempted to serve as a blank
screen for Americans to project their aspirations upon, they projected their most fearsome inner demons onto him. During
the October McCain-Palin rallies, Sarah Palin and far-right surrogates like Joe the Plumber attacked Obama as an Other,
a strange outsider who did not share mainstream American values. Their intention was to make him as unfamiliar and
frightening as possible, and in doing so, to scare off wavering independent voters. By this time, it was too late in the
campaign for the tactic to take effect, so it extended into this year and peaked during the Fall Teabagger rallies and town
hall disruptions.
Teabagger activists transposed images of Stalin and Hitler onto Obama's face. (Their propaganda bore a disturbing
resemblance to the signs waved by right-wing Jewish settlers during rallies against Yitzhak Rabin that depicted the soon
to be assassinated Israeli PM in Nazi SS garb and as the collaborator Marshall Petain, two seemingly incongruous
images). Obama was a Muslim; Obama was a commie; Obama was a cosmopolitan globalist; Obama was a black
nationalist. It did not matter who Obama really was. The right simply wanted to convince America he was The Other. As
cynical as their tactic is, it has damaged Obama in large part because he offered himself up as "a blank screen," defining
himself as he thought different audiences wished to see him, and ultimately not establishing a very clear identity at all.
The right has complemented its anti-Obama propaganda with false rumors designed to inject the language of death into
the healthcare debate. The single most damaging rumor, adopted from the cult of Lyndon LaRouche, refined by
healthcare industry lobbyist Betsy McCaughey. and popularized by Sarah Palin, was that Obarna's healthcare reform
proposal included a plan to implement "death panels." While the president pleaded for compromise and reason, the right
repeated the baseless charge over and over that he planned to pull the plug on grandma, euthanize the severely
handicapped, and kill the sick. Obama has not yet recovered from the damage the right's mortality reminders did to his
political standing.
 Since Obama announced his plan to escalate the war in Afghanistan, and with the White House apparently poised to
 scrap the public option and Medicare buy-in proposals to mollify Sen. Joseph Lieberman, the progressive left is going into
contortions. Turn on 1VISNIBC or read any major progressive blog and you will see former Obama zealots proclaim, "Kill
 the bill!" while assailing the president as an empty suit.
 The liberal left has become so disgruntled that a leading conservative talk radio host asked me recently if progressives
 were considering a primary challenge to Obama. I laughed and stated my belief that despite his troubles, Obama would
 win a second term. Whether or not that happens, those former Obama fanatics experiencing a crisis in faith should look in
 the mirror. They demanded a secular salvation narrative and participated in the near-deification of the politician who so
 eloquently delivered it to them. They now know that Obama is just a politician. What they have refused to acknowledge is
 that he would not have fallen so hard had they not lifted him so high.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766243 Date: 08/31/2015
