     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771451 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL


From:                           Valenzuela, Arturo A <ValenzuelaAA@state.gov>
Sent:                           Friday, October 1, 2010 7:34 AM
To:
Cc:                             Gonzalez, Juan S; Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma; Steinberg, James B; Burns, William J
Subject:                        From Arturo - Correa Rescued in Ecuador


Madame Secretary: After a tense day in which President Correa was slightly injured at noon by rioting and
striking police, and later was barred from leaving the hospital by the same, the army finally rescued him at
9pm last night. Some military units, including the Navy unit in Guayaquil appeared to support the police. The
police also occupied the national congress. As the rescue took place, the head of the Ecuadoran Joints Chiefs
of Staff issued a statement supporting the president, and noting that the armed forces respect the rule of law
"in which the President [Rafael Correa] is the maximum authority of the three branches." Things are now
calm.

Reaction in the hemisphere was one of deep concern. The OAS adopted a resolution; South American
presidents at the call of UNASUR travelled to Buenos Aires and are likely to go on to Quito to support
Correa. Several, including Garcia and Santos, called Correa. Zapatero also spoke with him. Moratinos tried to
reach you at around 6pm last evening to convey that news, I took the call.

As you know, we issued a statement of support for Correa. I also gave an interview to CNN in Spanish, which
was re-played frequently. I strongly recommend that you call Correa today to reiterate U.S. support for his
government and to wish him well.

He will appreciate it but, more broadly, it sends a signal that the United States supports the constitutional
order and rejects any attempt to undermine it. Chavez in Buenos Aires predictably declared that we were
behind the unrest. We have prepared a call sheet for you.

Regards,

Arturo




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771451 Date: 08/31/2015
