UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771965 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL



                                         Project Proposal


          USG Agency Roles in Off-Shore/On-Shore Balancing

         This project will prepare by December 31, 2010, a proposal defining in practical terms
  the contributions of U.S. Government agencies to a security strategy of off-shore military and
  on-shore political-economic balancing.

         An Alternative Security Strategy. Off-shore/on-shore balancing seeks to achieve
  America's core national security objectives through a combination of over-the-horizon ("off-
  shore") military power and in-region ("on-shore") economic and political power. Off-shore/on-
  shore balancing is an alternative to advancing U.S. security goals through the deployment of
  large ground forces overseas, already problematic and likely to become even more so as
  economic challenges continue and chronic resentment deepens. Off-shore/on-shore balancing
  relies on naval, air, and rapidly deployable ground forces in combination with on-site economic
  and political support for local partners to secure America's interests in combating terrorism and
  achieving other key national security goals, particularly in the Middle East and Asia.

         Afghanistan Case Study. To explore the strategy in practice, the project will consider a
  three-year transition to off-shore/on-shore balancing in Afghanistan. In the first, USG agencies
  would empower Pashtun groups through political and economic programs to achieve greater
  autonomy and create local opposition to the Taliban. U.S. and NATO troops on the ground
  would provide security. In the second year, U.S. and NATO troops would continue to provide
  security for political and economic programs and deliver lethal effects against terrorist groups,
  but they would operate with from a shrinking footprint as they redeployed to less sensitive
  parts of the country. In the third year, U.S. and NATO would remove troops and rely on air,
  naval, and rapidly deployable ground forces to deliver over-the-horizon effects.

         Talking to the Practitioners. The project aims to define the contributions from key
  agencies, starting with the State Department and then moving on to the intelligence
  community and the military services.

         The project will solicit agencies' views on how current and future programs might
         contribute to the strategy, identify inter-agency processes that might facilitate the
         coordination of the strategy, and anticipate issues that would arise in a transition to the
         strategy.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771965 Date: 08/31/2015
