    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772705 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                      RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                      B6


From:                               sbwhoeop
Sent:                               Tuesday, October 12, 2010 4:46 PM
To:
Subject:                            H: FYI. Sid


The Huffington Post
October 12, 2010




  oward Fineman
finemanAhuffingtonpost.com I HuffPost Reporting




The Power Of Clinton, The Invisibility Of
Obama
First Posted: 10-12-10 02:37 PM I Updated: 10-12-10 02:37 PM


LOUISVILLE -- I see that Dr. Rand Paul has taken out after Bill Clinton, dredging up Monica Lewinsky. And I know why
Paul did so. The former president was here in Kentucky yesterday and in this state, as in many others, he is a far more
potent and popular foe than President Barack Obama.
On my first day working for The Huffington Post, I came back to Kentucky, where I began my career many years ago at
the Courier-Journal. The people who run the University of Louisville Kentucky Author Forum wanted me to do an on-stage
interview with a certain best-selling author who is also my new boss: Arianna Huffington. It was a tricky mix of professional
incest and personal nostalgia, but the event worked out well and I also got a chance to play Kentucky reporter once again
out in the state.
I raced over to Lexington and here is the ground-level, outside-the-Beltway reality I witnessed:
Like Voldemort's, Obama's is a name no one dares utter -- and that includes Clinton speaking to Democrats.
At a sunny, noontime rally on the campus of the University of Kentucky in Lexington yesterday, the former president made
a stirring, well-argued case for Democratic Senate candidate Jack Conway and for Democrats generally -- without once
mentioning Obama and rarely mentioning the presidency. It was as though we suddenly had only two branches of
government.
To be fair, almost no one else at the one-hour rally mentioned the sitting president. And Kentucky is staunch Republican
territory. "We're farther ahead in the generic ballot here than ever," GOP Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky told me
yesterday. "President Obama was never popular here, even at his peak."
Still, the eerie invisibility of the president is a telling commentary on the Democrats' confused, divided and defensive
predicament as they brace for the verdict of the voters on Election Day, Nov. 2. There was something odd -- and, if you're
a Democrat, depressing -- about a former Democratic president avoiding any mention of his Democratic successor.
Clinton sincerely wants to help out on the trail -- and certainly wants to avoid the accusation that he didn't try to help. But
his travels have turned into a personal victory lap that often makes him -- not the candidate he's touting -- the center of
attention. That was true here in Kentucky. The rally's mechanics were mostly handled by the Secret Service; more to the
 point, the final (and therefore top-billed) speaker wasn't Conway. It was Clinton. The Conway people didn't mind. They
 were glad to have him.



    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772705 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772705 Date: 08/31/2015




Rail-thin but not frail, wearing a tweedy professorial sports coat and his signature rueful, knowing smile, Clinton was
treated with a respect bordering on awe. His familiar mane of white hair, thinning now, was translucent in the sun, giving
him an almost otherworldly look: the Sage from a Better Age.
Clinton is beloved In Kentucky. He won the state twice. He speaks the local dialect, which contains Appalachian notes of
working-class pride, suspicion of big shots and Baptist revivalism. But more than that -- and more than just in Kentucky --
Clinton's economic record (22.7 million jobs created, and he tends not to forget to mention the .7) looks spectacularly
good in the context of what has followed.
These days there is almost an Old Testament, milk-and-honey reverence for that economic record, at least as expressed
by former Kentucky Sen. Wendell Ford. An old-school podium pounder, Ford -- stooped but still strong voiced at 86 --
talked of the former president in messianic terms. "Bill Clinton found us the path to gold!" he shouted. The crowd of 2,000,
most of them students, didn't laugh. They seemed to think he was right.
How any of this helps Obama is far from clear; it isn't even clear that it helps many Democrats -- since they'd be joining
the same Washington party that the current president ostensibly heads.
But Clinton is all too happy to show Obama how it's done. As a campaigner and as president, Clinton's gift was his ability
to untangle the knots of even the most complex policy issue and explain it in plain language to people suspicious of the
powerful -- but eager not to be screwed by them or to be seen as dupes. Republicans and their corporate allies were out
to shut down the few good things that government does for you, he said, in the name of balancing a budget that they
themselves destroyed. "I gave you budget surpluses!" Clinton said, as if this had been an act of personal beneficence.
Knowing his audience, the former president focused on Pell Grants, and on a new program that allows graduates to pay
back their loans over longer periods and at lower rates. Paul, he said, will try to take that new program away -- and, given
the GOP's deliberate vagueness about spending cuts -- there is reason to think Clinton is right.
Which is why Paul got personal today. Which means Clinton drew blood. Which means that he did what he came to do.
Which means Obama will remain invisible, at least in Kentucky, at least for now, and probably for a long time to come.


 Ci




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772705 Date: 08/31/2015
