     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771305 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                  B6



From:                               sbwhoeop
Sent:                               Wednesday, October 13, 2010 9:50 AM
To:
Subject:                            briefed Ed Luce of FT on this... Sid




Financial Times FT.com



  Politics & Foreign policy

Clinton's aim is true as Democrats' top gun
By Edward Luce in Washington
Published: October 12 2010 20:43 I Last updated: October 12 2010 20:43
Nobody would go so far as to call it a comeback. But Bill Clinton's appearances on the midterm election trail are starting to
turn voters' heads in a way that Barack Obama's simply are not.
Democratic operatives say that Mr Clinton, who went through in 1994 the kind of setback that pollsters say Mr Obama will
face in less than three weeks, is more effective at presenting the election as a choice between starkly different
alternatives rather than a referendum on what people think of the Obama administration.
So far the president, who has booked most of the next three weeks for campaigning, has been unable to pull that off. This
week alone, Mr Clinton has shaken up two Senate races — in Kentucky and West Virginia — with appearances that have
assisted Democratic candidates. Mr Clinton was due to speak in Las Vegas on Tuesday night to assist the embattled
Harry Reid, the Senate majority leader, and then move onto California later in the week.
"Bill Clinton is about as close to a secret weapon as the Democratic party has got," says Norm Ornstein, a political analyst
at the conservative American Enterprise Institute. "He has this ability to fire up the Democratic base that almost nobody
else can do right now." Mr Clinton's intervention in Kentucky, where Jack Conway, the Democratic candidate, is locked in
a tight race with Rand Paul, the Tea Party icon, is a good case in point.
At the weekend Mr Clinton described Mr Paul, who wants drastically to shrink the size of the US federal government and
has talked of abolishing the Federal Reserve, as a "radical with no record to back it up". Mr Paul, who has never run for
elected office, hit back by reminding voters of Mr Clinton's former Monica Lewinsky scandal. "I am not sure I would trust a
man who had sex with an intern," said Mr Paul. "I mean, do you think he's an honourable person?"
Mr Paul's trip down memory lane appears to have backfired. Few voters seem to care any longer about a scandal that
occurred amid what in retrospect looks like a golden age of balanced budgets, job creation and the absence of foreign
wars.
"Bill Clinton's strength is that he knows how to fight back and turn adversity into advantage," says Tad Devine, a veteran
Democratic operative. "He is also able to enter an individual race, take the temperature, understand what people are
 feeling and then base his appeal to voters on that."
In the West Virginia Senate race, where Joe Manchin, the governor, is trailing John Raese, a wealthy local businessman,
 Mr Clinton on Monday came out punching. Referring to Mr Raese's plush Florida vacation home, the former president
 said: "I'm here for a lot of reasons. One is that I don't think it's fair for West Virginia to have one senator and Florida to
 have three."
 Acknowledging voter anger in a state where Mr Obama has 29 per cent rating, among the lowest in the country, Mr
 Clinton added: 'I am old enough to know that if you make a decision when you are mad — and I am not just talking about
 politics here — there is about an 80 per cent chance you will make a mistake."
 In contrast, a lot of Democrats are critical of the way Mr Obama has framed the midterm campaign, shifting from one
 attack line to another without sticking to an overarching narrative. Last month, Mr Obama turned on John Boehner, the
 Republican congressional leader, in what looked like a move to depict him as the voters' alternative.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771305 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771305 Date: 08/31/2015



More recently, Mr Obama has switched to attacking the Chamber of Commerce for allegedly funnelling foreign money into
attack ads. But it has generated a lot of criticism. "This election is awash with undisclosed money and it's fair to point out
how disadvantaged the Democrats have been," says one consultant. "But it isn't good politics at this late stage when
voters clearly want to hear about the economy."
Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2010. Print a single copy of this article for personal use. Contact us if you wish to
print more to distribute to others.

                 "FT" and "Financial Times" are trademarks of the Financial Times. Privacy policy I Terms
                                        © Copyright The Financial Times Ltd 2010.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771305 Date: 08/31/2015
