     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768992 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                            RELEASE IN FULL



From:                            McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sent:                            Friday, March 26, 2010 7:43 AM
To:
Cc:                              Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject                          FW: Afghanistan & Pakistan Morning News Highlights March 26



FYI, early read out of Pakistan media reaction to strategic dialogue. Not bad overall at this point.


Pakistan Media:

Coverage of the final round of the U.S.-Pak Strategic Dialogue dominated the front pages of all newspapers and
hourly bulletins of TV networks on Friday morning. Media highlighted reports that the U.S. and Pakistan
sought "wide-ranging, long term and substantive partnership," and "established a policy steering group for
further talks on strategic issues." The signing of a letter of intent between the U.S. and Pakistan to help
reconstruction of priority roads in Malakand division also received prominent display. Secretary of Defense
Gates' meeting with his Pakistani counterpart, and his comments that the "U.S. wants to increase the military
funding of Pakistan" received coverage. Pak Army Chief General Kayani's remarks that the "military is willing
to forgo its requests for hardware to ensure that Pakistan's energy and economic needs are met" were also
reported. Reports that GOP and the opposition are not on same page regarding talks with the U.S. received
front-page display. The civilian nuclear deal issue made news as "The News," reported that the "FO seeks to
hide unease over nuclear snub" and "The Nation," reported on front-page that "U.S. affirms durable partnership
but no civilian N-deal." However Foreign Office spokesman's remarks, that the "government is optimistic about
a positive outcome" was also reported. Terming the U.S. commitment of $125 million for the power sector, as
"crucial," "The News," noted in its editorial that "it needs to be translated into action urgently." Its sister mass-
circulated Urdu daily, "Jang," however noted with a word of caution, that "we think that the present U.S.
overtures to woo Pakistan are not completely altruistic. It remains to be seen what Washington wants from
Islamabad." A prominent columnist, Ayesha Siddiqa noted in "Dawn," that "the U.S. might have realized that it
will have to listen to Pakistan and feel concerned about its inherent insecurity vis-a-vis India's role in
Afghanistan."




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768992 Date: 08/31/2015
