         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769584 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                       B6



    From:                                sbwhoeop                                                                        B6
    Sent:                                Thursday, July 15, 2010 8:56 AM
    To:
    Subject:                             fyi




    http://www.bloomberq.com/news/2010-07-14/americans-disappoving-of-obama-policies-poised-to-enable-republican-
    dains.html


    Americans Disapproving Obama Poised to Enable
    Republican Gains
    By John McCormick and Catherine Dodge - Jul 14, 2010
•
•     Email
•    Share
•    Print


    Chart: Poll Results


    Attachment:    Poll results and methodology


    Americans disapprove of U.S. President Barack Obama's handling of almost every major issue and are
    deeply pessimistic about the nation's direction, offering a bullish environment for Republicans in the
    November congressional elections.

    A majority or plurality disapproves of Obama's management of the economy, health care, the budget
    deficit, the overhaul of financial market regulations and the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, according to a
    Bloomberg National Poll conducted July 9- 12. In addition, almost 6 in 10 respondents say the war in
    Afghanistan is a lost cause.

    Almost two-thirds say they feel the nation is headed in the wrong direction, an even more sour
    assessment than in March when 58 percent felt that way. Two-thirds of independent voters are
    pessimistic, while just 56 percent of Democrats offer a vote of confidence.

    "They don't see any solutions in sight," said J. Ann Selzer, president of Selzer & Co., a Des Moines, Iowa-
    based firm that conducted the nationwide survey. "They have been hammered by the economy and there
    is a disconnect between the lives Americans are living and Washington. They seem to have lost hope."

    Poll respondents are divided on their congressional preference between Democrats and Republicans,
    with both sides getting 43 percent support. Among those who say they are most likely to vote,
    Republicans are favored, 48 percent to 40 percent. The Republican advantage is even greater among
    likely voters who view the election as exceptionally important, with Republicans beating Democrats 56
    percent to 34 percent.

    Control of Congress


         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769584 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. CO5769584 Date: 08/31/2015




For the Democrats, whd control Congress and the White House, the survey shows the potential 'for losses
in November, when voters will fill all 435 House seats, 36 Senate seats and 37 governorships. The
outcome could affect °Pam's ability to move his agenda through Congress for the two years leading up
to his own 2012 re-election bid.

The fate of incumbents will depend to some extent on what happens to the economy in the next four
months and whether unemployment drops much from its current 9.5 percent. A rising stock market could
help as well. So far this year, the S&P 500 stock index has declined 1.8 percent.

The public's disenchantment with the president's Policies doesn't extend to voter feelings about Obama
himself, as he gets a job approval rating of 52 percent and personally is viewed favorably by 55 percent.
Obama, 48, remains more popular than any of the Republican figures tested in the poll and is topped only
by Secretary of State :-- ;:!aity ant.cn and General Da,,,td Petraeos, the new commander of U.S. forces in
Afghanistan, among a list of 15 people and political parties reviewed.

Republican Leaders

The only bright spot for Republican candidates is for Louisiana Governor Eiob%) 1i:tele!, who gets a 32
percent favorable rating and an 18 percent unfavorable grade. Better-known party leaders such as former
vice presidential candidate :a-et..n and former House Speaker Netf,ri: CirigPait both have negative
ratings that outweigh the positive views.

Although turnout in midterm elections is historically lower than in presidential races, the electorate is
interested. Four- fifths of Americans who plan to vote say November's election is very or exceptionally
important.

The likelihood to vote is strongest among older voters, Republicans and those with the highest incomes.
Among those 55 and older. three-quarters say they will definitely vote, compared with 48 percent of those
younger than 35. Four-fifths of Republicans say they will definitely vote, compared with 65 percent of
Democrats and 62 percent of independents.

Referendum on °barna

Seeking to capitalize on the intensity expressed by voters, Republicans want to make the election a
national referendum on Obama and the party in power, while the White House and Democrats argue it is
about going forward, rather than backward to failed policies.

The challenge for Democrats will be to translate their vision of a better future into more positive feelings
about the economy among voters. In the poll, Republicans have the advantage among the independents
often critical to winning elections. Among independents likely to vote, Republican congressional
candidates are preferred to Democrats, 50 percent to 29 percent.

"Anything that has been tried hasn't resulted in making anything better in the world where ordinary people
live," Selzer said. "That's a bad scenario for incumbents of the majority party."

Incumbent Disadvantage

A third of poll participants say they would be less likely to vote for a candidate who has served in
Congress for many years. About one-fifth of likely voters say the election is more about sending a
message, while three-quarters say it is about picking the party that has the best ideas.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769584 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769584 Date: 08/31/2015




"I don't know what these people are thinking in Washington," says poll respondent Jeff Lockman, 41, a
professional golfer and Republican from Malvern, Pennsylvania. "They are going in 10 different directions
and they really don't know what to focus on."

The proportion who feel the nation is headed in the wrong direction is about the same as at this poin't in
1994, when Republicans took control of Congress, and 2006, when Democrats took over.

The public also has soured on Obama's foreign-policy priority, the war in Afghanistan. While the president
has ordered an expansion of forces to turn the tide in a conflict where he says the U.S. has a critical stake,
58 percent say it is a lost cause, compared with 36 percent who say it can still be won. A slim majority of
Republicans -- 52 percent -- say the U.S. can still win in Afghanistan, while 71 percent of Democrats say
the conflict is lost.

Afghanistan Withdrawal

Six in 10 Americans say it would be best to stick with Obarna's plan to start withdrawing forces in July
2011, while one-third say they remain open to keeping the same number of troops there, or even adding
additional forces.

Reflecting the belief among many that the war cannot be won, a third of Americans say they have become
less supportive of the effort there in recent months.

The Bloomberg National Poll is based on interviews with 1,004 U.S. adults ages 18 or older. Percentages
based on the full sample may have a maximum margin of error of plus or minus 3.1 percentage points.

:4:?,r;yr• 3
           '. cwrra:1, who studies public opinion at the ,A;-necicar Entarpr:F.:e institute, a public-policy research
group in Washington, cails the poll "very, very grim news for the Democrats."

At the same time, she says, one silver lining for Democrats is that Republicans have yet to convince
voters that they have a plan.

Obarna Visit

One signpost for Democrats in the poll is the finding that just 26 percent of Americans say it would help a
Democratic candidate in their area to get a visit from Obama, while 20 percent say it would hurt the
candidate and 54 percent say it wouldn't matter or they don't know.

Obama's worst ratings are for his handling of the budget deficit, where 59 percent disapprove and 37
percent approve. It's his worst grade for that subject in any of four Bloomberg polls taken since
September 2009. The Obama administration expects a record budget deficit this year of more than $1.5
trillion, or 10.6 percent of GDP, according to projections the White House released in February. It was
$1.4 trillion for the 2008-2009 fiscal year, which covers the end ofGecrge W. Bush's presidency, and
Obama has said that the current fiscal shortfall as well as theunemployment rate are inheritances from his
Republican predecessor's administration.

"My biggest fear is we have people in government who don't have a clue about what is going on in the
economy," says poll respondent Jim Heeter, 66, from Glendale, Arizona. "They have never run a business
or had to make a payroll."

Economy, Health Care


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769584 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769584 Date: 08/31/2015




Slim majorities disapprove of Obama's handling of the economy and health care. When it comes to
creating jobs, he gets 46 percent approval, addressing problems on Wall Street, 42 percent support,
running the war in Afghanistan, 46 percent approve, and managing the BP Plc oil spill, 46 percent
support.

Forty-five percent say they have become more supportive in recent months of tougher regulations for Wall
Street. The momentum is heading in the opposite direction from the White House and Democrats on most
other issues.

Almost half say they have become less supportive in recent months of federal money being loaned to
automotive companies to help them stay in business, while 37 percent have become less supportive of
the health-care overhaul passed by Congress earlier this year. A majority, 61 percent, say the nation
should wait and see how the health-care legislation works or leave it alone, while 37 percent want to see it
repealed.

Arizona Immigration Law

Almost half of Americans say they have also grown more supportive of allowing local law enforcement to
detain anyone who can't produce proof of citizenship when stopped for an offense, as is contemplated in
an Arizona law. Cbama has criticized the measure and the Justice Department has announced it plans to
sue Arizona.

At least half of respondents also say they would be less likely to support candidates who voted to give
financial assistance to the banking or automobile industries.

Americans are roughly divided on whether they would be more or less likely to support a candidate who
voted against extending unemployment benefits because of concern over the cost. A measure providing
such support worth $34 billion is stalled in Congress.

Clinton Popularity

The disaffection with Obarna and Democrats doesn't carry over to all Democrats. Hillary Clinton, 62, is
viewed favorably by 61 percent of respondents and a quarter of Americans, including 30 percent of
Republicans and 21 percent of Democrats, say the nation would be in a better place if she had been
elected president.

The Tea Party movement, which has been mainly associated with Republicans, has lukewarm support in
the poll. A majority of 58 percent of all respondents says it would make no difference to them if a
candidate was backed by Tea Party activists, while a third of Republicans say that kind of backing would
make a candidate more appealing to them.

Those who are more likely to think the Tea Party is a simplistic and misguided movement -- 44 percent of
all respondents -- include Democrats, 65 percent, and those with the highest incomes, 52 percent.
Independent voters are divided on whether it is misguided or has rightly identified that the nation would be
better served by reduced federal government, compared with 39 percent overall.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769584 Date: 08/31/2015
