UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769270 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL




                                                            June 30, 2010

  Dear Mr. John Olver:

           We thought you would be interested to know that three members of Kaleidoscope Trio,
  located in your district, recently traveled to Mali and throughout Cote d'Ivoire as part of the
  Performing Arts Initiative, a cultural exchange program supported by the Bureau of Educational
  and Cultural Affairs. This program is an important way to engage foreign audiences by
  providing U.S. embassies financial support for presentations of American performing arts and
  artists.

          We received excellent feedback on the Kaleidoscope Trio. This outstanding jazz
  ensemble delighted hundreds of people in Mali through concerts and many thousands more
  through feature programming on nationwide radio and TV outlets. During stops in
  Yamoussoukro, Tiassele, and Abidjan, the group conducted participatory workshops and
  discussions for nearly 475 students.

           The ensemble's packed schedule included workshops at the Bamako School for the Blind
  as well as music and high schools throughout the capital; an outdoor concert for 500 in a town in
  southwest Mali; and, a joint performance with Grammy-nominated Malian artist Bassekou
  Kouyate. The Trio members' willingness to provide free music lessons during their downtime
  deeply impressed Malian audiences. Perhaps the greatest cultural exchange occurred in Abidjan
  when group member, Gilad Dobrecky, was presented with an "ahoko," an African percussion
  instrument, and to the surprise and enjoyment of the audience seamlessly incorporated it into the
  trio's repertoire.

           We are thrilled to have the opportunity to showcase America's accomplished and talented
  artists through our cultural projects. Your constituents' willingness to undertake the rigors of
  international travel to engage foreign audiences, foster goodwill and provide insight into our
  culture and values makes them true citizen diplomats. We are grateful to them for helping us
  accomplish our country's foreign policy objectives.


                                               Sincerely,



                                               Maura M. Pally
                                                Deputy Assistant Secretary for
                                                   Professional and Cultural Exchanges


  The Honorable
       John Olver,
               House of Representatives.



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769270 Date: 08/31/2015
