    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770115 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL


From:                             Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Sent:                             Monday, June 28, 2010 11:32 AM
To:                               H; Lew, Jacobi
Subject:                          FW: Afghan release -- about to be sent out by lowey.




                 Lowey to Remove Assistance for Afghanistan From Foreign Aid Bill
                       Chairwoman Announces Oversight Hearings on Corruption in Afghanistan

WASHINGTON — In light of two troubling news reports on corruption within the Afghan government, Congresswoman
Nita Lowey (D-NY), Chairwoman of the Appropriations State and Foreign Operations Subcommittee, today announced
she is removing funding for Afghanistan beyond humanitarian aid from her 2011 bill scheduled for markup this week.

"The alleged shipment of billions in donor funds out of Afghanistan and allegations of Afghan government insiders
impeding corruption investigations are outrageous," said Lowey. "I do not intend to appropriate one more dime for
assistance to Afghanistan until I have confidence that U.S. taxpayer money is not being abused to line the pockets of
corrupt Afghan government officials, drug lords, and terrorists. Furthermore, the government of Afghanistan must
demonstrate that corruption is being aggressively investigated and prosecuted.

"Rampant corruption fosters the conditions that threaten the security of our troops and the stability of the Afghan
government and economy."

The State and Foreign Operations Appropriations Subcommittee will mark up its Fiscal Year 2011 Appropriations Act on
Wednesday June 30th. The subcommittee will not consider any bilateral assistance for the Afghan government other
than lifesaving humanitarian aid at this time.

Lowey also announced the Subcommittee will hold oversight hearings after the July 4th recess to get to the bottom of
these allegations.

"Too many Americans are suffering in this economy for us to put their hard-earned tax dollars into the hands of
criminals overseas," said Lowey. "We will not commit billions more in taxpayer money for Afghanistan until there are
assurances that such funds will be used for their intended purposes and that the government of Afghanistan is willing
and able to root corruption within its ranks. U.S. taxpayers deserve nothing less."




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770115 Date: 08/31/2015
