     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769542 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                                                RELEASE IN
                                                                                                                PART B6



From:                              sbwhoeop
Sent:                              Sunday, July 11, 2010 10:06 AM
To:
Subject:                           H: fyi, leaked Luntz poll on Bibi policies; and many congrats to Huma! Sid


 Below is a transcript from Israeli TV News Channel Ten on a leaked poll taken last week by Frank Luntz. Here's a
summary:

    1.   56% of Americans agree with the claim that there is a humanitarian crisis in Gaza;
    2.   43% of Americans agree with the claim that people in Gaza are starving;
    3.   34% of Americans support the Israeli operation against the Flotilla;
    4.   20% of Americans "felt support" for Israel following announcement of easing of Gaza closure.



Frank Luntz analyses Netanyahu's media performance in the flotilla affair
The figures are troubling and worrisome. If that is the situation with our great friend the US, it is easy to imagine the
situation in other, somewhat less sympathetic countries.
Channel Ten TV News, July 1 2010 20:38
Yaacov Eilon (host): Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is considered to make an extremely persuasive presentation in
the world press. But a professional analysis by a US expert presented yesterday to his senior aides strongly criticizes him.
Netanyahu's messages on the flotilla caused more harm than good. Our political correspondent Chico Menashe has
obtained the report.
Chico Menashe: Criticism of Prime Minister Netanyahu's current PR messages and Israeli PR in general comes from the
international elite of media consultants and pollsters and from the mouth of Frank Luntz, considered one of the leading
American political consultants, a Republican pollster, a consultant to many governments throughout the world and to
dozens of the biggest corporations in the US. He was asked by the Jewish organization The Israel Project to check the
opinions of the American public on the messages Israel issued to the world during and after the flotilla events. The result
is a harsh document that primarily criticizes the media strategy of the person considered Israel's number one
propagandist in the world, Prime Minister Netanyahu.
Netanyahu: Once again Israel faces hypocrisy and a biased rush to judgment.
Chico Menashe: Every time Israeli speakers begin with accusing the international community, writes Luntz, they
lose their audience. For example, Netanyahu's comments after the flotilla about the world hypocrisy were rejected by
most of the American participants who listened to them. The findings were presented last night to senior members of
Netanyahu's Bureau. Luntz checked the opinions with focus groups, not a poll. He warns of a dangerous slide in the
public opinion of the only country considered pro-Israeli, the U.S. Israel misses simple opportunities to change world
public opinion, he writes, and the consequences are significant. The American public increasingly hesitates to accept
arguments that support Israeli positions.
Ehud Barak: There is no hunger in Gaza and no humanitarian crisis.
Netanyahu: There's no shortage of food, there's no shortage of medicine, there's no shortage of other goods.
 Chico Menashe: Luntz says Israel must immediately stop using the argument that there is no hunger and no
 humanitarian crisis in Gaza. He says this fatally destroys Israel's credibility in light of the images on the
 television screens. Israel must admit that there is a problem, he says, to gain the listeners' sympathy [emphasis
 mine]. Luntz finds the troubling figure that 56% of participants agree with the claim that there is a humanitarian crisis in
 Gaza, and no less astonishing is that 43% of participants from the American public agree with the claim that people in
 Gaza are starving. But even lifting the closure that was supposed to improve Israel's image missed the opportunity,
 according to Luntz.
 Netanyahu: Yesterday an important decision was made by the security cabinet. Its meaning is clear. On the one hand,
 allowing civilian goods into Gaza, and on the other hand maintaining the military blockade of Hamas.
 Chico Menashe: The statement by Netanyahu's bureau of lifting the closure missed the opportunity to gain
 support in international public opinion [emphasis mine]. Only 20% of the Americans polled felt support of Israel
 following the statement. According to Lunt, this is the summary of the flotilla damage in American public opinion: Only
 34% of the American public support the Israeli operation against the flotilla, and he says that is a dangerously low
 percentage.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769542 Date: 08/31/2015
