     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772036 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL



From:                            Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Sent:                            Friday, November 5, 2010 6:05 AM
To:                              H; Lew, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:                         FW: The Cable: Granger seeking chairmanship of State and foreign ops subcommittee




     The Cable: Granger seeking chairmanship of State and foreign
     ops subcommittee




     Granger seeking chairmanship of State and foreign ops subcommittee
     Posted: 03 NOV 2010 1131 AM PDT


     Texas Congresswoman Kay   Granger will seek the chairmanship of the State and Foreign Operations
     Appropriations Subcommittee, according to her spokesman, ending rumors that she would forgo the post in favor of
     some other position.

     Although no decisions have been made, until last night Granger was the ranking Republican on the panel and she is
     the clear frontrunner for the job. She would succeed current chairwoman Nita Lowey (D-NY), who has served as
     chairwoman since 2006.

     "Congresswoman Granger is interested in continuing on as chair of the state and foreign operations appropriations
     subcommittee," Matt LeffingwelL her press secretary, told The Cable Wednesday.

     When power switches in Congress, a complicated game of musical chairs begins as senior members jockey for
     committee and subcommittee chairs. Just being the highest-ranking minority member on a panel doesn't mean one
     automatically takes over the chairmanship.

     But if Granger does succeed Lowey, she will play a large role in writing the bills that appropriate money for State
     Department operations, USAID, foreign operations, foreign assistance, humanitarian assistance, and many other
     things. Those accounts all face unprecedented pressure next year as the GOP led Congress will be looking for
     spending cuts that don't have strong domestic constituencies.

      Last month, we identified Granger as one of 10 Republicans who stand to be influential in the next Congress if
      the GOP won control of the House. Since then, we've received several e-mails from sources who had heard that
      Granger would forgo the subcommittee chairmanship to pursue leadership of another panel.

      We've heard that Ander Crenshaw (R-FL), the third-ranking Republican on the panel, was eyeing the
      chairmanship with the expectation that Granger would step aside.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772036' Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772036 Date: 08/31/2015




(Mark Kirk (R-IL), the second-ranking Republican on the subcommittee, was elected Tuesday night to become the
junior senator from Illinois, the seat once held by Barack Obama.)

So how would subcommittee chairwoman Granger handle the responsibility of writing the State and foreign ops
appropriations bill? Here's what we reported in October:

  Although [Granger] supported the bill put forth this year by current chairwoman Nita Lowey CD-N.Y.),
  she criticized the increases for the foreign-ops budget, saying, "We also face the continued concern in
  our own country about our economy and the devastating effects of skyrocketing deficits and debt." She's
  a strong supporter of a balanced budget amendment, which doesn't bode well for foreign-aid
   funding in this dismal fiscal environment.

   Granger also serves on the defense subcommittee, placing her at the intersection of the debate over how
   to balance the national security budget and shift resources from defense to diplomacy and development.
   Here she seems to favor the Pentagon, saying in June, "I want to be sure that we aren't increasing foreign
   aid at the expense of our troops." Her lack of support of international organizations was criticized by the
   group Citizens for Global Solutions, which gave her an "F" in its 2007 to 2009 rating. Granger is also
   on board with efforts to eliminate aid to countries that are not performing on internal reform, as she
   explained when expressing opposition to funding of the Senegalese government through the State
   Department's Millennium Challenge Corporation. "We can't just give out money and say we will put up
   with whatever you are doing," she said.

The committee leadership assignments won't be doled out for at least two to three weeks, our Hill sources report.
But if Granger's bid is successful, she'll be instantly influential. The fiscal 2011 State and Foreign Ops bill still has
not been completed by Congress, despite that the fiscal year began Oct. 1.

The stop gap funding measure that has been funding these programs since then, known as a "continuing
resolution," expires in December. The lame duck Democratic led Congress is unlikely to be able to pass full
appropriations bills on its way out the door, so they will likely pass another short term continuing resolution. That
would leave the final work on the actual bill to the incoming class led by the GOP next year.



You are subscribed to email updates from The Cable                                                Email delivery powered by Google
To stop receiving these emails, you may unsubscribe now.


 Google Inc., 20 West Kinzie, Chicago IL USA 60610




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772036 Date: 08/31/2015
