       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770255 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL




From:                               McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sent:                               Thursday, August 5, 2010 1:16 PM
To:                                 H; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject:                            FW: Kenya update



Fyi,


From: Wharton, David B
Sent: Thursday, August 05, 2010 12:11 PM
To: McHale, Judith A; DiMartino, Kitty; Castillo, Raymond A; McClanahan, Julie A; Roche, Lynn W; Kemp, Edward
Subject: Fw: copy of cable

Latest from Nairobi. Glenn is political counselor there.



1. This situation report is current as of 6:30 pm. It concludes Embassy Nairobi's Referendum situation reports.

2. Results from approximately 200 of 210 constituencies have been counted and final results should be announced
within the next hour. The "Yes" vote is about 5.5 million and the "No" vote is about 2.5 million. Final results should
show "Yes" with about 69 percent.

3. President Kibaki, Prime Minister Odinga, and Vice President Musyoka addressed a large crowd at the Kenya
International Conference Center at about 6:00 pm. Avoiding triumphalism , they struck themes of unity, reconciliation,
renewal, and building a new Kenya. After Odinga called for unity and paid tribute to Kibaki's leadership, Kibaki noted
that Kenya was coming to the end of an historic 20-year journey. The adoption of a new constitution was a victory for
those who had fought long and hard for a new constitutional dispensation that would usher in a new Kenyan nation. He
congratulated Kenyans on a successful and peaceful resolution of the constitutional process that showed that Kenya's
democratic institutions had come of age. Kibaki said he was particularly pleased with the transparent and efficient
conduct of the Interim Independent Electoral Commission. He called on all elements of Kenyan society to implement
the constitution. Referring to opposition to the constitution, Kibaki said their voices would be heard. Democracy was
about accepting the verdict of the majority, he said, while acknowledging space for the minority.

4. Earlier in the day, opposition leader William Ruto conceded defeat. He thanked the Kenyan people for their peaceful
participation in the process and specifically thanked the more than two million people who had resisted blackmail and
manipulation to vote "no." He argued that the majority of Kenyans had either voted against the constitution or did not
vote. Therefore, the "yes" side would have to consult with the opposition on issues of concern to it.

5. Embassy observer teams have returned from the field and reported that the situation throughout Kenya, including
the Rift Valley, is calm. Tensions have eased in the Rift Valley following Ruto's concession, and Post expects the post-
Referendum period to be peaceful.



This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770255 Date: 08/31/2015
