      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768846 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                      RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                      B6



From:                             Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                             Friday, April 30, 2010 5:44 AM
To:                               Jiloty, Lauren C
Cc:
Subject:                          Fw: For the Secretary
Attachments:                      ir2110.vcf



Lauren - can u print for hrc?

    Original Message ---
From: Irwin Redlener, M.D.
To: Abedin, Huma
Cc: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Fri Apr 30 00:30:43 2010
Subject: For the Secretary

Hi,Huma,
Please share this with Hillary.
Thanks,
Irwin



Dear Hillary,
I am hoping we can pick up the threads of our previous conversations, including meeting again with Cheryl. I continue to
believe that I can - and would very much like to - be able to contribute meaningfully to your work and the mission of the
Department. Issues having to do with the status of children world-wide, health liaison to US AID and a variety of issues
within the realm of disaster response and preparedness.

- I just today participated in and spoke at a major conference in DC on nuclear terrorism. Most of the speakers and
participants were federal officials, including WH staff. One of the key points I made was the extraordinary disconnect
between administration concerns with respect to the possibility of IND/nuclear terrorism and the degree to which this is
essentially ignored in state and local disaster planning, including in the principal target cities. My discussions with
officials in Great Britain and a couple of other countries reveal a similar inability to deal with nuclear preparedness. For
many of these folks, here and abroad, images of apocalyptic destruction - as was the actual threat during the nuclear
arms race with the Soviets - are just paralyzing.
However, a terrorist IND, is not an all-out nuclear war. Current, scientific modeling suggests that minimal planning for
an IND could save hundreds of thousands of lives and create a much high level of resiliency than we currently have

I believe that an international consortium of disaster response and recovery planning officials should be considered as a
means of increasing attention and resources focused on nuclear - and CBRNE in general - terrorism readiness. We have
much that could be learned from one another in terms of advancing this work. My center at Columbia recently held a
very successful and productive conference called "Day 3"
, focused on the regional conditions and projections 72 hours post IND detonation.

- Natural disasters also remain a major challenge and potentially increasingly so over the years to come. I feel that
there is much to be gained by upgrading the level and quality of our international collaboration around disaster
response planning - and particularly major disaster recovery, still one of the great unsolved challenges world-wide.



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768846 Date: 08/31/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768846 Date: 08/31/2015




- As a member of the federally appointed National Commission on Children and Disasters, we just completed a field
hearing of state and federal officials on the management of children brought from Haiti to Florida for medical care and
humanitarian rescue. Some were American nationals, others not. But the reports from people involved in the process
were overwhelmingly concerned about lack of coordination, dangerously inadequate information accompanying many
of the kids who came over and lots of less than positive feedback about operations within Haiti. I believe that I could
help in the organization of emergency response, overseeing some of the key functions in managing international
disasters which end up involving the U.S.

- I had a chance and very interesting meeting with Ban Ki-Moon 2 weeks ago. I mentioned an idea I have been thinking
about having to do with another world children's summit. The last one was in 1990, held at the U.N. and involving
about 150 countries, including heads of state from about 45 - 50 nations. Conditions for children were outlined and
goals set for future improvements - many of which were met, many not.. We are overdue for another world gathering
focused on children. This would obviously by in Tony Lake's purview, and I was going to visit with him, bringing Jeff
Sachs with me.

- We did discuss this a bit last year, but I am hoping that the U.S.
could continue to expand its involvement in global health diplomacy strategies as a part of U.S. smart power agenda.
The global health program at Columbia - and a number of other academic centers - could provide resources, ideas,
programs, expertise and relevant research to bolster such efforts.

If you think it would be worthwhile, I would look forward to continuing our conversations.

Warm regards,

Irwin




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768846 Date: 08/31/2015
