      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773197 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                              B6



From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Friday, January 22, 2010 5:31 PM
To:                                'millscd@state.gov'; 'sullivanjj@state.gov'
Subject:                           Fw: Haiti American Deaths/Confidential



The idea of a statement as requested below is a good one.

    Original Message
From: Brian Greenspun
To: H
Sent: Fri Jan 22 17:17:12 2010
Subject: Fw: Haiti American Deaths/Confidential

Hi hillary,

                                          Below is a message from my friend kevin thanking me for your efforts and alerting
me to the letter that has or will find its way to you from the university president. I forward it to you in case you haven't
seen it, want to get out in front of it, or whatever. The fact that you were instinctively sensitive to this situation should
always be enough but, of course, with this type of loss, it never is. I hope all else is well, there has to be some good news
somewhere. Right? All the best, brian




From: kevin stuessi
To: Brian Greenspun
Sent: Fri Jan 22 14:04:07 2010
Subject: Fw: Haiti American Deaths/Confidential




Dear Brian,

I wanted to thank you again for




I read with interest today's article in the NY Times on how well the Obama Administration-State Dept is managing the
crisis and associated PR. I know this would be a wonderful opportunity to serve two causes and get some great PR as
well as put the minds of many families at ease if the Sate Department were to make a statement of support for "leaving
no stone unturned until all Americans lost in Haiti can be returned to their families". I have already reached out to
Senator Reid as well who had a liaison of his following up on search efforts. You will notice below the University is
making a plea to Secretary Clinton directly, she may or may not be, aware. Again, thank you for your time and if this can
be put in the proper hands it would so be appreciated. You have already done more than I would have expected; and, I
did not want anyone to be surprised if they had not heard of the University and the families making the plea to
 Secretary Clinton.

 Kind Regards,

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773197 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773197 Date: 08/31/2015




K



Kevin A. Stuessi




    Forwarded Message ----
Fro m: "froggyla la           <froggylala
To: kevinstuessi
Sent: Thu, January 21, 2010 5:41:31 PM
Subject: Lynn University Update: MEDIA ALERT:



hi kev...please take note and see if anything else can be done...




President Kevin M. Ross remarks from 5 p.m. press briefing

                As we all know, the world suffered one of the greatest natural disasters in history last Tuesday. The 7.0
earthquake that was centered just outside Port-au-Prince imperiled the lives of all those in Haiti, including 14 members
of our Lynn University family who were there on a mission trip. All 14 were on site at the Hotel Montana when the
quake struck, and we have reason to believe that our four missing students and two faculty may be there still.

         In the nine days since that tragedy, we have all been captivated by the stories of heroism, triumph, anguish and
loss that have followed in the wake of this earthquake. And every day, we rejoice for what good news has been
broadcast out of the country: the elderly woman rescued from beneath a crumbled cathedral; the child pulled alive and
almost completely well from a wrecked home. As the family members of our missing students and employees have said
in recent days, we have taken comfort in these reports, and celebrated them almost as if they were our own good news.

         And for good reason. It is our good news. This tragedy is not a Lynn University tragedy alone. It does not affect
just us, our community members, and their families. It affects us all. It affects people from around the world. It affects
those that survived, and those that did not. And it impacts most severely those in Haiti itself—the people who call that
country home.

         Our "Journey of Hope" students went to Haiti to deliver hope. Eight have returned. And six remain missing. We
still have hope— hope that a miracle is in the making. Hope that our six are found safe and sound. And hope that many



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773197 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773197 Date: 08/31/2015




others too will be freed and reunited with loved ones around the world. That remains our most ardent wish here at Lynn
University.

        But there is another hope we have. A different kind of hope. And it is that hope that I wish to express tonight.
We have hope that whatever the days ahead may bring, that we have the United States government's assurance that
every person lost in this tragedy will be returned to their loved ones.

       I want this personally. I want this for the families of our missing students and faculty, and our more than three
dozen employees and eight students with family missing in the country. And I want it for the campus community I
serve— a community that will need to grieve as well.

         This is needed for every grieving father, son, mother, daughter, friend and neighbor who is aching at this very
moment for a phone call. Whenever that phone call comes, I join the families of our missing six in demanding that such a
call contain news of the whereabouts of the missing. A missing family member, whether alive or dead, must be returned
to his or her loved ones.

        Forces are mounting in defense against such a call. From the outset of this crisis my office has been served in
immeasurable ways by Senator George S. LeMieux and Congressman Ron Klein and their staffs in Florida and D.C. The
two have helped however they could to aid us in our search efforts. And tonight they are standing with us to ask
Secretary Clinton and others to ensure that all Americans missing and unaccounted for in Haiti be returned home.

        This is the assurance our campus community — and the families of these missing loved ones — will require in the
days ahead. And many other American families will appreciate the same.. Tonight I have a letter already signed by
Senator LeMieux urging the Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates and the U.S. Agency for International
Development to continue "search and rescue efforts until the possibility of survival no longer exists" and to do
"everything within (their) power to ensure that every American known to be missing in Haiti is located and returned
home."

         I am so thankful for the senator's support, and the support of Congressman Klein, who has also pledged to back
us in this push. We hope all of our elected officials will join us — including those in Massachusetts, Georgia, New Jersey
and New York, the home states of our four missing students. So many have already shown their support and concern.
But now, we need assurances. We need a commitment to returning the missing to their families. Only this will give the
families of the victims the peace they need to carry on.

         We have been saying from the beginning how thankful we are for the prayers and support we have received
here at Lynn University. The outpouring of support has been incredible. Please continue to offer those prayers and cross
those fingers. We still believe in miracles. And we wish those same miracles upon all of you who are still uncertain at this
hour.

        Thank you all. And God bless.

         <http://www1.1ynn.edu/index.php?cid=1254451&forward=img>
        To be removed from the Lynn University e-mail list, please click here.
<http://wwwtlynn.edu/index.php?cid=1254451&src=broadcastemail&optoutall=3180&key=bblea2fb>




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773197 Date: 08/31/2015
