     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773954 Date: 08/31/2015

                                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                               Ebeling, Betsy <                                                                              B6
Sent:                               Friday, October 22, 2010 11:03 AM
To:
Subject:                           for your mom



Keith Richards Has Memories to Burn
By JANET MASLIN


It is 3 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time in the New York office of Keith Richards's manager, a place that might look ordinary if
every wall and shelf were not crammed with some of the world's most glorious rock 'n' roll memorabilia. Mr. Richards has
a 3 o'clock appointment. "Come on in, he'll be here in a minute," an assistant says — and here he comes in a minute, at
3:01. This from a man who once prided himself for operating on Keith Time, as in: the security staff ate the shepherd's pie
that Keith wanted in his dressing room? Then everyone in this packed stadium can bloody well wait. The Rolling Stones
don't play until another shepherd's pie shows up.

Chalk up the promptness to the man's new incarnation: he is now Keith Richards, distinguished author. True, he is far
from the only rock star to turn memoirist, and far from the only Rolling Stone to write a book about himself — very much
about himself. The raven-haired Ron Wood wrote "Ronnie," in which he described Brian Jones as "me in a blond wig." Bill
Wyman, the band's retired bass player and bean counter, wrote "Stone Alone," in which not a 15-shilling demo disc went
unmentioned. Now Mr. Richards has written the keeper: "Life," a big, fierce, game-changing account of the Stones' nearly
half-century-long adventure.

"It's the most difficult thing I've ever done," he says about the book. "I'd rather make ro records."

But he sounds anything but weary. And he seems refreshed, bearing surprisingly little resemblance to the battered, kohl-
eyed pirate Keith Richards who looks like 50 miles of bad road. Today, in neutral street clothes and hot-green shoes, he is
positively debonair. On his hands: the ubiquitous silver skull ring, swollen knuckles, the thin white scar from a hunk of
steaming phosphorus that burned his finger to the bone while he played through a concert without stopping. On his head:
both a headband and a raffish, straw-colored hat, gray tufts poking out in all directions. Not a single gewgaw hangs off it.
"I've been through that phase," he says. "Don't know that the hair will take the pressure anymore."

He's been through quite a lot of phases. And they're all on the page in "Life": the Boy Scout (really); the tyro rocker; the
lovestruck kid (mad for Ronnie Spector, unbeknownst to Phil Spector); the astonished new star; the heroin-addicted older
one; the jaded veteran of countless world tours; and the longtime sparring partner of Mick Jagger. (Despite tabloid shock
over the bickering in the book, these two have seriously been calling each other names at least since the early 198os.) All of
this is recounted with straight-up candor, and some of it is easily sensationalized. But the book's single biggest stunner is a
hand-written note on its jacket flap: "Believe it or not, I haven't forgotten any of it."

How, he is asked, is this humanly possible from a man as well known for stupefaction as "Satisfaction?" "I think my main
concern at the beginning was whether my memory was really reliable," he says. "Fox had to do a little sleuthing." Fox is
James Fox, the journalist and author of "White Mischief," who has been Mr. Richards's friend over many years and was
his collaborator in putting "Life" together. (It was sold to Little, Brown & Company for a reported advance of more than $7
million.)

Mr. Fox wound up researching Mr. Richards's past, conducting interviews with those who knew him long ago and drawing
upon wonderfully candid old letters and journal entries. "Spent day practising," the 19-year-old Mr. Richards wrote in
January 1963, when the Stones were just beginning to play in public. "Worthwhile, I hope!" Also exhumed: a 1962 letter
from Mr. Richards to his Aunt Patty describing a boy he had known in primary school, Mick Jagger. He signs off
"Luff/Keith XXXXX"

These artifacts turned out to be the Richards equivalent of Proust's madeleines, though Mr. Richards, whose reading taste
runs to naval history and the novels of Patrick O'Brian and George MacDonald Fraser, would hardly put it that way. In any
case they prompted recollections that he never expected to rediscover, and "Life" began to click. Once his stories were told
and a draft was written, he and Mr. Fox wound up sitting together with separate copies of the manuscript as Mr. Fox read
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773954 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773954 Date: 08/31/2015




the whole book aloud. "What I couldn't guess was that he'd be such a very good natural editor," Mr. Fox, reached by e-
mail, says of Mr. Richards. "He cut, accordingly, for pace and rhythm — a real musical cut."

As for calling the book "Life," Mr. Richards did some editing there too. "My Life" was what the book was to be called. "I
said 'I tell you what, just cut off the 'My,' and you've got a title," he says. He might just as appropriately have used another
title he likes, "Keep It Dark." But, he says, "I'm saving it for a song."

The contents of "Life" are dark enough already. The book begins with a 1975 drug bust in Arkansas and a judge who was
persuaded to free Mr. Richards after confiscating his hunting knife (which still hangs in the courtroom) and having a
picture taken with him. How did Mr. Richards get so lucky? "I really can't explain it," he says, deadpan, about that now.
"Maybe I've got an honest face."

It covers many other arrests too, as well as Mr. Richards's grueling efforts to kick his heroin addiction, which he claims to
have done successfully 30 years ago. "Stories like this aren't told very much," he insists. "There aren't many people willing
to tell them."

Then there are the other health hazards that the book describes. Like electrocution. "My most spectacular one was in
Sacramento. ..." he now says with a smile, drifting off into a fond-sounding reverie that involves a guitar string touching an
ungrounded microphone and clouds of smoke billowing out of his mouth. He has a good laugh at the memory of finding
himself in a hospital and hearing a doctor say, "Well, they either wake up or they don't."

"Life" has already attracted undue attention for a schoolyard-sounding anatomical swipe at Mr. Jagger. But this is a book
that pulls no punches, and most of its disses are more serious than that. "Cold-blooded" and "vicious" are only two of the
more printable words he uses to describe Brian Jones. Allen Ginsberg was an "old gasbag." Mick Taylor, the former
Rolling Stone, "didn't do anything" after he left the band, and Donald Cammell, the film director ("Performance," starring
Mr. Jagger and Anita Pallenberg, Mr. Richards's longtime lover and partner in crime), couldn't commit suicide quickly
enough to suit Mr. Richards. (He shot himself in 1996.) When Marlon Brando propositioned him and Ms. Pallenberg, Mr.
Richards remembers replying with this: "Later, pal."

As for Mr. Jagger, the complaints are deep-seated. They involve credit hogging, social climbing, egomania, insecurity,
unethical business behavior and — here comes a Freudian's holiday for anyone who's ever watched the bare-chested young
Jagger and Richards vamp it up together — uncertain sexual identity. There's also a cool condescension about Mr. Jagger's
contributions to the duo's songwriting. And a nasty nickname or two, like "Disco Boy."

In conversation about all this, Mr. Richards is emphatically blase: "It's bound to be somewhat rough, but the point is I'm
trying to tell the story from Day 1 to now," he says. And sure: "There's the odd conflict here and there. But if you weigh it
all out, those things count for nothing." Mr. Richards did see to it that Mr. Jagger knew what was in the book ahead of
time. "The important thing to me," he says, "was that Mick had been through it and seen it and knew what was what." And
is there anything that one Stone can say about another Stone and really give offense at this point? "No."

But is there anything new that can be said about the Stones anyway? As "Life" emphatically demonstrates, the answer is
yes. And some of its most surprisingly revelatory material appears in what Mr. Richards jokingly calls "Keefs Guitar
Workshop." Here are the secrets of some of the world's most famous rock riffs and the almost toy-level equipment on
which they were recorded, like the cassette recorder onto which Mr. Richards dubbed guitar layer after guitar layer for
"Street Fighting Man," "Jumpin' Jack Flash" and part of "Gimme Shelter." Here's how the silent beats in Elvis Presley's
"Heartbreak Hotel" worked their way into some of Mr. Richards's most inspired solos. Mr. Fox found that "Heartbreak
Hotel" itself was the key to some of Mr. Richards's best musical memories.

Some of this is by now well known to music critics. But Mr. Richards makes it fascinating at the layman's level. And he is
surprised to find that early readers haven't been skipping the musicology, even though the book cordially invites them to
do so. What he finds most gratifying about having written "Life" is the chance for both him and his readers to grasp the
breadth and range of this book's material. He is the rare memoirist who can say, without hyperbole, "that what I hoped
was worth sharing with people turned out to be far more important than I could possibly imagine."

It's getting late. Time to leave this bright orange room where Mr. Richards's name is emblazoned on a director's chair;
where assorted music awards and platinum records are everywhere; where there's a discreet little skull in the middle of
the wall mirror; where his Louis Vuitton guitar case — he did an ad for Vuitton — is parked in a corner. But the items
likeliest to catch his eye are the ones on the coffee table: loose cigarettes neatly arrayed in a holder, a lighter, more
cigarettes in a pack.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773954 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773954 Date: 08/31/2015




"Do you mind if I smoke?" he had asked when he first appeared. Easy one: Who, aside from Keith Richards and certain
legal authorities, has ever kept Keith Richards from doing anything? But an hour has gone by, and he hasn't touched the
cigarettes. He hasn't even looked at them. He has done not one thing to make him resemble the sullen, haunted,
diabolically beautiful creature on the cover of his book, the one with hellfire blazing up from his hand to meet the blurry
white thing he's smoking.

"That?" he says innocently when asked about the picture. "Oh, that's just me lighting a cigarette. That's all I was doing."




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773954 Date: 08/31/2015
