UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770313 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL




                                      CONFIDENTIAL




                                              May 11, 2010



 For: Hillary
 From: Sid
 Re: The day after Gordon


 Whatever the outcome, whichever party ultimately makes a pact with the Lib-Dems, or whether
 neither does, the next British government will be remarkably weak, flimsy and fly apart within
 months. That is the only certainty now.

 On Gordon's political suicide, David, Labour: Neither David Miliband nor Shaun (who has been
 constantly on the phone with Gordon and by his side since the election as a sort of therapist)
 were privy to the decision; nor did Gordon tell either before making his announcement on the
 steps of No. 10. Gordon's confidant in contemplating his end was only Peter, the penultimate
 scene (there must be at least one more) of their twisted relationship rooted in the Tony-Gordon-
 Peter triangle now transmuted into the perverse Gordon-Peter-David triangle. David is the heir,
 the son, "Our Boy," as Anji Hunter describes him to me, playing a version of the Tony role.
 Shaun and David met alone for an hour and a half late last night to discuss the whole situation.
 David is well aware of Peter's perversity, that Peter has been plotting to usurp his position as
 foreign secretary, that Peter seeks to direct his campaign as leader, that Peter wishes to be the
 arbiter and controlling figure in a government under David. At this point, David does not want
 Peter to run his campaign but involved. Does Peter know this? No. David is wary of a deal with
 the Lib-Dems and understands his perilous position in the event he were to become leader as the
 second unelected PM in a row. Upon reflection, it may be that a Labour-Lib-Dem alliance would
 not be the harbinger of a grand progressive coalition, but an illusion under these circumstances.
 If an arrangement were to be made the government would be extraordinarily unstable. Because it
 would be subject to the demands of every bit player, the government would have the potential of
 collapsing over every issue large or small. It could not last long. Under the stress, the result
 might be that in an inevitable election to be held six to eighteen months (at the outside) from
 now, the Conservatives would be posed to gain the majority just beyond their grasp. Shaun
 advised David to work things out with his brother Ed, trying to persuade him not to compete
 against him. If Ed runs for leader against David, Ed Balls, Gordon's heir in the same sense that
 David is Tony's, might get through, which would put Labour back at square one, bearing the
 burden of Gordon again.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770313 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770313 Date: 08/31/2015




  Meanwhile, Peter negotiates with the LD team, a meeting that has broken up by this afternoon.
  Meanwhile, the Scottish National Party, which two days ago was eager to lead the way to a
  coalition with Labour, the LDs, and other parties, has announced it has dropped out of any
  arrangment, which also means the Welsh national party, its partner, has dropped out. Meanwhile,
  David Blunkett, former Labour home secretary, has denounced any deal with the LDs.
  Meanwhile, some prominent LDs have denounced a Labour-LD coalition as a "coalition of the
  defeated" and a deal with the Tories as "the only game in town." Meanwhile, Clegg met
  privately with Cameron this morning while Peter, et al were meeting with the LD negotiators.
  Meanwhile, this afternoon, Cameron has upped his offer to the LDs on a referendum, insisting
  today is "decision time." Meanwhile, the Tory right denounces any deal with the LDs.
  Meanwhile, Clegg dithers.

  It has been said of the Lib-Dem Party that anytime anyone tries to use it, it simply crumbles in
  their hands. So far, so good. I suspect for the party that allies with the LDs, the deal will be a
  poisoned chalice.

  More to come soon...




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770313 Date: 08/31/2015
