       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769519 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL




From:                             Sullivan, Jacob <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Thursday, July 8, 2010 7:04 PM
To:
Subject:                          FW: Read-out Ambassador Eikenberry's phone call with HAC-FO Chairwoman Nita
                                  Lowey



FYI.


From: Holbrooke, Richard
Sent: Thursday, July 08, 2010 7:01 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Fw: Read-out: Ambassador Eikenberry's phone call with HAC-FO Chairwoman Nita Lowey

FYI for you and HRC

Ambassador Eikenberry and Chairwoman Lowey had a positive conversation that lasted more than an hour. He thanked
the Chairwoman for her leadership and support and for her willingness and commitment to work with her colleagues to
secure the significant amounts of funding that is so essential to the success of our Mission's programs and efforts. They
had a very candid and detailed conversation about the elements, causes, and contributors to corruption in Afghanistan
and the various interagency programs that are partnering with Afghan institutions to promote transparency and
investigate corrupt practices and prosecute corrupt actors.

Chairwoman Lowey appreciated Ambassador Eikenberry's detailed analysis and thorough review of the conditions in
Afghanistan. She stated that there is an absolute need to ensure meaningful and effective accountability of US taxpayer
funds appropriated by Congress. She conceded that we are not going to create an utopian society free of corruption,
but stressed the need for accountability and transparency. She was particularly concerned with various reports that
officials within the GIRoA are impeding the Embassy's efforts to assist the Afghans in investigating and prosecuting
corrupt actors. The Chair asked if there are enough credible partners in the Afghan government who are committed to
good governance and transparency. Ambassador Eikenberry provided an assessment of where he thought the
challenges are, the next steps to be taken, and how progress can be made going forward.

The Chair reiterated her longstanding support for assistance programs, especially education and health, and she asked
Ambassador Eikenberry if he felt we are making progress in the areas of health, education, and agriculture. He provided
a review of the various health, education, and agriculture programs and the multitude of changes that have been
implemented to ensure greater transparency, accountability, and flexibility of funds and how these changes have better
equipped the embassy to hold contractors accountable.

The Ambassador raised the certification of Ministries program; how we are seeking to certify additional ministries once
the Ministries achieve the appropriate level of financial accountability standards; and how these efforts will help
develop Afghan capacity and ultimately allow us to increase the amount of assistance that goes through the Afghan
government. They discussed the NSP program, and the Chair reiterated her support for the program and how she had
consistently increased funding for NSP.

Ambassador Eikenberry explained the Afghan public's reaction to reports that the assistance money had been removed
and he respectfully encouraged her to reinstate the funding as quickly as possible so as to send a clear message to
Afghans that we intend to have an enduring civilian assistance presence. He invited her to visit Afghanistan for several
days and travel the country to see first-hand the progress that has been made and the challenges and opportunities that
remain. She thanked him for his invitation and suggested that any visit might have to be deferred until November.



       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769519 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769519 Date: 08/31/2015
                                     -




Several times she asked how the hearings could be helpful or if the hearings could be useful to shine a spotlight on
particular areas, and she welcomed Ambassador Eikenberry's thoughts on that issue. Ambassador Eikenberry agreed to
give that idea some additional consideration and to speak with the Chair on Tuesday morning.




SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769519 Date: 08/31/2015
