      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772863 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                          RELEASE IN FULL


From:                           Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                           Tuesday, November 9, 2010 9:42 AM
To:                             Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:                        FW: Issa plans hundreds of hearings


FYI


From: Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Tuesday, November 09, 2010 8:51 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Issa plans hundreds of hearings


POLITICO
Issa plans hundreds of hearings
By: Jake Sherman and Richard E. Cohen
November 8, 2010 05:13 PM EST
California Rep. Darrell Issa is already eyeing a massive expansion of oversight for next
year, including hundreds of hearings; creating new subcommittees; and launching fresh
investigations into the bank bailout, the stimulus and, potentially, health care reform.

Issa told POLITICO in an interview that he wants each of his seven subcommittees to hold
"one or two hearings each week."

"I want seven hearings a week, times 40 weeks," lssa said.

Issa is also targeting some ambitious up-and-comers like Reps. Jason Chaffetz of Utah,
Patrick McHenry of North Carolina and Jim Jordan of Ohio — all aggressive partisans —
to chair some of his subcommittees.

 He also wants to organize aggressive oversight beyond his committee and plans to refer
 inquiries to other House panels, drawing even more incoming GOP chairmen to the cause
 of investigating the executive branch.

"As Clint Eastwood says, a man needs to know his limitations," Issa said in the interview.
"With other committees, we have good working relationships. Our committees have some
areas of primary jurisdiction, including the federal work force, procurement and the Postal
Service. We will take care of our core knitting, but we have very narrow legislative
jurisdiction."

 While he promises an ambitious — and some say confrontational — agenda, Issa is
 making overtures to the Obama administration: He already has a meeting scheduled with
 Vice President Joe Biden to discuss stimulus oversight.

 But lssa's specific plans bring a certain reality to what has been known for months:
 Oversight of the Obama administration and congressional Democrats will be a central

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772863 Date: 08/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772863 Date: 08/31/2015




purpose for the new Republican House.

To give an idea of how expansive Issa's oversight plans are, look at the record of Rep.
Henry Waxman (D-Calif.) when he chaired the oversight committee during in the 110th
Congress during George W. Bush's presidency. Waxman held 203 oversight hearings in
two years; Issa has signaled he's prepared to hold about 280 in just one year.

Issa sees the committee's role as not policy but to "measure failures." He likens his job to
seeing "whether the fuel being consumed meets the specifications." And he isn't looking to
catch witnesses off guard, saying that "oversight should be done with a balance for the
American people and not as a gotcha."

Issa won't have a shortage of targets. He's been hammering for better tracking of the
stimulus and has a growing list of other investigative targets, including the housing
meltdown and the bank bailout.

Earlier this year, Issa pressured Oversight and Government Reform Committee Chairman
Edolphus Towns (D-N.Y.) to issue a subpoena to Countrywide Financial about its VIP loan
program. Other investigations during the minority included inquests into actions taken
during the financial meltdown and a look at problems with Toyota automobiles.

There are already résumés piling up from people looking to join lssa's staff — mostly
lawyers, a source said. Republicans have a good deal of hiring to do in the weeks ahead,
although the House Republican Steering Committee will approve chairmen in December.
Issa will most likely face no serious challenge.

In the coming weeks, Issa and his staff are also planning to reach out to the inspector
general community and staffers at the various bureaucracies the committee will oversee.

Issa also is looking to dig into procurement and government contracting, and he seems
sure to return to the Countrywide VIP program — which has subpoenaed records en route
to the Capitol. He's also got inquiries into Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's role in the
financial collapse. And with earmarks all but gone from the Capitol, Issa will turn his fire
toward the White House and the far larger sums of cash controlled by the executive
branch at a time of huge deficits.

"We really want to study presidential earmarks and the grant-making process: How do we
take all this discretionary money and see what is necessary," Issa said. "The debate on
how to shrink the federal government is at the core of our problem of government not
doing its job."

Issa is also pointedly looking to avoid probing what he seems to view as peripheral
issues — like Waxman and former Chairman Tom Davis's foray into hearings on steroids
in baseball.

"This is important, in contrast to hearings on steroids in baseball, where I felt that it was
inherently wrong to get Roger Clemens to lie to Congress," Issa said. "The American
people really want us to shrink government."

Issa also wants to avoid the sometimes petty controversies that enmeshed Rep. Dan
Burton (R-Ind.) as committee chairman during the Clinton presidency and sometimes

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772863 Date: 08/31/2015
  UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772863 Date: 08/31/2015




made him the issue.

Another, more cosmetic change could be coming up the pipe.

"We will seriously consider a name change back to what it was," lssa said, hinting the
committee will again be named the Government Reform and Oversight Committee — "to
emphasize government reform and not oversight."
                                                                              IRIDES
                                                                              ,111 N10,11


© 2010 Capitol News Company, LLC




  UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772863 Date: 08/31/2015
