    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772844 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                             Sunday, November 7, 2010 5:53 PM
To:
Subject:                          Fw: (Haaretz) Netanyahu to Biden: Palestinians must not take unilateral steps toward
                                  state




From: Moore, Anna W
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-0_0S; SES-O_Shift-III
Sent: Sun Nov 07 17:23:35 2010
Subject: (Haaret2) Netanyahu to Biden: Palestinians must not take unilateral steps toward state



HAARETZ. corn
    •   Published 23:57 07.11.10
    •   Latest update 23:57 07.11.10


Premier meets U.S. Vice President on sidelines of
Jewish GA, warns that sanctions have not been
enough against Iran.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu told U.S. Vice President Joe Biden during their meeting in New
Orleans on Sunday that Israel had made enough efforts to reach a peace settlement with the Palestinians,
and has not received sufficient gestures in return.

Speaking to the vice president before the latter's address to the General Assembly of Jewish Federations,
Netanyahu said that a peace agreement could not be reached from above and added that the Palestinians
must be stopped from taking unilateral action at the United Nations in their quest to establish a state.

Netanyahu also told Biden that other Arab states must be brought into the peace process to give Israel
the political backing needed.

An Israeli political source said earlier Sunday that Netanyahu would tell Biden that the U.S. must create a
credible threat in the form of a military campaign to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons.

According to the official in Jerusalem, Netanyahu planned to stress that the West must operate with
suspicion and great caution in the face of Iran's recently stated intentions to renew dialogue over its
nuclear program.

The source also said that Netanyahu would warn Biden that the international community must be careful
not to fall into any sort of Iranian trap with regard to this expressed willingness, said the official.

The prime minister was expected to say that a credible threat of military action is the only way to ensure
that Iran will rethink its nuclear program, according to the Jerusalem official. Although Netanyahu believes
that the harsh military sanctions have weakened Iran, said the official, there is still no sign that they have
led the Islamic Republic to consider halting its nuclear program.

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772844 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772844 Date: 08/31/2015




"The only way to ensure that Iran will not go nuclear is to create a credible threat of military action
against it if it doesn't cease its race for a nuclear weapon," the source said Netanyahu would tell Biden.

"The economic sanctions are making it difficult for Iran, but there is no sign that the Ayatollah regime
plans to stop its nuclear program because of them," the source said Netanyahu would add.

Netanyahu was also say that the only time Iran stopped its nuclear program was in 2003, when it believed
there was a threat of American military action, the source said, adding that the threat alone is enough to
prevent the need for military action.

Netanyahu arrived earlier Sunday in the U.S., where he was also set to meet Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton and address the General Assembly of Jewish Federations in New Orleans.

Asked about the comments, an Israeli official traveling with Netanyahu said the prime minister call in all
his meetings in the United States for pressure to be stepped up against Iran. He is also expected to
discuss with U.S. officials Israel's impasse in direct negotiations with the Palestinians.

"It is our fervent desire that the current impasse can be overcome and we see an expeditious return to
direct talks with the Palestinians," Netanyahu spokesman Mark Regev said on board the prime minister's
flight from Tel Aviv to New Orleans.

Netanyahu will meet Biden before the latter's own address to the GA. Netanyahu will deliver his speech to
the forum on Monday, before his four-day visit to New York.

During the trip, he will not see President Barack Obama, who is on a visit to Asia. But the U.S. visit will
give Netanyahu an opportunity to gauge the impact of last week's Republican rout of Obama's Democrats
in the midterm congressional elections.

Netanyahu was scheduled to hold talks in New York with UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon on Monday
and Clinton on Thursday, before flying home.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772844 Date: 08/31/2015
