      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769292 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                       B6



From:                                sbvvhoeop
Sent:                                Thursday, January 21, 2010 10:20 PM
To:
Subject:                             H: early review. Sid



H: Jim Fellows told me he was at your speech and thrilled by it. He's just returned from three years in China. He didn't
expect you would be so frank. Here's his post on The Atlantic website. Sid

http://jamesfallows.theatiantic.comiarchives/2010/01/a_momentous_40_hours.php#more

 Xr
07:
 Hi!!ary Clinton's "Internet freedom speech iVian


A momentous 40 hours, leading to Clinton/China/Internet

21 Jan 2010 04:12 pm
Apart from two obvious pieces of momentous news in the past day-and-a-half -- the new junior Senator from
Massachusetts, and the new         ckv V. V5-rvi,,
                                                 - c.:! (by which I mean today's lamentable, straight-party-line Supreme Court
ruline; that removes limits from direct corporate underwriting of political campaigns) -- there is one other event today that
will have big ripple effects. i mean SecState Hillary Clinton's speech this morning about "Internet Freedom," mentioned
;:lere and with a prelude discussion

I'm not going to take time for a thorough gloss of the speech. Instead I highly recommend reading the full text, lette, or
watching the official video, .'tere. And for now some of the main points while listening (and noting main points down in real
time with the handy u ' iveaSccibe, pen.)

- In contrast to the dreamy Internet optimism of a decade or so ago -- I'm not naming names, but I remember! -- when
many people imagined that info technology, by itself, would undermine oppression and bring the world together, Clinton
started off with a very astringent reminder that this technology, like others, was neither good or bad in itself and is already
being used in both helpful and destructive ways:
        "Amid this unprecedented surge in connectivity, we must also recognize that these technologies are not
        an unmitigated blessing. These tools are also being exploited to undermine human progress and political
        rights. Just as steel can be used to build hospitals or machine guns, or nuclear power can either energize
        a city or destroy it, modern information networks and the technologies they support can be harnessed for
        good or for ill. The same networks that help organize movements for freedom also enable al-Qaida to
        spew hatred and incite violence against the innocent. And technologies with the potential to open up
        access to government and promote transparency can also be hijacked by governments to crush dissent
        and deny human rights."
And a very nice pivot out of this section, effective because it's so blunt and plain:
           "On their own, new technologies do not take sides in the struggle for freedom and progress, but the
           United States does."
- Underscoring the "this is a big deal" tone of the speech, she enumerated the "Four Freedoms" that FDR proclaimed in
1941, as part of the struggle for the world's future, and said there were a comparable set of Four Freedoms for the
Internet age. Check out the speech yourself for details.

- The China surprise: the speech was a more frontal challenge to Chinese internet and overall censorship policy than I
expected, and than I recall in other US-China interactions in a very long time. For instance, early in the speech, an
itemization of the places where suppression is getting worse:
           "In the last year, we've seen a spike in threats to the free flow of information. China, Tunisia, and
           Uzbekistan have stepped up their censorship of the Internet. In Vietnam, access to popular social
           networking sites has suddenly disappeared. And last Friday in Egypt, 30 bloggers and activists were
           detained."

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769292 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769292 Date: 08/31/2015




Tunisia, Uzbekistan, Vietnam, Egypt -- this is not the grouping of countries that the Chinese government, in its recent
sense of rise to superpower status, is used to being lumped with. Compared to the US as a financial power, OK;
overtaking japan in economic size, yes; being a crucial player in environmental negotiations.., all that is one thing.
Bracketed in the same sentence with Tunisia and Uzbekistan is different. Sentences like this don't appear in formal, big-
deal SecState addresses by accident.

Other passages to the same effect:
        "As I speak to you today, government censors somewhere are working furiously to erase my words from
        the records of history. But history itself has already condemned these tactics....

        "Those who disrupt the free flow of information in our society or any other pose a threat to our economy,
        our government, and our civil society. Countries or individuals that engage in cyber attacks should face
        consequences and international condemnation...."
And then the Google section itself.
I had wondered whether the speech would mention Google by name -- and had reason to think it might not. (Main
argument forleavina it implicit rather than referring directly to the Google case: in the company's ongoing efforts to find a
"ilvineyiftaiv_in" acceptable way to remain in China, rather than a lose-lose-lose permanent split, its not necessarily a help
to have the U.S. government standing officially by its side. ) But the way Sec. Clinton introduced the point was significant:
as a proxy for China's own ability to     H.to,tentiai and sustain its economic rise:
        "To use market terminology, a publicly listed company in Tunisia or Vietnam that operates in an
        environment of censorship will always trade at a discount relative to an identical firm in a free society. If
        corporate decision makers don't have access to global sources of news and information, investors will
        have less confidence in their decisions over the long term. Countries that censor news and information
        must recognize that from an economic standpoint, there is no distinction between censoring political
        speech and commercial speech. If businesses in your nations are denied access to either type of
        information, it will inevitably impact on growth.

        "Increasingly, U.S. companies are making the issue of internet and information freedom a greater
        consideration in their business decisions. I hope that their competitors and foreign governments will pay
        close attention to this trend. The most recent situation involving Google has attracted a great deal of
        interest. And we look to the Chinese authorities to conduct a thorough review of the cyber intrusions that
        led Google to make its announcement. And we also look for that investigation and its results to be
        transparent.

        "The Internet has already been a source of tremendous progress in China, and it is fabulous. There are
        so many people in China now online. But countries that restrict free access to information or violate the
        basic rights of internet users risk walling themselves off from the progress of the next century. Now, the
        United States and China have different views on this issue, and we intend to address those differences
        candidly and consistently in the context of our positive, cooperative, and comprehensive relationship."
There's a lot more in the speech, including about terrorism, disaster relief, religion, etc -- but it's there for the reading.
 Back to the to-do list for me now.
Peirmalink
.Share This




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769292 Date: 08/31/2015
