      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769911 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                                 Jake Sullivan
Sent:                                 Monday, June 21, 2010 10:53 PM
To:
Subject:                              early news accounts



Below is McC's statement and some early articles:

McC Statement:



I extend my sincerest apology for this profile. It was a mistake

reflecting poor judgment and should never have happened.



Throughout my career, I have lived by the principles of personal honor

and professional integrity. What is reflected in this article falls far

short of that standard.



I have enormous respect and admiration for President Obama and his

national security team, and for the civilian leaders and troops fighting

this war and I remain committed to ensuring its successful outcome.




Aides to U.S. general in Afghanistan slam Obama:
report
20 mins ago
WASHINGTON (Reuters) — Aides to the top U.S. general in Afghanistan insulted some of President Barack Obama's closest advisers,
calling one a "clown" and another a "wounded animal," in an article to be published Friday in Rolling Stone magazine.

The article also quotes an aide describing the commander of U.S. and NATO forces in Afghanistan General Stanley McChrystal's
"disappointment" with his initial one-on-one meeting with Obama last year.

Quoting all the McChrystal aides anonymously, the article portrays a split between the U.S. military and Obama's advisers at an
extremely sensitive moment for the Pentagon, which is fending off criticism of its strategy to turn around the nearly nine-year-old
Afghan war.

The Pentagon had no immediate comment about the article, which has been brought to the attention of senior officials.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769911 Date: 08/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769911 Date: 08/31/2015




It quotes a member of McChrystal's team making jokes about Vice President Joe Biden, who was seen as critical of the general's
efforts to escalate the conflict and who had favored a more limited counter-terrorism approach.

"Biden?" the aide was quoted as saying. "Did you say: Bite me?"

Another aide called White House National Security Adviser Jim Jones, a retired four star general, a "clown" who was "stuck in 1985."
It quoted an adviser to McChrystal dismissing an early meeting with Obama as a "10-minute photo op."

"Obama clearly didn't know anything about him, who he was. The boss was pretty disappointed," the adviser told the magazine.

McChrystal, a famous workaholic said to sleep just four hours a day, was brought into Afghanistan a year ago after his predecessor
was pushed out.

The article portrays his teams as disapproving of the Obama administration, with the exception of Secretary of State Hillary Clinton,
who backed McCrystal's request for additional troops in Afghanistan.

Some of the strongest criticism was reserved for Richard Holbrooke, Obama's special envoy to Afghanistan and Pakistan.

"The boss says he's like a wounded animal," a member of the general's team is quoted as saying. "Holbrooke keeps hearing rumors
that he's going to get fired, so that makes him dangerous."

McChrystal was quoted as saying he felt "betrayed" by the leak of a classified cable from U.S. Ambassador to Afghanistan Karl
Eikenberry last year. The cable raised doubts about sending more troops to shore up an Afghan government already lacking in
credibility.

"I like Karl, I've known him for years, but they'd never said anything like that to us before," McChrystal was quoted as saying in the
article.

"Here's one that covers his flank for the history books. Now if we fail, they can say, 'I told you so."
(Editing by Washington World Desk)

                                                                Copyright © 2010 Yahoo! Inc. All rights reserved.




         And from the WSJ:

               0     JUNE 21, 2010, 6:55 PM ET



         McChrystal's Next Offensive?
         Relations between the U.S. military and civilians in the Obama administration have been tense since last year's three-month review of Afghan war strategy, a state of affairs
         unlikely to be helped by a new profile of Gen. Stanley McChrystal, the overall commander in Afghanistan, that will appear in Rolling Stone magazine on Friday.

         In the eight-page article, released to reporters on Monday ahead of publication, McChrystal appears to belittle Vice President Joe Biden and accuses Karl Eikenberry, the U.S.
         ambassador to Kabul, of undermining his war plan within the administration.

         Asked by the Rolling Stone reporter about what he now feels of the war strategy advocated by Biden last fall — fewer troops, more drone attacks — the article reports that
         McChrystal and his aides attempted to come up with a good one-liner to dismiss the question. "Are you asking about Vice President Biden?" McChrystal reportedly jokes. "Who's
         that?"

         Later in the article, McChrystal turns more serious when asked about cables sent last fall to Washington by Eikenberry. The cables called into question the major troop increase
         advocated by McChrystal's team and the U.S.'s backing of Afghan President Hamid Karzai — views that the ambassador had not previously raised with McChrystal or his staff.

         "I like Karl, I've known him for years, but they'd never said anything like that to us before," McChrystal is quoted as saying. "Here's one that covers his flank for the history
         books. Now if we fail, they can say, 'I told you so."

         The article, titled "The Runaway General," has already caused nervousness inside the Pentagon, where memories are still fresh of another blistering profile that got a top
         commander in hot water: an August 2008 cover story in Esquire <hop://wvav.esquire.com/features/fox-fallon > on Adm. William "Fox" Fallon, then commander of all U.S.
         forces in the Middle East and Central Asia. The article eventually played a part in Fallon's resignation two years ago.

         In that Esquire piece, however, Fallon appeared to directly contradict White House policy on Iran and other parts of the Middle East; the Rolling Stone article makes no such
         allegation, but rather is full of jokey put-downs of important Washington players.

         Comments in the article attributed to anonymous McChrystal aides are particularly harsh towards some senior members of the Obama administration, including National Security
         Adviser James Jones, and other leading politicians, like Sens. John Kerry (D., Mass.) and John McCain (R., Ariz). They also make some unflattering references to
         PresidentBarack Obama himself, saying the president didn't seem to know who McChrystal was when he appointed him to run the war early last year.

         Only Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who is portrayed as having strongly backed McChrystal's plan for Afghanistan, is singled out for praise by the anonymous McChrystal



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769911 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769911 Date: 08/31/2015


 aides.
 A spokesman for McChrystal did not immediately respond to a request for comment late Monday.
 Copyright 2008 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

 This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by our Subscriber Agreement
 <littp://onlinemsi.com/public/pagg/subscriber agreement.html> and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact Dow Jones Reprints all-
 800-843-0008 or visit

 www.djremints.com <htm://www.djrenrints.com>




 Top US Afghan commander mocks Biden: report
 (AFP) — 1 hour ago

 WASHINGTON — The US commander in Afghanistan mocks the vice president and denounces a top diplomat in a magazine interview, while his aides
 speak dismissively of President Barack Obama.

 Tensions between General Stanley McChrystal and the White House are on full display in an unflattering profile in Rolling Stone of the commander of US
 and NATO forces in the Afghan war.

 McChrystal jokes sarcastically about preparing to answer a question referring to Vice President Joe Biden, known as a skeptic of the commander's war
 strategy.

 "Are you asking about Vice President Biden?' McChrystal says with a laugh. 'Who's that?'" the article quotes him as saying.

 "Biden?' suggests a top adviser. 'Did you say: Bite Me?"

 McChrystal tells the magazine that he felt "betrayed" by the US ambassador to Kabul, Karl Eikenberry, in a White House debate over war strategy last year.

 Referring to a leaked internal memo from Eikenberry that questioned McChrystal's request for more troops, the commander suggested the ambassador had
 tried to protect himself for history's sake.

 "I like Karl, I've known him for years, but they'd never said anything like that to us before," McChrystal tells the magazine.

 "Here's one that covers his flank for the history books. Now if we fail, they can say, ?I told you so."

 Eikenberry, himself a former commander in Afghanisan, had written to the White House saying Afghan President Hamid Karzai was an unreliable partner
 and that a surge of troops could draw the United States into a open-ended quagmire.

 The article revisits the friction between the White House and the military last fall as Obama debated whether to grant McChrystal's request for tens of
 thousands of reinforcements.

 Although Obama in the end granted most of what McChrystal asked for, the strategy review was a difficult time, the general tells the magazine.

 "I found that time painful," McChrystal says. "I was selling an unsellable position."

 An unnamed adviser to McChrystal alleges the general came away unimpressed after a meeting with Obama in the Oval Office a year ago, just after the
 president named him to take over in Afghanistan.

 "It was a 10-minute photo op," the general's adviser says.

 "Obama clearly didn?t know anything about him, who he was.., he didn?t seem very engaged.

 "The boss was pretty disappointed," says the adviser.

 The profile, titled "The Runaway General," portrays his aides as profane and intensely loyal to McChrystal, while arguing the general has seized control over
 the war on the military and diplomatic fronts.

 The four-star general also derides the hard-charging top US envoy to the region, Richard Holbrooke, and complains about a dinner with an unnamed French
 minister during a visit to Paris.

 "Oh, not another e-mail from Holbrooke," McChrystal says, looking at his messages on a mobile phone. "I don't even want to open it."

 In a hotel room in Paris getting ready for a dinner with a French official, McChrystal says: "How'd I get screwed into going to this dinner?"

 "The dinner comes with the position, sir," says his aide, Colonel Charlie Flynn.

 "Hey, Charlie," McChrystal says, "does this come with the position?"

 McChrystal gives him the middle finger.

 Copyright © 2010 AFP. All rights reserved




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769911 Date: 08/31/2015
