       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768525 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL




From:                                Sullivan, Jacobi <Sullivanii@state.gov>
Sent:                                Wednesday, March 10, 2010 2:41 PM
To:
Cc:                                  Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:                             FW: choice quotes from the testimony



FYI.


From: Hyde, Dana
Sent: Wednesday, March 10, 2010 2:35 PM
To: Lew, Jacob 3; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob 3
Subject: FW: choice quotes from the testimony

REALLY good stuff from the GI-II hearing this morning with Gates and Clinton. ©

We should make sure the Secretary knows what an instrumental role Ann Gavaghan has played at all levels of this. -
D



From: Gavaghan, Ann
Sent: Wednesday, March 10, 2010 2:20 PM
To: Hyde, Dana; Batson, Arnie (GH/AA)
Subject: FW: choice quotes from the testimony

Stories are starting to roll in...


From: Peterson, Jennifer L
Sent: Wednesday, March 10, 2010 2:02 PM
To: Gavaghan, Ann; Knight, M Chantal; Walsh, Thomas J
Cc: Thaivalappil, Maureen E; Ballard, Erica L; Murphy, Ruth L
Subject: RE: choice quotes from the testimony

I was just chatting with Maureen about highlighting today's testimony. She can send out some of the quotes below via
PEPFAR's Twitter feed, and will give State a heads up about the tweets in case they want to push them out too. She is
also posting the video of the hearing on our Facebook page.

We could consider doing a Dipnote blog from EG when he testifies, and we could quote today's testimony.

Here are some articles out:

Clinton: Improving foreign health is good policy
CNN international - March 10, 2010
Washington (CNN) — Aside from a moral obligation, improving the health of people in other nations is smart foreign
policy, former President Clinton said Wednesday. 'We live in an interdependent world in which we have learned the hard
way that no matter how brilliantly our forces perform, we can not kill, jail or occupy all of our adversaries," he told the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee in discussing why the issue of global health should be important to the United
States.

Clinton, Gates Say US Help Abroad Improves Image
Associated Press — March 10, 2010
Bill Clinton and Bill Gates have told a Senate panel that U.S. investments in fighting AIDS, malaria and other diseases in
underdeveloped nations play a vital role in improving America's image abroad. Clinton said Wednesday that helping the

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768525 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768525 Date: 08/31/2015




world's poorest tackle their health problems is "intrinsically good for America's foreign policy." The former president said
the work shouldn't be politicized.

Double Bill-ino on the Hill
Politico — March 10, 2010
Bill Clinton and Bill Gates urged senators to devote more resources to global health today — and said that there are limits
to what their own fame and wealth can accomplish. "My goal is to go to places where my being there won't cause
problems for foreign policy," Clinton said. ... Gates and Clinton agreed broadly that the United States should continue and
intensify its efforts to combat infectious diseases. On other global development issues, they sometimes clarified each
others remarks.




From: Gavaghan, Ann
Sent: Wednesday, March 10, 2010 12:58 PM
To: Peterson, Jennifer L; Knight, M Chantal
Subject: choice quotes from the testimony

Senator John Kerry: "The Global Health Initiative has rightly identified several core principles that should guide our
thinking.... I hope they will provide the underpinnings for strong bipartisan support going forward for advancing
global health and strengthening the fight against HIV/AIDS."

Bill Gates:
"I believe GHI is an important next step — indeed a natural progression — in U.S. efforts to address health challenges
around the world."

"I am pleased that the GNI will include an increased emphasis on family health and the myriad of interventions that,
when taken together and integrated in both approach and execution, make families healthier and societies more
productive."

"...the GHI aims for greater resources and a fresh approach to deploying resources in order to maximize health
outcomes in as short a time as possible. It seeks to concentrate resources in order to better achieve scale in selected
countries. And it utilizes targeted funding increases on diseases and conditions that have a devastating health and
economic impact on countries yet are entirely preventable or treatable. These are laudable goals."

"I'm pleased that the Global Health Initiative aims to build off of and improve successful American platforms such as
PEPFAR and PMI, and that it will enable a more integrated approach to health both here in Washington, D.C., and on the
ground — where we lose patients if we can't address their needs comprehensively."

"Yet 9 million children dying unnecessarily each year is still 9 million too many. I believe that a combination of
interventions, as suggested by the approach of the Global Health Initiative, can cut this figure in half again in well under
15 years."




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768525 Date: 08/31/2015
