      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769606 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL




From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Sent:                            Tuesday, June 1, 2010 11:00 AM
To:
Subject                          Fw: 'We're the only ones who believe them'




From: Toiv, Nora F
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Tue Jun 01 10:10:28 2010
Subject: 'We're the only ones who believe them'


POLITICO
'We're the only ones who believe them'
By: Ben Smith
June 1, 2010 04:44 AM EDT
A delicate diplomatic maneuver by President Barack Obama to smooth frayed relations
with Israel without alienating America's Arab allies may have been blown out of the water
Monday morning by Israel's botched attempt to enforce the Gaza blockade — and by the
lack of condemnation from Washington that followed it.

For while much about the incident remains unclear, a day of carefully parsed statements
from the White House and State Department left at least one irrefutable aftershock: With
much of the world expressing fury over the raid, the contrast with Washington's muted
response could not have been more striking.

"The situation is that they're so isolated right now that it's not only that we're the only ones
who will stick up for them," said an American official. "We're the only ones who believe
them — and what they're saying is true."

The official was referring to Israeli protestations — backed by Israeli Defense Forces video
— that their solders were attacked by passengers on a ship headed for Gaza with
humanitarian aid, when they boarded the ship in what the Israelis concede were
international waters.

Organizers of the flotilla, meanwhile, insisted that participants were unarmed and that
Israeli forces used excessive force.

The timing of the incident had to be viewed with rueful irony among the administration's
Middle East hands. Obama spent this spring damping down concern among American
friends of Israel that his seeming feud with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu had
brought the administration to the verge of fundamentally altering the historic U.S. alliance
with the Jewish state. Obama met personally with Jewish members of Congress and
dispatched top officials to Jewish groups to stress the point, as the "anti-Bibi" rhetoric was
simultaneously dialed back precipitously.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769606 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769606 Date: 08/31/2015




The charm offensive appears to have worked. But now an administration that itself has
expressed its own fury toward Netanyahu and his government in the past now finds itself
close to sharing Israel's isolation at the moment — a dynamic that could complicate
Obama's outreach to the rest of the region.

Israel's traditional critics denounced the raid — the chief Palestinian peace negotiator,
Saeb Erakat, called it a "war crime" — but so did some the countries Jerusalem counts as
friendly. Turkey's Prime Minister described the incident as an act of "inhuman state terror"
and Ankara withdrew its ambassador to Israel while the Conservative British Foreign
Secretary took the occasion to call the Gaza blockade "unacceptable and counter-
productive."

The White House, in sharp contrast, avoided any hint of criticism of the Israeli action in its
public statements, and American officials appeared sympathetic to Israeli explanations
that their soldiers were attacked by flotilla participants.

The U.S. "deeply regrets the loss of life and injuries sustained" in the Israeli raid, deputy
White House press secretary Bill Burton said in the first of three carefully-modulated
statements Monday, The administration, he said, is "working to understand the
circumstances surrounding this tragedy."

The White House rendition of a call between Obama and Netanyahu also strained to avoid
condemnation, and went out of the way to note that many of those wounded in the
incident "are being treated in Israeli hospitals."

Six hours later, State Department spokesman PJ Crowley issued a third statement, adding
that the U.S. expects that the Israeli government — the unstated emphasis was not the
United Nations — "will conduct a free and credible investigation."

Crowley added an evenhanded paragraph calling on the Israelis to open Gaza to
humanitarian aid, while simultaneously condemning the militant group Hamas, whose
political control of Gaza prompted the blockade.

"Hamas' interference with international assistance shipments and work of
nongovernmental organizations, and its use and endorsement of violence, complicates
efforts in Gaza," Crowley said.

The immediate upshot of the statements from the United States and other countries is that
Obama, perhaps surprisingly, finds himself in the same posture as his predecessors over
the past 60 years — one that holds that the U.S. is far more willing to give the Israelis the
benefit of the doubt on matters of security.

Washington "is always going to be the most reluctant major global actor to condemn
Israeli excesses, and that is the position President Obama finds himself in right now," said
Hussein Ibish, a Senior Fellow at The American Task Force on Palestine.

That position squares with the administration's apparent, reluctant rapprochement with
Israeli's rightist leader — even if that burying of grudges had deep reverberations for the
peace process.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769606 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769606 Date: 08/31/2015




"After wandering around for 15 months, vacillating between pandering to the Israelis and
trying o punish them, they have decided they have to work out some kind of relationship
with Netanyahu that allows them to do something serious," said Aaron David Miller, a
former American peace negotiator. "They need to weather this crisis with the relationship
with the Israelis north of where it is now."

The most immediate challenge, Miller said, will be steering a special session of the UN
Security Council — called by Arab members — away from forcing the U.S. either to vote on
condemning Israel's actions or to veto a resolution condemning them.

Observers of the process expect the U.S. to attempt to craft a resolution that doesn't
condemn Israeli directly and doesn't establish any international investigation, like an
earlier inquiry into Israel's actions in Gaza led by the former South African Judge Richard
Goldstone.

Obama and other American officials stressed the need to study the details of the incident,
as the Israeli government pointed to video of passengers on the ship — which was boarded
in international waters — attacking Israeli commandos with what appeared to be chairs and
metal poles.

"At this point, it is unclear what happened and there must be a thorough investigation,"
Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman John Kerry said in a statement.

Others suggested that further probes may not change the initial reactions. "You can have
an independent commission spend 3 or 4 months studying this thing and come out with
something that is stunningly clear and factual, but it doesn't matter," said Miller. "People
knew where they were before this episode started."
                                                                                  R.11)ES

© 2010 Capitol News Company, LLC


Nora Toiy
Office of the Secretary
202-647-8633




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769606 Date: 08/31/2015
