   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771905 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL


From:                           Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                           Sunday, November 28, 2010 10:53 PM
To:
Subject:                        Fw: can you send me ros-leithan's statement and any other members




From: Rodriguez, Miguel E
To: Mills, Cheryl ID
Sent: Sun Nov 28 22:51:16 2010
Subject: RE: can you send me ros-leithan's statement and any other members

Below please find statements from Kerry, Ros-Lehtinen, Hoekstra, and King.

Haven't seen anything yet from Lugar or Berman.

Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman John Kerry:

"The release of classified information under these circumstances is a reckless action which jeopardizes
lives by exposing raw, contemporaneous intelligence. This is not an academic exercise about freedom of
information and it is not akin to the release of the Pentagon Papers, which involved an analysis aimed at
saving American lives and exposing government deception. Instead, these sensitive cables contain candid
assessments and analysis of ongoing matters and they should remain confidential to protect the ability of
the government to conduct lawful business with the private candor that's vital to effective diplomacy."

                                                      ###

Ros-Lehtinen Condemns Latest Wikileaks Release of Sensitive U.S. Documents

(WASHINGTON) - U.S. Rep. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen (R-FL), Ranking Republican on the House Foreign Affairs
Committee, commented today on the release of scores of sensitive documents by the Wikileaks
website. Statement by Ros-Lehtinen:

               "This latest release of classified and other sensitive U.S. documents by Wikileaks is
               extremely irresponsible. Those who leak and publish such information are doing great harm
               to our nation, and are potentially putting American lives in danger.

               "This newest batch of documents appears to contain troves of classified reports related to
               our nation's conduct of diplomacy and foreign policy, including reports of critical discussions
               with our allies. This is the everyday work-product of our officials all over the globe. This
               critical and highly sensitive information must be managed carefully.

               "It is deeply disturbing that a few individuals seem to have deemed themselves worthy of
               deciding that scores of classified and sensitive material should be paraded about for our
               enemies to review and use against us. These leaks come at the expense of U.S. security
               and, potentially, American lives."

                                                      ###

From Rep. Pete Hoekstra (R., Mich.) ranking member of the House Intelligence Committee:


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771905 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771905 Date: 08/31/2015




"\Nikileaks clearly is determined to undermine U.S. national security and damage our foreign relations. The
disclosure of thousands of potentially classified cables and other documents is an embarrassment to the
Obama administration and represents a critical failure by the Pentagon and intelligence community to
protect sensitive national security information.

"Once again our partners and allies are forced to question whether the United States can keep secrets,
and our diplomats around the world have been forced to scramble to try and patch-up foreign relations
strained by this illegal leak. ODNI's national counterintelligence executive must move quickly to assess the
failures in this case and to establish security protocols, including robust audit capabilities for classified
networks. Congress also should move quickly to hold hearings to ensure ODNI, the military and FBI have
the necessary counterintelligence authorities to ensure a destructive leak of this nature cannot happen
again.

"The disclosure of these documents by Wikileaks had nothing to do with transparency or whistleblowing,
as the site would claim, and everything to do with undermining American foreign policy. As the world's
number one target for spying by foreign adversaries and now clearly other hacks, the federal government
must do a better job of strengthening America's computer and cybersecurity protocols. If we do not, we
risk leaving exposed an Achilles heel that could cause irreparable damage to our global partnerships and
international standing."

                                                      ###

U.S. Representative Peter T. King:

"WikiLeaks presents a clear and present danger to the national security of the United States. I strongly
urge you to work within the Administration to use every offensive capability of the U.S. government to
prevent further damaging releases by WikiLeaks."


From: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Sunday, November 28, 2010 10:14 PM
Cc: Rodriguez, Miguel E
Subject: can you send me ros-leithan's statement and any other members




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771905 Date: 08/31/2015
