           UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766507 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                    RELEASE
                                                                                                    IN FULL



    From:                                 Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
    Sent:                                 Thursday, January 28, 2010 10:13 AM
    To:
    Cc:                                   Mills, Cheryl D; Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J
    Subject                               Plane reading: old boys network v Ashton



    Below is from the Economist blogger re efforts wil EU to discredit Ashton, particularly from the French. Wouldn't hurt to
    mention her positively with French interlocutors. See particularly this line: "There is, frankly, a whiff of old boy's
    network against Lady Ashton: she is not a lifetime member of the honourable guild of former foreign
    ministers, and she is surrounded by men in suits who think they know a lot more about foreign policy than
    she does. There is not much sympathy for her complicated family life, involving young children, and much
    commuting between Brussels and Britain."




    A blog by the author of our column on the European Union



    Charlemagne's notebook

. Why did Lady Ashton take the EU's foreign policy job?
•   Jan 26th 2010, 22:04


    NOT yet February, and the briefing against Catherine Ashton, the newly appointed EU foreign policy chief,
    is getting nasty. Jean Quatremer, the Brussels blogger and well-connected EU correspondent of Liberation,
    dropped another depth charge against the baroness tonight. His list of complaints against her is long, and
    I have a feeling some of them are a smidgeon exaggerated. I find it hard to believe it is literally
    impossible to reach Lady Ashton after eight o'clock in the evening as Mr Quatremer charges, because she
    allegedly has her mobile telephones diverted to the EU situation centre (a small intelligence analysis cell
    staffed by officers from national servicies) after that hour. I also have some doubts about the stress laid
    on the fact that she has not yet got round to having top secret security clearance yet, so cannot see any
    confidential papers. As a former British cabinet minister, and serving UK commissioner, something tells
    me the British at least may share just the odd secret with her.

    A senior official I saw today also made the point that any holder of Lady Ashton's post would currently be
    struggling with teething problems and squabbling as the new foreign policy apparatus created by the
    Lisbon Treaty takes shape. There is, frankly, a whiff of old boy's network against Lady Ashton: she is not a
    lifetime member of the honourable guild of former foreign ministers, and she is surrounded by men in
    suits who think they know a lot more about foreign policy than she does. There is not much sympathy for
    her complicated family life, involving young children, and much commuting between Brussels and Britain.

    Finally, at the risk of sounding too loyal to the British, I think Mr Quatremer is being unfair when he says
    that it suits the Foreign Office in London to have Lady Ashton "sabotage" the post. My impression is that
        aritich nnvornmpni- fPPlc I (iv Achtnn nePdc a lot of sunnort riaht now and worries she is not getting
           UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766507 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766507 Date: 08/31/2015




enough support, but at the same time worries that if she receives too much help in the way of briefings
and advice from British officials, she will be seen as a British stooge. That may be a self-serving sort of
fear (because it allows the British to offer Lady Ashton lots of help) but it is real enough.

Other charges probably have something to them. They certainly chime with things I have been told by
other people.

But most damaging, to my mind, is the intimate nature of some of the briefing: this stuff is coming from
officials close to Lady Ashton, or who are senior enough to have significant contact with her. And I can
confirm from my own conversations that people across the whole EU foreign policy machine are asking the
same question: why did she take this huge job, when her instinct seems to be to make it as low key as
possible? That is a dangerous question mark to have hanging over you.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766507 Date: 08/31/2015
