      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771753 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                RELEASE IN PART B6




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Sunday, August 22, 2010 9:13 PM
To:
Subject:                           FW: Insecurity and Monterrey Consulate



See below.

No update yet - John is out and have not connected with Jack but will early am.

cdm

    Original Message
From: Pascual, Carlos (Mexico City)
Sent: Sunday, August 22, 2010 2:35 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Steinberg, James B; Lew, Jacob J; Valenzuela, Arturo A; Jacobson, Roberta 5;
Kennedy, Patrick F
Cc: Feeley, John D (Mexico City);
Subject: Insecurity and Monterrey Consulate

Please Pass to the Secretary

Madame Secretary,

A shoot out occurred on August 20 in front of the American School in Monterrey (AFSM), resulting in the death of two
bodyguards. An investigation is continuing into the details, but our understanding at this point is that it was an
attempted kidnapping targeting the relatives of a local business executive. While it does not appear that U.S. families
were targeted, the sharp increase in kidnapping incidents in the Monterrey area, and this event in particular, present a
very high risk to the families of U.S. citizens who might be become incidental victims.

U.S. security and law enforcement personnel have engaged local and federal security officials to seek their help on
understanding the immediate risks and measures that can be taken. I have urged U.S. families at the Consulate in
Monterrey not to send their children to school in the coming days while we review the events that took place on August
20. We also are advising U.S. citizens in the area that we have urged Consulate personnel not to send their children to
school while we complete this security review.

I am sure that the warden notice will lead to a rash of press reports on U.S. concerns about security in Monterrey. More
broadly, if the government cannot get the kidnappings in Monterrey under control, that may affect our ability to
function in Monterrey. I have advised Secretary Espinosa of this, and have sought her help as well to address consulate
security.

Consulate personnel are currently on "authorized departure" and have the option to send their families to a U.S.
location. Pat Kennedy is in close touch on these matters.

Carlos Pascual




This message has been sent via BlackBerry



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771753 Date: 08/31/2015
