        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768469 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                              B5




From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                             Monday, March 8, 2010 6:18 PM
To:                               H
Subject:                          FW: Call From Qadhafi Staffer



FYI


From: Feltman, Jeffrey D
Sent: Monday, March 08, 2010 5:20 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma
Subject: FW: Call From Qadhafi Staffer

Look at this -- from our Embassy in Tripoli, about the Qadhafi rage over PJ's remarks.




Jeffrey Feltman
Assistant Secretary
Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs
Department of State
202-647-7209


From: Lempert, Yael
Sent: Monday, March 08, 2010 5:14 PM
To: Feltman, Jeffrey D
Cc: Schlicher, Ronald L; Sanderson, Janet A; Cretz, Gene A; Polaschik, Joan A; Nardi, Margaret H; Kalmbach, Heather E;
Baker, Natalie A
Subject: Call From Qadhafi Staffer

Jeff,

Wanted to fill you in on a call I just received from key Qadhafi staffer Mabrouka al Sharef; she's the one who
initially flagged for us last week that there was GOL blowback to A/S Crowley's comments.

Sharef began by stating how much Libya valued the bilateral relationship with the US, how we had all worked for
years to improve things between our countries, "only to have it all ruined in one minute by your spokesman."
Sharef said she had sat in on meetings today with Qadhafi, PM Baghdadi, and Qadhafi chief of staff Bashir Saleh.
She said all were "angry and upset" that there had still been no apology from the USG for the "insult to the
Leader." I reviewed with her Crowley's March 5 comments, noting that he had clarified his remarks were off-hand
(I translated that in Arabic as "non-official.") I also briefed her on your and A/S Crowley's meeting with Aujali,
which she had clearly not yet heard about (which means Q most likely had also not been briefed on it). Sharef
said such a meeting was appreciated, but did not meet the Libyan demand for an apology. She said, repeatedly
throughout the conversation, "The Brother Leader is upset that no one from the USG has explained that this
spokesman was not speaking for them, and made clear that his comments were wrong, and apologized for them.
He expected behavior and words like this from Switzerland, not from the US." She noted that Q had remarked
that he had said nice things about President Obama during his meetings with people from the US Embassy ("You
reported that back to Washington, right"; I assured her we had), and was thus surprised that the USG responded
with "the words of gangsters!" Sharef repeatedly referenced NOC Chair Ghanem's meeting last Thursday with
the GM's from US oil companies: "We don't want to have to take measures against them, but such insults to the
Leader cannot stand. Why has the US not publicly distanced itself from Crowley and his comments?!" She


        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768469 Date: 08/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768469 Date: 08/31/2015




treated me to a lengthy detailing of Swiss criminality and violations of international agreements, and then said,
"But even the Swiss haven't said what your spokesman did!"

I reviewed again with her Crowley's March 5 comments, and noted that, as he is the spokesman for the State
Department, he is the correct person, in our view, to remark on the situation; it wouldn't be in keeping with USG
practice for someone other than the Department spokesman to comment (i.e. no distancing of the USG from
Crowley). I emphasized that the US was not involved, and did not want to be involved, in the Swiss-Libya dispute,
we just hope it is resolved soon. I stressed that the US values its relationship with Libya, and wants to continue
improving the relationship, and get past this unfortunate bad spot we currently are in. I asked if it would be
helpful if a senior USG official called Q to discuss issues of bilateral interest, and reinforce the importance of the
relationship. At first, she brushed off such an idea - "that won't be a public apology" - but at the end of our
conversation, returned to the idea, noting that it was interesting, and inquiring as to which USG official might
call. I said I didn't want to make any promises I couldn't keep; that I'd check with Washington and get back to her
with further details tomorrow. She reiterated that she liked the idea, and said we should discuss it further over
coffee tomorrow or Wednesday.

Sharef closed by mentioning that she "and most Libyans" are "hand in hand with the US ... we want a good
relationship with you, as we like you, you're not like the Europeans."

Appreciate your guidance as to whether I can discuss further details of possible call with Sharef tomorrow.

Thanks, and sorry our hosts are taking up so much of your time lately!,

Yael




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768469 Date: 08/31/2015
