        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769161 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL




From:                               Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                               Wednesday, January 20, 2010 8:28 PM
To:                                 H
Cc:                                 Mills, Cheryl D; Abedin, Huma
Subject                             Morales



Morales blasted the U.S. efforts in Haiti today. See below. Craig Kelly and I agree that you should consider a call to
Morales. Perhaps we could discuss tomorrow.



From: Rocha, Barbara
Sent: Wednesday, January 20, 2010 1:26 PM
To: Roberts, Asel K
Subject: FW: Garcia Linera on Haiti

Rough translation of the points below:

    O   Evo Morales announced today that his government will ask for an emergency meeting at the UN to "reject the
        U.S. military occupation" in Haiti, according to Spanish news agency EFE.
    O   "It is not possible that the U.S. is using a natural disaster to invade and occupy Haiti," said Morales, who
        qualified as "inhumane, savage, and opportunist" the deployment of troops in the Caribbean island.
    O   "We'll ask the UN, via our Foreign Ministry, for an emergency meeting to reject this military occupation of the
        U.S. in Haiti," announced Morales.
    O   Morales recalled that President Obama has guaranteed in international fora that he wants partners and
        respectful diplomatic relations with other countries. "You don't achieve this (partners, diplomatic relations)
        with military occupation, or troops, or bases," he said and expects "a pronouncement by the peoples of the
        world and social forces rejecting this intervention and military occupation in Haiti."
    O   Morales also asked "how much money, food and water" will be destined to the 12,000 soldiers the U.S. sent to
        Haiti and noted that this money "should be spend on the victims."
    O   He trusted that the American people will reject "the abusive use" of their economic resources for what he
        insisted on qualifying as "military intervention."
    O   "The times of empire have ended: these are times of the people."




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Rocha, Barbara
Sent: Wednesday, January 20, 2010 1:09 PM
To: Roberts, Asel K
Subject: FW: Garcia Linera on Haiti

Following up on this, President Morales has now said he will call for an emergency meeting at the UN to "reject the U.S.
military occupation of Haiti." I've alerted 10. I'll reach out to Labor and G staff to offer a briefing, will keep you looped
in.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769161 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769161 Date: 08/31/2015




EVO MORALES FIDE REUNION DE EMERGENCIA PARA REPUDIAR Y RECHAZAR A EEUU
EN HAITI, INFORMA EVE.
• Evo Morales anunciO hoy que su Gobierno pedira. a Naciones Unidas una reuniOn de emergencia para
   "repudiar y rechazar la ocupacion militar de Estados Unidos" en Haiti, informa la agencia espaiiola EFE.
• "No es posible que Estados Unidos use una desgracia natural para invadir y ocupar militarmente Haiti", dijo
  Morales, quien califico de "inhumano, salvaje y oportunista" el despliegue de las fuerzas armadas
   estadounidenses en la isla caribeiia.
• "Vamos a pedir mediante la cancilleria a las Naciones Unidas una reunion de emergencia para repudiar y
   rechazar esta ocupacion militar de Estados Unidos hacia Haiti", anuncio Morales.
• Morales recordo que el mandatario de Estados Unidos, Barack Obama, ha garantizado en foros
  internacionales que desea tener socios y relaciones diplomaticas de respeto mutuo con el resto de paises.
  "Ser socios o tener relaciones diplomaticas no se hace con ocupacion militar, ni con tropas militares, ni con
  bases militares", dijo y espera "un pronunciamiento de todos los pueblos del mundo y de las fuerzas sociales
   rechazando esta intervencion y ocupacion militar en Haiti".
• Morales se pregunto tambien "cuanta plata, cuantos alimentos o cuanta agua" se van a destinar para
  abastecer a los 12.000 soldados que Estados Unidos ha mandado a Haiti y considero que ese dinero "deberia
  gastarse en los damnificados" por el terremoto y no en los militares.
• Conflo en que el propio pueblo estadounidense rechace "el uso abusivo" de sus recursos econOmicos para lo
  que insistio en calificar como "intervencion militar".
• "Los tiempos de imperio se terminan: son tiempos de pueblos", sentencio.



SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769161 Date: 08/31/2015
