UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767141 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                             RELEASE IN
                                                                                             FULL




                                       CONFIDENTIAL



                                               February 12, 2010



 For: Hillary
 From: Sid
 Re: Saudi Arabia


 I have been in contact with Chas Freeman, former ambassador to Saudi Arabia, and he has sent
 me his most recent public speech on the subject. He says the policy part is toward the end, and
 that King Abdullah's new university (KAUST) is an important initiative. He also relates that the
 atmosphere is near toxic because of Obama's failure to follow up his Cairo speech and the rebuff
 from Netanyahu. Cynicism, at best, is pervasive among the Saudi elite.




 Saudi Arabia: The End of Progress without Change
 Remarks to the Sarasota Institute for Lifetime Learning

 Ambassador Chas W. Freeman, Jr. (USFS, Ret.)
 Sarasota, Florida, February 11, 2010

  I have been asked to speak to you about the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. This is a topic I have
  never before addressed to an American audience. Why bother?

  We Americans reserve the right to have strong opinions on the basis of little or no knowledge.
  There are few countries that better exemplify our assertive ignorance of foreign geography,
  history, and culture than Saudi Arabia. Most of us are convinced that Saudis are Muslim zealots,
  control the world's oil prices, and are absurdly rich, anti-feminist, and undemocratic. They hate
  our values and want to destroy us. Talk radio confirms this. What more needs to be said?

  On reflection, a lot does. Neither caricature nor a priori reasoning is a sound basis for policy. A
  distorted view of foreign realities precludes success at dealing with them. There is much at stake
  in our relationship with Saudi Arabia. We can ill afford to get it wrong.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767141 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767141 Date: 08/31/2015




   That country is, of course, the heartland of Islam and the custodian of the world's largest oil
   reserves. It lies athwart transport routes between Asia, Europe, and Africa. It is at the center of
   a growing concentration of global capital. Under any circumstances, the Kingdom of Saudi
   Arabia would be important. It is all the more so in an era when we Americans are at war with
   ever more peoples in the Islamic world, depend on ever greater amounts of imported energy, and
   need ever larger foreign loans to run our government and sustain our life style.

   Yet Saudi Arabia is little known. It is the only society on the planet not to have been penetrated
   by Western colonialism. No European armies breached its borders; no missionaries; no
   merchants. Its capital, Riyadh, was long off limits to infidels; the holy cities of Mecca and
   Medina remain so today. When Westerners finally came to Saudi Arabia, we came not as the
   vindicators of our presumed cultural superiority, but as hired help. As a result, some say that
   Saudis secretly see the world's peoples as divided into two basic categories: (1) fellow Saudis;
   and (2) potential employees. Be that as it may, foreigners, Western, Asian, or Arab, who have
   lived in Saudi Arabia all see it as a very strange place — one that is not easy to understand and
   that remains at odds with many of the values non-Saudis profess.

   The Kingdom has long stood apart from global norms. Its system of government draws on tribal
   and Islamic traditions rather than Western models. Its king presides rather than rules over the
   royal family and Saudi society. His responsibility is less to make decisions than to shape and
   proclaim consensus, while assuring a share of the national wealth to all, especially the least
   privileged. Saudi Arabia levies no taxes on its citizens, other than the religious tithe known as
   "zakat" — a two-and-a-half percent annual donation of private capital to charity and other public
   purposes. All Saudis enjoy free education and medical care from birth to death and can pursue
   these services at home or abroad, as they wish. The Kingdom has no parliament, though it does
   have elaborate informal mechanisms for consultation with its citizens on policy matters. Saudi
   Arabia reverses and thereby affirms a basic principle of American political philosophy. "No
   representation without taxation."

   Unlike some other countries in the Arab Gulf, Saudi Arabia has invested its oil wealth at home,
   not abroad, though it has long been generous with foreign aid. (At one point it was donating six
   percent of GDP to other, mostly Muslim, nations.) The desperate poverty of the pre-oil period is
   now, at most, a dim memory. Over the lifetime of elderly Saudis, the Kingdom's per capita
   income has risen about one hundred fold. Sparsely populated mud-walled villages have grown
   into huge air-conditioned cities with 21' Century architecture. Today, Saudis are not just
   literate; many have university degrees. There are more U.S. Ph.D.'s in the Saudi Cabinet than in
   our Cabinet and Congress put together.

   Despite rapid development, the strong family structure that characterized traditional Saudi
   society has remained largely intact. It is truly moving to see how lovingly children and
   grandchildren care for their elders in the Kingdom. Saudi Arabia's unique social stability is
   reflected in the fact that almost none of its citizens emigrate, though many have second homes
   abroad, and a few, like Osama Binladin, have been exiled for deviant behavior.

   For a long time it was easier for journalists and academics to get a visa to Tibet than to Saudi
   Arabia. Perhaps this accounts for the near total lack of institutions and scholars that study the




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767141 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767141 Date: 08/31/2015




 place. In the United States, 9/11 was followed by an avalanche of polemical tracts, but there are
 still very few books about the Kingdom that reflect its realities rather than the authors' biases or
 propagandistic agendas. Lack of personal familiarity with the Kingdom helps explain the
 repeated prediction by pundits that the Saudi monarchy is in jeopardy. Generations of such
 pundits have passed away. The Kingdom has not. When I was ambassador to Riyadh, I was so
 struck by the apparent social stasis that I briefly thought the national motto should be "progress
 without change." But in fact change is a constant in Saudi Arabia. Most of it comes from the
 top down.

 Not all Saudis are happy with the status quo. Some are angry about the extent to which the
 Kingdom is opening up and reforming. Others are impatient to get on with reform. The ranks of
 the latter clearly include King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz Al-Sa'ud, the current ruler. Now in his
 late eighties and on the throne only since 2005, he has surprised everyone with the vigor of his
 efforts to modernize Saudi society and to reshape its relationships with the world beyond its
 borders. Saudi Arabia has plenty of problems to keep the king engaged.

 A lot of issues derive from the peculiar religious heritage of the Saudi state. The current
 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (now over a century old) is the third political structure to ally the
 House of Sa'ud with the family of the eighteenth century religious reformer Shaykh al Islam
 Mohammed ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab Al-Tamimi. Ibn .Abd al-Wahhab's writings form the doctrinal
 basis of so-called Wahhabism, a notoriously intolerant and socially conservative form of Islam
 that is often confused with other reactionary religious traditions like that of the Taliban. Saudi
 history has involved a sustained effort by the Kingdom's rulers to persuade its religious scholars
 and their puritanical followers to embrace change and to open up to the outside world. This
 struggle has mainly been peaceful and virtually invisible to outsiders. Sometimes, however, it
 has engendered violence. In 1975, for example, the late King Faisal paid with his life for
 instituting public education for girls and for introducing television to his nation.

 Both as regent (from 1996 to 2005) and more recently as ruler, King Abdullah has been so
 careful to avoid drama in his promotion of change that it is truly startling to review the
 cumulative results of his leadership. Take women's issues, for example. In 2002, responsibility
 for girls' education was transferred from the religious authorities to the ministry of education.
 Women now make up 58 percent of the enrollment in Saudi universities. The new Princess
 Noura bint Abdulrahman University for Women, currently under construction in Riyadh, will
 enroll 40,000 students this fall.

 Female participation in the labor force is rising rapidly. Twenty-nine percent of women now
 work outside the home. (That is a low figure compared to our own but represents a remarkable
 advance for the Kingdom.) One-third of civil service positions have been reserved for women.
 The first woman took her seat in the Council of Ministers last year. After a bit of a kerfuffle, the
 Kingdom's religious scholars finally endorsed coeducation at the new King Abdullah University
 for Science and Technology. That was big blow to the legitimacy of gender apartheid. A Saudi
 friend and I are betting that it will not be long before women in the Kingdom can drive. We plan
 to clean up by building the separate road system this may require. (That's a joke, I hope.)




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767141 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767141 Date: 08/31/2015




   A word about the vision embodied in the King Abdullah University for Science and
   Technology. Founded by the king last September with an initial endowment of ten billion
   dollars, KAUST is an international, graduate-level research university. It sits in a two-billion-
   dollar campus on the Red Sea about seventy-five miles northwest of Mecca. On one level, it is
   the leading element in an effort to prepare the Kingdom for a knowledge-based economy that can
   complement and eventually supercede the current reliance on energy exports. But on another
   level, it is a powerful answer to the religious zealotry that terrorist movements like al Qa'ida
   espouse. Let me explain.

   There is a broad consensus among the world's 1.6 billion Muslims that the modern age is
   ethically corrupt and that religious faith needs reinvigoration and renewal. Much like early
   Christian Protestants, many believe that the way to achieve this is to rediscover and reaffirm the
   values of their religion's earliest times. When he inaugurated KAUST, King Abdullah explained
   that he envisaged it as a reborn Bayt al-Hikma or "House of Wisdom." The original "House of
   Wisdom" was founded in Baghdad around 760 C.E., in the second century of the Muslim era. It
   was where the Arabs incorporated Greek, Indian and other foreign knowledge into Islam and
   conceived much of modern mathematics, astronomy, medicine, chemistry, zoology, and
   geography. It made Islamic civilization the global leader in science and technology. The
   "House of Wisdom" prospered in an age of tolerance, when Jews and Christians served
   alongside Muslims as ministers of government. Though destroyed by the Mongols in 1258, the
   knowledge it preserved and developed eventually found its way to Europe, where it sparked the
   Renaissance.

   Today, like mainstream Muslims, the extremists of al Qa'ida and related movements argue that
   Islam must return to its roots. But they portray early Islam as puritanical, xenophobic, intolerant,
   and oppressive of women. KAUST is a living rebuttal of this historical fallacy and the ideology
   of hatred derived from it. It was conceived as a new "House of Wisdom." It stands for the
   principle that Islam was founded as and can only be reborn as the religious guide to a society
   open to ideas from other traditions. It represents a call for return to an Islam tolerant of foreign
   ways, respectful of women, dedicated to the scientific study of God's handiwork, and committed
   to the development of new technologies to better the human condition. KAUST is as much an
   instrument of religious renaissance and an answer to extremism as it is an academic institution.

   This brings me to the issue of religious tolerance. In 2003, King Abdullah inaugurated what he
   called a "national forum for intellectual dialogue." This ongoing national dialogue is an
   unprecedented acceptance of religious diversity in the Kingdom. It marks an end to longstanding
   official discrimination against its Shiite minority. In 2007, King Abdullah made an historic call
   on the Pope in the Vatican, the first time a Muslim leader of his stature had done so. In 2008 he
   organized two unprecedented international interfaith conferences between Muslims, Jews,
   Christians, Buddhists, and others at Madrid and New York. He intends this dialogue, too, to be a
   continuing process.

   There are other major domestic reform initiatives in progress, like a complete revamping of the
   Saudi educational system and curriculum, experiments with elections at lower levels of
   government and civil society, efforts to shift the Kingdom toward reliance on alternative sources
   of energy, the development of a huge new petrochemical industry to complement the production




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767141 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767141 Date: 08/31/2015




 of energy in its primary form. Time will not permit me to describe these developments. My
 point is simply that there is a great deal more going on in Saudi Arabia than our press and
 pundits seem to realize.

 That said, everything is, of course, relative. Sadly, to many Saudis, the history of their nation
 suggests that the more religiously uptight they are, the more oil comes out of the ground. The
 Kingdom continues in many ways to belie God's admonition in the Holy Quran that "there can
 be no compulsion in religion." The open practice of religions other than Islam remains banned.
 The status and role of women in Saudi society is controversial and far from settled. Despite
 efforts at "Saudiization," foreign workers continue to dominate the employment market, while
 demanding a premium to compensate for the discomfort and stress that Saudi Arabia's
 religiously sanctioned mores impose on them. Methods of political consultation that worked in a
 more cohesive and less populous Saudi Arabia can no longer produce consensus. The fiscal
 basis of the state continues to be oil exports, and oil is a commodity whose price fluctuates
 unpredictably. There is, in other words, a very long list of problems for Saudis to work out in
 coming years.

 Let me turn briefly to Saudi Arabia's foreign relations before reviewing the state of our country's
 interaction with it.

 In foreign even more than domestic affairs, King Abdullah's impact has been little short of
 revolutionary. He has overseen the negotiated settlement of the Kingdom's long-disputed
 borders with all of its neighbors. He brought Saudi Arabia into the World Trade Organization,
 ensuring that its trade and investment activities for the first time follow internationally agreed
 rules. In 1982, at Beirut, he led the Arab League in an historic reversal of policy toward the
 Israel-Palestine issue. Saudi Arabia had long insisted that it would be the last state in the region
 to recognize and establish relations with Israel. At Beirut, King Abdullah committed to be the
 first to normalize relations with Israel upon its achievement of a mutually acceptable
 arrangement for coexistence with the Palestinians. He persuaded all other Arab countries to
 promise they would do the same. To his great frustration, Israel did not respond. Since then,
 hope for a two-state solution that could gain acceptance for Israel in the region has
 dimmed.

 Many of Saudi Arabia's foreign policy challenges stem from recent American policies in the
 region. These policies have had the effect of liberating Israel from all constraints on its
 settlement activities and belligerent intervention in its Arab neighbors, installing Iran as the
 dominant political influence in both Iraq and Lebanon, consolidating rather than eroding the
 Syrian-Iranian alliance, pushing Hamas into the arms of the Iranians, and raising regional
 tensions over Tehran's nuclear program while doing nothing effective about it. Then there is
 Afghanistan, where the United States now seems to be engaged in a crusade against militant
 Islam — one that many in the region now fear may soon extend to Yemen. Saudi counter-
 terrorism specialists, who have a well-deserved international reputation for effectiveness, are
 convinced that the most efficient way to radicalize Muslim populations and encourage terrorism
 against the United States and its foreign policy partners is to invade, occupy, and humiliate
 them. They believe that the panicked militarism of the U.S. response to 9/11 was exactly what
 groups like al Qa'ida hoped for. They see no sign that the United States is about to abandon




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767141 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767141 Date: 08/31/2015




    actions and policies that metastasize extremism and stimulate terrorist reprisal against Americans
    and our foreign friends.

   No longer willing to be publicly associated with U.S. policies in the Holy Land, Iraq,
   Afghanistan, and elsewhere that radicalize the region and menace the Kingdom's own security,
   Saudi Arabia is actively attempting to reduce its historic dependence on America. To this end, it
   is building new relationships with counties like China, India, and Russia, while strengthening
   cooperation with longstanding partners in Europe and Asia like Britain, France, Germany, Japan,
   and south Korea. It is not that the Kingdom has given up on the United States. As the king's
   scholarship program for Saudi students in this country evidences, Saudi Arabia continues to
   reach out and seek improved relations with America. But Saudis no longer trust us to take their
   interests into account or to protect them from their enemies.

   In December 2002, as the U.S. prepared to invade Iraq against the forcefully expressed advice of
   then Crown Prince Abdullah, Saudi Aramco (the world's largest oil company) quietly abandoned
   a decades-old subsidy for the cost of shipping oil to the North American market. Within months,
   China replaced the United States as the Kingdom's biggest overseas market for oil. U.S. exports
   have remained relatively constant as the Saudi Arabian economy has boomed, dramatically
   reducing our market share in our largest Middle Eastern market. Ironically, the best element of
   the US-Saudi relationship is now cooperation against terrorists. This is a task in which the
   Saudis have perforce learned to excel. American policies ensure an endless supply of angry
   young Muslim men in the region, including in Saudi Arabia.

   The United States is now said to have entered a "long war." The last time we did so, in 1947
   with Soviet Communism, the enemy was obvious, George Kerman gave us a strategy, and
   skillful American diplomacy gave us the allies we needed to pursue it. Kennan's "long
   telegram" from Moscow outlined a comprehensive approach to the political, economic, cultural,
   and military containment of the threat to our survival and our values posed by the Soviet Union.
   We followed his outline. Forty years later, as Kennan forecast, without our having to go to war
   with the USSR, our Soviet enemy collapsed of its own infirmities.

   This time, our "long war" is with various Islamic extremists, tribes, sects, and societies. We're
   not quite sure who our enemy is. No Kennan has emerged to give us a strategy for winning
   without fighting or, indeed, any "strategy" at all. Instead, we are flailing about with our superbly
   lethal military in response to events. Lacking a strategy, we have been unable to recruit foreign
   partners to support one. We are now alone in Iraq. We are isolated internationally on the Israel-
   Palestine issue. Our NATO allies are with us in Afghanistan out of consideration for NATO, not
   because they think we know what we are doing. Many of them have already announced their
   intention to withdraw. Pakistan is with us only because all its alternatives are worse.

   Saudi Arabia and America head al Qa'ida's enemies list. The Kingdom has, however, been
   successfully vilified in the eyes of the American elite and public. To deal effectively with
   Islamic extremism, we need Muslim allies. There is none more potent that the Kingdom of
   Saudi Arabia. Yet we have made no effort to seek its advice about how to address the challenges
   of Islamic extremism. We have not sought its help to legitimize an effective political,




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767141 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767141 Date: 08/31/2015




 informational, cultural, and economic strategy for productive engagement with the Islamic
 world.

 Meanwhile, however, many things now happening in the Kingdom — like the implicit message of
 the king's vision for KAUST — suggest that such a partnership with Saudi Arabia and Arab
 nations of like mind is possible. Such a partnership could be the basis for a strategy to bring
 victory in this latest "long war." The common interests on which to forge an alliance are clearly
 there. Last June in Cairo, President Obama brilliantly articulated a credible basis for sound
 relations with the Islamic world. His vision was persuasive, but it remains a mirage, not a
 reality. It is past time to implement it. An intensive effort to reset the relationship with Saudi
 Arabia and to craft a common antiterrorist strategy with its king would be a good place to start.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767141 Date: 08/31/2015
