UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                    RELEASE IN
                                                                                    FULL




              TOWARD A NEW POLICY ON IRAN

          BY HEINTZ, LUERS, PICKERING AND WISNER
                  December 21, 2010




   I INTRODUCTION: US-Iran relations are never ripe for an opening
   but there is high risk to continuing to put it off. We propose that you
   urge the President to instruct you to open a direct relationship with
   Iran. That might begin by a letter of congratulations to Foreign
   Minister Salehi offering to work with him toward a new relationship.
   The burden rests on the US to convince an uncertain Iranian leadership
   to come out of its shell. The next few months offer an opportune moment
   for a new policy. The 2010 sanctions are taking a toll on Iran but are not
   changing Iran's behavior. The Iranian government has moved in a more
   repressive direction against the opposition and for consolidation of
   Khamenei/Ahmadinej ad power, with an increasing role of the Iranian
   Revolutionary Guard.

   The Administration has a responsibility and an opportunity now to take
   initiatives in 2011 that will diminish the possibility of conflict and enhance
   the US role in the Middle East We try to answer below: Why now? What
   are the elements of a new policy? How to get started?

   II Why Now?

         A. The Administration's 2009 moves to reset US policy in the
         Middle East and the Islamic world have been well received by
         most Islamic nations but undercut by Iran. A US policy of
         isolating Iran is comforting and easier than alternatives but it also
         weakens the larger US objectives of resetting our role in the region. A
         new US policy toward Iran would enhance the administration's
         regional strategy and return the US to being a strategic player rather
         than a polarizing one.

         B. The President's initiatives to engage Iran last year failed. The
         Iranian expectations for corrective actions from the Obama
         administration have been high. Iran's self image as an aggrieved




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015




       victim of the US perfidy and efforts at regime change, provide a
       partial explanation for the Iranian unresponsiveness. Another factor
       has been Iran's domestic turmoil, almost unprecedented since the
       1979 revolution. As a result the leadership has been even more
       immobilized than usual on whether and under what conditions to meet
       with American officials. Now is the time to return with even greater
       authority in an effort to talk to the Iranians (C below). EV-Ily novt-isit ,--   Fomiatted: Font color: Red

       key-questioth-Not-elear the-answer-is-h.           in-the-paper. We-did
                                                                 • --thimge-iff
       4tdd ed s rc snit eti eids-td-n4-sigits-ef-moving-nway-fr-ran regime-eh tinge
       viii-help-enirdition-the-atinespliere:-Tritn-is-eagaged-iit-buyine
       ankl4he4ask4s-te-make-eleiw4hs-an-approffeh-vt4ieh-letids-only

       ether-oppen4-ani-ties-,


       C. Significant US steps toward engagement now would surprise
       Iran's leaders. A new policy now would be more effective in
       changing Iranian behavior than the sanctions have been. The
       multilateral agreements in 2010 to strengthen the sanctions against
       Iran have sent a strong message to the Iranian leadership about the
       seriousness of the Obama administration. But the sanctions have also
       reinforced Iran's determination to stay the course. Iran's leaders
       perceive US policies over the past 30 years of seeking to isolate,
       punish, threaten, subvert, sanction, intimidate, and overthrow if
       possible Iran as a permanent fixture of American foreign policy. They
       have been successful in convincing the Iranian public that they are
       right. Now is the time to engage the Iranians with a new and
       determined US policy.

       D. Failure to reach an agreement soon on Iran's nuclear program
       will increase the risk that Iran will have the capacity to develop a
       nuclear weapon. The decision to continue to deploy UNSC sanctions
       as our "weapon of choice" for stopping Iran's enrichment of uranium
       has failed. This policy has contributed to making Iran's nuclear
       program (not a nuclear bomb) a symbol of national unity and pride.
       As the UNSC approves more sanctions Iran builds more centrifuges.
       This US insistence on having some suspension of enrichment or a deal
       on their nuclear program as a precondition for talks on other subjects
       has led both countries into a dead end. The resulting confrontation

                                                                              2




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015




      seems likely to allow Iran the time to develop a nuclear bomb and as a
      result eventually toward potential conflict as the only option.
      Although the US has stressed that it is following a two track policy
      toward Iran, in fact the diplomatic track has been mainly in the
      successful diplomatic effort to expand sanctions. A new US policy
      must give Iran reasons to limit its nuclear program to peaceful
      purposes. We should consider an approach that provides enrichment
      in Iran under international supervision but such a discussion awaits a
      US decision and must be coordinated with the other members of the
      P-5.

      E. The consequences of a failure in US policy toward Iran will
      severely damage US interest's world wide. US military action
      against Iran is unthinkable as a strategy or as the consequence of no
      strategy. Military conflict would gravely set back our programs in Iraq
      and Afghanistan, further derail the peace process, and perhaps lead to
      a regional war involving Israel, some Arab states and Hezbollah and
      Hamas. A new toll of human life in the Islamic world would be
      catastrophic for the goals of resetting US policy with consequences
      for US interests from Morocco to South East Asia. The consequences
      of prolonging the current policy without accomplishing any of its
      objectives will degrade US authority and power. Another consequence
      will be the missed opportunity to engage Iran in a long term
      constructive regional strategy:
             1)To put in place a crisis management understanding that will
      reduce the possibility of US-Iran conflict in the Gulf or over Iraq and
      Afghanistan.
             2) To deal directly with Iran over its nuclear program.
             3) To help establish a regional security structure aimed at
      giving Iran and the Gulf states a greater sense of stability.
             4) To build a regional stabilization program for Afghanistan
             and Iraq,
             5) To carry out a joint program to reduce drug trafficking,
             6) To develop a coordinated effort to deal with refugees in the
      region.
             7) To develop together approaches to weaken the Taliban and
      destroy Qa'eda and eventually to weaken Iran's support for Hamas
      and Hezbollah.




                                                                            3




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015




             8) To develop other common approaches to serious issues in the
       region where U.S. and Iranian interests are at play — drugs, refugees
       are examples.


 III WHAT ARE THE ELEMENTS OF A NEW POLICY? The US
 should make a determined and carefully designed effort to get the
 Iranians to the table. The risks of delaying this relationship are getting
 higher. Any new policy toward Iran should begin with the following
 characteristics.

       A. A new policy must engender a positive decision from the
          Supreme Leader and his advisors and thus must be seen to
          come from the President and have his full commitment to its
          implementation. It must aim in the first instance at defining a
          framework of negotiations that address all outstanding issues
          between the US and Iran.

       B. It must eliminate suggestions to Iran that the suspension of
          enrichment or some other "progress" on our nuclear demands
          is a precondition for any progress to direct talks. The Iranians
          still believe that broader talks on a full range of issues with the US
          based on mutual respect and justice will only happen if Iran
          suspends enrichment. This Iranian posture is partially a reflection
          of their paranoia and insecurity in dealing with the US. But fruitful
          discussions on nuclear issues are only likely to come after Iran has
          determined that the US seriously seeks a bilateral relationship
          based on mutual respect for each other's interests, concerns and
          role in the region.

       C. The US should achieve an arrangement with Iran that would
          maximize IAEA and other international access to and
          monitoring of Iran's nuclear program. As the US sets aside its
          zero enrichment preconditions for any progress in the talks, it
          should link Iran's assurances that it will not build a nuclear bomb
          to a new agreement. That agreement should provide for intrusive
          inspections from the IAEA and multilateral or international
          management of their enrichment program.
       D. A US offer to cooperate with Iran as an equal partner on one
          or more non-nuclear issues will set the stage for more fruitful

                                                                                4




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015




         discussion of the nuclear issue. The US will improve markedly
         chances to get Iran to deal seriously with the nuclear issues by
         starting with an offer to cooperate on other problems in the region.
         The Iranians do not want to "talk" or "negotiate" with the US.
         Small gestures such as direct flights to Tehran from the US and
         liberalizing travel restrictions on their diplomats in the US might
         help but not change the situation significantly. They want to work
         together with the US. The issues that would demonstrate a serious
         US intention to work with Iran would be:
             a. Create crisis management mechanisms to deal with the
                possibility of incidents in the Gulf or in Iraq and
                Afghanistan.
             b. Renew the cooperation on Afghanistan (that was cut off in
                January 2002).
             c. Seek cooperation on Iraq (in anticipation of further US force
                draw down) building on the bilateral talks that took place in
                Baghdad several years ago.
             d. Seek cooperation on controlling drug trafficking along the
                Afghan border and more broadly.


       E. Take actions that will signal to Iran's leaders that the US has
          genuinely rejected a regime change strategy. Oral assurances
          have not been sufficient. The Iranians have appreciated
          President Obama's rhetorical outreach but argue that the
          rhetoric has not been matched with any material change in US
          actions. Such steps would include a decision to reduce or cease
          few-a-per-led-44444w some executive branch actions taken against
          Iran, particularly anvsofne covert political military activities (with
          the exception of efforts to delay or disrupt their progress on
          enrichment) that Iran's leaders might identify as part of the US
          strategy of regime change.

       F. One way to begin a new effort at engagement would be for the
          Secretary of State to send a letter to the new Iranian Foreign
          Minister Salehi congratulating him on his new position and
          suggesting a willingness to work with him toward a new era in
          US-Iranian relations. Such a letter might be delivered directly
          through the Iranian Permanent Representative to the United


                                                                                   5




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015




         Nations along with the oral message to the Supreme Leader that
          we recommend below.




       G. Set a new tone in reciprocal communications including a
          moratorium on the rhetorical attacks from leaders on both
          sides. The President and cabinet members would constrain their
          threats and red lines on Iranian behavior, make clear at every
          opportunity that the US does not have a policy of regime change
          and agree to open up the entire range of bilateral issues that are
          particularly important to the Iranians. Astute subtle gestures on
          both sides can diminish the distrust. The Iranian leadership would
          be asked to agree to comparable restraint in relation to the US. Our
          overall goal is to secure Iranian recognition that we are legitimate
          players in the region, have interests and will defend them. At the
          same time, we will not seek to destabilize Iran's domestic order.
          We can compete peacefully on the playing field of ideas, without
          challenging the legitimacy of each other's interests.

       H. Establish a formal structure through which the two
          governments will communicate directly. But diplomatic
          relations should not be sought at the outset. One early priority
          will be for both sides to empower a senior representative to
          conduct regular discussions on official business. Key
          communications should go through one established channel, agree
          to avoid informal back channels, and seek progressively to raise
          the level of those authorized officials. Each side will want to
          establish a bilateral process to manage the multiple bilateral
          incidents and problems such as arrested nationals and travel of
          Iranian diplomats at the UN. Iranian officials have underscored
          their reluctance to establish diplomatic relations for now since they
          have a long history of distrust for the purposes and activities of a
          US Embassy in Tehran.

    IV. HOW TO GET STARTED?

          A. The President must find a way to communicate directly
             with the Supreme Leader a US desire to open official talks.

                                                                              6




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015




            Further written communications     alone from the President will
            not persuade the Leader that the US is serious this time.
            Getting directly to the Leader with an oral message (perhaps
            confirmed by a non-paper), delivered at a very senior level, is
            important to get through despiteafound the intense internal
            political struggles in Tehran over relations with the US — and
            over who will rule Iran.

            The message to the Leader should declare that President
            Obama has designated his personal representative to conduct
            official discussions with a representative of the Supreme
            Leader. In a respectful tone the message should call for:

                   •        The avoidance of misunderstandings in the
                            Gulf, Afghanistan, Iraq or the Levant that
                            would lead to conflict.
                   •        Greater cooperation between these two
                            important states — the US and Iran - in the
                            Middle East.
                   •        Mutual recognition of the other's legitimate
                            interests in the area.
                   •        The beginning, without preconditions, of
                            discussions on cooperative steps on regional
                            and global problems.
                   •        Mutual recognition that both leaders of the US
                            and Iran have stated publicly their desire for a
                            world without nuclear weapons.
                   •        An understanding that the Leader's fatwa
                            against the building or use of nuclear weapons
                            could establish an excellent basis for
                            discussions with the aim of agreement for
                            greater IAEA access to Iran's nuclear program
                            to assure the world about Iran's nuclear
                            intentions and develop an arrangement
                            regarding enrichment.
                   •        Finally, an understanding of what types of
                            reciprocal actions might be undertaken by each
                            side to demonstrate the seriousness of this new
                            effort to work toward cooperation.


                                                                               7




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015




         B. Getting this message directly to the Supreme Leader is a
            major hurdle. We offer several possible approaches:
                   •      First. A senior US Government official,
                           perhaps the Secretary of State, would make an
                          oral presentation to the Iran's permanent
                          representative to the UN, who is the senior
                           Iranian official within reach and request that
                          the message get directly to the Supreme Leader.
                           This approach would have the advantage of not
                           appearing to bypass President Ahmadinejad
                           and provide an opportunity for the new Foreign
                           Minister Salehi to become a player. It would
                          have the disadvantage of throwing the message
                           into the middle of Iran's political disorder and
                           competitive environment where US
                          relationships have become a touchstone...
                   •       Second. A senior American, not a member of
                           the administration, could deliver this message
                           to a senior counterpart in Tehran. For example
                           Senator Kerry might meet with Larijani the
                           President of the Majlis. The advantage would
                           be that it would enable the President to have ,
                           deniability should this initial approach prove to
                           be unproductive or be rejected. But the
                           disadvantage is that it would bring in a key
                           player who is a strong competitor to
                           Ahmadinejad and perhaps not be seen as a
                           serious US Presidential initiative...
                   •       Third. A senior Envoy from the US or a Third
                           Country could take this message directly to
                           Ahmadinej ad, who claims to be the strongest
                           supporter of closer US/Iran contacts. The
                           advantage of this approach would be to engage
                           the second most important player in the Iranian
                           government. The disadvantages are that it
                           would enhance, at least temporarily,
                           Ahmadinejad's stature in Iran's governing
                           structure and open up even more open
                           opposition within Iran's power elite.


                                                                           8




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015




                   •       Fourth. A senior statesman from a third
                           country who has direct access to the Supreme
                           Leader could be asked to determine whether the
                           Leader would respond favorably to President
                           Obama's message. We have in mind someone
                           like Prime Minister Erdogan of Turkey, who is
                           one of the few statesmen who probably has
                           direct access to the Leader. There may well be
                           others in that category such as Oman. The
                           advantage of this approach is that Erdogan's
                           stature as an Islamic leader friendly to Iran
                           might make the message more credible to the
                           Leader. Another advantage would be that the
                           initial approach could be confidential and
                           provide some deniability for the President
                           should this approach sour or fail. The
                           disadvantage would be the involvement of a
                           third country national whose personal and
                           national prestige would become engaged and
                           raise the possibility that the President's
                           message to the Leader might be distorted or
                           misunderstood. The Iranians see Turkey in a
                           competitive and possibly disdainful light based
                           on a history with periods of confrontation and
                           tension.


         C. Should the initial approach to the Supreme Leader prove
            successful in setting up-initial discussions between
            designated envoys, one possible and ambitious route for the
            administration would be an agreement between President
            Obama and the Supreme Leader on a structure to manage
            the bilateral differences and promote the common interests.
            Such an agreement would provide clear direction to each
            government on establishing a new tone and spirit in conducting
            relations. It would also set the agenda for cooperation on a
            wide range of bilateral problems.
         D. The administration would need to develop a public
            diplomatic strategy in advance of the first meeting of
            empowered representatives to explain the objectives to the

                                                                         9




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015




             Congress, to our allies and friends and to the American
             people.

 Conclusion: We can give no assurances that any of these suggestions
 would work. We are convinced however that given the Iranian
 obsession about US regime change policies and the negative
 consequences for US interests of not changing the relationship, the US
 will have to take the lead in persuading the Supreme Leader and his
 advisers that the US generally seeks a new relationship.




                                                                          10




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773680 Date: 08/31/2015
