UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770302 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL



                 AF/PDPA 2010-2014 Organizational Development Plan

                                        Executive Summary

          To address concerns raised by the OIG in its August 2009 inspection report of the Africa
  Bureau, the Office of Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs (AF/PDPA) has engaged in an
  organizational development process. Over the past few months AF/PDPA has defined the
  philosophy, role, mission, audiences, core functions, and value added of public diplomacy and
  public affairs in the Africa Bureau and set goals and strategies for the AF/PDPA office to excel.

          The Department of State's expertise on public diplomacy programs and activities in
  Africa, on the regional African public and media context, and on the Department's engagement
  with the media and American audiences on African issues should reside in AF/PDPA.

          The mission of Africa Bureau (AF) public diplomacy and public affairs is to support the
  achievement of U.S. foreign policy goals and objectives, advance national interests, and enhance
  national security by understanding, engaging, informing and influencing the people of Africa and
  informing the people of the United States of America in order to create an enabling environment
  and strong relationships for a healthy, mutually-beneficial U.S.-African partnership.

          This four-year organizational development plan lays down specific goals, strategies and
  actions/changes that will facilitate the highest level of performance of the office's core functions,
  address the office's performance challenges, and take advantage of opportunities. Throughout
  this plan is an ongoing commitment by AF/PDPA personnel to a new approach to their work.
  The commitment is to increased initiative, more strategic thinking, more frequent and earlier
  engagement in policy-making processes, and a fuller understanding by every staff member of
  how his/her work contributes to the larger whole. Over the course of the next few months, the
  approach of each AF/PDPA staff member will change as will a number of roles and portfolios.
  This plan assumes that the rest of the AF Bureau not only will be receptive to these changes but
  also will pro-actively seek AF/PDPA expertise and collaboration as appropriate.

          The most visible outcome of this organizational development process will be the physical
  reorganization in the Africa Bureau. As soon as space is available, AF/PDPA will embed public
  diplomacy desk officers in the AF geographic offices. In order to make space available and to
  increase coordination among the bureau's functional offices, all of which do some engaging of
  civil society and private-sector audiences in the United States and in Africa, Assistant Secretary
  Carson has asked the bureau's executive office to conduct a full-bureau analysis of office space
  based on function, size and resource available. This analysis
  will inform the ultimate decisions as to who sits where.          "The U.S. must recognize the
                                                                     necessity of orchestrating
          However, the most significant outcome of this
  process will not be the shuffling of office space, but the         networks of public, private and
  results. The current AF/PDPA team is constantly short-             civic actors to address global
  staffed but at its core is an innovative, talented team of Civil   problems"
  and Foreign Service experts in engaging publics and the
  media and building long-term relationships for the United                       -- Anne-Marie Slaughter


        UNCLASSIFIED       June 18, 2010 AF/PDPA 2010-2014 Organizational Development Plan             1

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770302 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770302 Date: 08/31/2015




 States. With added expertise, further integration with the rest of the Bureau and a 21' century
 focus on networking, AF/PDPA will produce results: more effective public diplomacy in Africa
 and public affairs in the United States and better informed policy-making in Washington.

        AF/PDPA is adopting five major goals and will use seven cross-cutting strategies to
 achieve the goals by taking dozens of specific steps and actions.

 AF/PDPA Goals - By 2014:

    I.      AF/PDPA is valued for public diplomacy leadership in Africa and for public affairs
            leadership on Africa policy in the U.S.

   II.      Policy-making on Africa is informed by an understanding of public perspectives. State
            depends on AF/PDPA for expertise and advice on understanding, informing, engaging,
            and persuading publics in Africa and informing the U.S. public.

  III.      The conduct of public diplomacy in Africa and AF's public affairs in the U.S. is
            strengthened and enhanced via the achievement of specific, measurable public diplomacy
            and public affairs program objectives.

  IV.       AF attracts and retains a diverse, high-caliber public diplomacy and public affairs
            workforce.

   V.       Resources to engage publics in Africa and in America are sufficient and deployed in line
            with policy priorities.

 Strategies

     A. Address location and restructure to close access and communications gaps with AF,
        better support and guide the field, facilitate AF engagement with target domestic
        audiences, support expanding PD portfolios, make positions more desirable, and facilitate
        AF inter-office teamwork.

     B. Engage fully in AF policy-making processes, 'especially the paper process.

         C. Raise visibility of PD and PA work in AF.

     D. Build and retain expertise in the field and in AF/PDPA.

         E. Increase AF/PDPA networking and coalition building.

         F. Empower the field and AF/PDPA

         G. Align resources with policy priorities and stretch resources via partnerships with other
            USG, private, and non-profit organizations to maximize resource coordination on shared
            policy and program goals.

           UNCLASSIFIED      June 18, 2010 AF/PDPA 2010-2014 Organizational Development Plan           2

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770302 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770302 Date: 08/31/2015




 Actions to Achieve Both Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs Goals
    1. Engage more in the paper process (report more to the Front Office via DARs, Info
       Memos etc.)
    2. Increase administrative support to public affairs staff and cultural coordinator
    3. Retain special projects/assistant cultural affairs position
    4. AF Bureau BSRP includes public diplomacy and public affairs goal paper
    5. Increase coordination and clarify PDPA roles to AF functional offices
    6. Establish all-AF/PDPA electronic filing and contact systems
    7. Reconfigure media officer position to non-traditional media and outreach position
    8. New deputy PACO/special projects civil service position
    9. Pilot if appropriate: "Public Environment" issue paper for A/S and higher trips

  Public Diplomacy Actions
     1. PD desk officers develop PD, educational, cultural, media, and social networking
         expertise in portfolio countries
     2. Embed desk officer positions in geographic offices
     3. Improve support for first-time PAOs
     4. Meet Specific Public Diplomacy Program Objectives:
             a. Preserve current and establish new American Centers.
             b. Double PD training opportunities in Africa.
             c. FSO position at South Africa Media Hub
             d. PAOs at PD-transition posts.
             e. PILOT: Podcasting production capabilities at Public Affairs Sections in Africa.
             f. Nearly 100% increase in ACCESS scholarship students by 2014.
             g. Educational advisors at every embassy in AF.
             h. Double number of Regional English Language Officers to 4 by FY 2014.
             i. Pilot hand-held mobile devices for engagement/distribution of information.
     5. Streamline and improve results/impact and public environment reporting from the field
         (Embrace MAT)
     6. Annual AF PAO Conference in Washington, DC.
     7. MSRPs — PD included in all goal papers and specific PD goal paper
     8. Increase interagency coordination with an emphasis on Afi-icom and USAID
     9. AF/PDPA makes better use of public opinion polling/academic analysis and data on
         Africa
     10. Annual Franklin and/or Science & Technology Fellow in AF/PDPA
     11. Increase links to public-private partnerships
     12. Chief of Mission EERs include public affairs achievements

  Public Affairs Actions
     1. Increase strategic value of outreach to the Africa Bureau
     2. Enhance Diaspora Relations Coordination
     3. Restructure morning media clips
     4. Biweekly calendar of domestic outreach and media interviews
     5. PD-DAS takes on principal AF Bureau spokesperson role
     6. Internal marketing - update AF/PDPA information on State's internal websites



        UNCLASSIFIED      June 18, 2010 AF/PDPA 2010-2014 Organizational Development Plan         3

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770302 Date: 08/31/2015
