      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775305 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                   B6


From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Wednesday, March 31, 2010 11:47 AM
To:                                'cheryl.mills           millscd@state.gov'
Subject:                           Fw: FT re NSC




    Original Message
From: PIR
To: Evergreen
Subject: FT re NSC
Sent: Mar 31, 2010 11:02 AM

Sorry - the middle part most relevant to you was omitted from what I sent - here's the full article:



US Foreign Policy: Waiting on a Sun King By Edward Luce and Daniel Dombey Financial Times
Published: March 30 2010

For better or for worse, Washington has grown used to the fact that Barack Obama runs the most centralised — or
"White House-centric" — administration since Richard Nixon. When Nixon wanted foreign policy advice, everyone knew
where he got it from: Henry Kissinger, variously his national security adviser and secretary of state.

In contrast, Mr Obama has no big foreign policy strategist. Even insiders give different answers when asked to whom he
turns for advice on the big international questions. But almost all agree with the following observation. "The truth is that
President Obama is his own Henry Kissinger — no one else plays that role," says a senior official. "Every administration
reflects the personality of the president. This president wants all the trains routed through the Oval Office."

Fifteen months after he took office, the character and structure of Mr Obama's foreign policy machinery is still evolving.
But from interviews with dozens of insiders and outsiders, including senior officials both authorised and unauthorised to
speak, and three former national security advisers, it is clear the buck not only stops with, but often floats for quite a
long time around, Mr Obama himself.

Foreigners have complained about the tendency of his domestic agenda to crowd out the international one — the
passage last week of healthcare reform was greeted with an audible sigh of relief among US allies. But within foreign
policy itself, his centralised structure can also result in many issues being left on the back burner awaiting presidential
attention, say critics.

"On the positive side, we have a very conscientious president who takes advice widely," says the official. "On the debit
side, for all the president's intelligence, Barack Obama came to office with very little experience. He just doesn't have
much depth on some issues."

The core of Mr Obama's foreign policy machinery is in the White House-based National Security Council, which advises
the president and co-ordinates activities across an increasingly complex alphabet soup of Washington departments,
military commands and intelligence agencies. The most widely questioned link in the chain is Jim Jones, whom, to many
people's surprise, Mr Obama brought in as his national security adviser.

Only briefly acquainted with Mr Obama beforehand, General Jones, a retired four-star marine corps general, shows little
interest in running the "inter-agency" process — a key part of the job. Somewhat unconventionally, Gen Jones travels



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775305 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775305 Date: 08/31/2015



frequently and is thus often out of town. Unusually, it is Mr Obama himself who usually chairs the weekly National
Security Council, known as the "principals meeting", not Gen Jones.

Rahm Emanuel, Mr Obama's chief of staff, is also a key part of it. "If you were to ask me who the real national security
adviser is, I would say there were three or four, of whom Rahm is one and of which Gen Jones is probably the least
important," says another official.

Anyone who has dealt with Gen Jones speaks highly of his matter-of-factness, his geniality and the respect many foreign
governments have for him — Pakistan and Israel among them. But as he himself admitted rather disarmingly last year, he
does not have a taste for bureaucracy. Speaking at the Atlantic Council, a think-tank where he previously worked, Gen
Jones provoked laughter when he said: "I fondly remember [the Atlantic Council] as a place where people actually did
what you asked them to do. In my new role I'm finding out that an order is a basis for negotiation."



STATE AND DEFENCE DEPARTMENTS

An 'alliance of the unsackables' finds it can confront the inner circle

If there is a caveat to the depiction of the Obama administration as White House-centric, it is in the alliance between
Hillary Clinton and Robert Gates, the president's secretaries of state and defence.

Mrs Clinton has proved one of the surprises of Barack Obama's tenure, forging a strong working relationship with her
former rival and establishing herself as his chief foreign policy spokesperson internationally — if not at home, where Mr
Obama's inner circle often seems to monopolise the explaining.

Mr Gates, who recently decided to stay for at least another year, is seen as unsackable, not least for the credibility he
lends on issues ranging from missile defence to Guantanamo Bay and Afghanistan. As a holdover from the Bush
administration, his national security bona fides are hard to dispute. It is no coincidence that Mrs Clinton is probably the
only other unsackable cabinet member.

The combination has made itself felt in some of the administration's most significant debates, notably on Afghanistan,
where both successfully urged the deployment of more troops."

Gates and Clinton happen to like each other, which no one really predicted," says one official, who notes that while the
traditional role of the NSC is to "play referee" between the state and defence departments, it is as often nowadays a
combination of the two against the White House. This is very different from how it worked when Donald Rumsfeld and
Colin Powell held those positions."We work together well," Mr Gates said at an appearance with Mrs Clinton on CNN
last year. "I think it starts with, frankly, based on my experience, the secretary of defence being willing to acknowledge
that the secretary of state is the principal spokesperson for United States foreign policy."

Their outlooks often overlap. From the Pentagon, Mr Gates has long called for more US spending on diplomacy. As chief
diplomat, Mrs Clinton has adopted a muscular approach. On Iran, both favour tough sanctions; on Russia, both have
sought to reassure Moscow's neighbours even while improving relations with the Kremlin.

But for all their workmanlike co-operation, there is no escaping the fact that Mrs Clinton is not part of the Obama inner
circle — a traditionally helpful feature in that job. There is also a constant "residue of friction" between Mr Obama's and
Mrs Clinton's teams, according to insiders. For example, Cheryl Mills, Mrs Clinton's chief of staff, has had several run-ins
with others in the administration.

One official describes Mrs Clinton as "totally loyal" to Mr Obama. He adds: "She and the president are not the best of
friends — how could they be? But she totally respects the presidency — she was married to a president and she wanted to
be one... She still might be."



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775305 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775305 Date: 08/31/2015



The lack of a strong national security adviser has created recurring difficulties. Perhaps the best example is the Arab-
Israeli peace process, which Mr Obama launched on his second day in office when he appointed George Mitchell as his
envoy. Three months later, Mr Obama insisted Benjamin Netanyahu freeze all settlements activity in order to boost Arab
confidence in the talks.

In a heated showdown in the Oval Office last May, in which Mr Netanyahu refused to accede to Mr Obama's demand,
the only officials present were Mr Emanuel and David Axelrod, senior adviser to Mr Obama in office and during the
campaign. Gen Jones was not there. The fallout put the talks in abeyance and damped high Arab hopes for Mr Obama.

"The question is, which bright spark advised the president to demand a settlements freeze without working out what
the next step should be when Netanyahu inevitably said 'No'?" says Leslie Gelb, an official in the Carter administration
and former head of the Council on Foreign Relations. "Why wasn't George Mitchell in the room? Where was Jones?"Mr
Obama's character is also stamped on the inter-agency process, set up and managed by Tom Donilon, deputy national
security adviser. The nitty-gritty of foreign policy-making is done at these frequent "deputies' meetings", which can
sometimes consume four to six hours a day.

Described by one insider as "the most powerful man in the White House whose name isn't widely known", Mr Donilon,
who was an official in the Clinton administration, is the man who keeps Mr Obama's trains running on time. And there
are a lot of trains. Last year, Mr Donilon held 270 deputies meetings — a workload described as "clinically insane" by a
former senior diplomat under Bill Clinton.

But as time goes on, it is becoming streamlined — now taking up roughly two to three hours a day, say officials. "People
forget that we inherited two wars, terrorism threats, and perhaps the biggest single eight-year decline [George
W. Bush's two terms] in America's power and reputation in our history," says a senior official. "It took time to put in
place a process that could deal with the very complex decisions we had to take."

Also the organiser of Mr Obama's 9.30am national security briefing, Mr Donilon reinstated the paper trails needed to
prevent intra-governmental anarchy, using the model de-vised by Brent Scowcroft, national se-curity adviser to George
Bush senior and Gerald Ford. Vice-president Joe Biden's team was also incorporated to prevent the kind of "parallel
process" Dick Cheney used to circumvent the bureaucracy under George W. Bush.

"If you look for the 2002 or 2003 meeting where the decision to go to war in Iraq was taken, you cannot find it," says the
senior official. "By getting the process right, we are improving the quality of decisions."

The deputies' ties go back years. For example, the families of Mr Donilon and Jim Steinberg, deputy secretary of state,
often go on holiday together. Mr Donilon's wife, Cathy Russell, is chief of staff to Jill Biden, the vice-president's wife. Mr
Steinberg's wife, Sherburne Abbott, is deputy to John Holdren, Mr Obama's chief scientific adviser.

All those who regularly attend, including Michele Flournoy, a senior Pentagon official, and Susan Rice, the US
ambassador to the United Nations, have known each other since at least 1993, when they started off in the Clinton
administration. This is just as well, since they spend half their lives together:

"A lot of work gets done in that group," says Ms Flournoy. "Sometimes it feels like shovelling coal to keep the fires
going."

The refurbished machinery was perhaps most in evidence during the build-up to Mr Obama's decision in December to
send another 30,000 US troops to Afghanistan — a journey that took four months and involved him in 40 hours of Oval
Office meetings.

But the very diligence of the process crowded out Mr Obama's time to focus on other crises — of which there are many.
"Time is the most precious commodity a president has," says a for-mer national security ad-viser.

 "On average he is only going to have 45 minutes a day for foreign policy, so you want to make sure it is well spent."

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775305 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775305 Date: 08/31/2015




The widely expected departure of Gen Jones before the end of the year has also created rivalries within the engine
room. Those who are thought to have ambitions to replace him include Mr Steinberg, Ms Rice, Mr Donilon and Denis
McDonough, NSC chief of staff and the foreign policy official who is personally closest to Mr Obama. Although all are
widely respected, none is considered a big strategic thinker in the Kissinger or Scowcroft mould.

Described by Mr Gelb as Mr Obama's "Lord High Executioner", Mr McDonough "has appended himself to the Chicago
crowd", says another official. Mr McDonough's widely feared role highlights some of the contradictions of Mr Obama's
foreign policy apparatus.

Once an adviser to former Senate majority leader Tom Daschle, Mr McDonough was frequently at Mr Obama's side
during the campaign. Insiders describe him as the "en-forcer" and as the keeper of "message discipline", a key element
of any campaign but something that can drastically slow the wheels of government.

"McDonough is the guy from the campaign and the one who plays basketball with the president — they're very close,"
says an official. "Instead of Jim Jones telling McDonough what the president thinks, it is the other way round."

Indeed, if Mr Obama's highly centralised foreign policy machine had a face, it would be Mr McDonough's. "Donilon has
been perceived to make the process inclusive and give everyone a seat at the table," says David Rothkopf, a former
Clinton official and scholar on the NSC. "Fairly or not, McDonough has been perceived as representing a process that
was taking place in another room, among the inner circle, at a table to which most weren't invited."Mr Obama has built
a machine in which all roads lead to and from him. On the minus side, that means a lot of lower-level meetings without
decisions. It also means neglecting issues that cannot be squeezed into his diary, such as trade policy, which continues to
drift; or relations with India, which are unnecessarily tense.

And it means that the fingerprints of Mr Obama's political inner circle are detected by the rumour mill even when they
are absent, such as on the president's decision to begin the troop withdrawal from Afghanistan in July 2011 — a
recommendation that came from Robert Gates, secretary of defence.

On the plus side, Mr Obama has a sharp learning curve, which means his administration continues to evolve. On the plus
side also, if it has to be White House-centric, it is perhaps better with him as the Sun King than, say, Nixon or George W.
Bush."At the end of each meeting, the president summarises what everyone has said and the arguments each has made
with a real lawyer's clarity," says a participant to the NSC principals meeting, which includes Mr Gates and Mrs Clinton.
"When the president finally makes a decision, it is with the full facts and usually shows a high calibre of judgment."

When Mr Obama makes a decision, that is.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775305 Date: 08/31/2015
