      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771192 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                       B6


From:                              sbwhoeop
Sent:                              Wednesday, September 1, 2010 9:24 AM
To:
Subject:                           fyi, it's the economy, any gesture to reverse this... Sid




http://www.ft.com/cms/s/5799a774-b534-11df-9af8-00144feabdc0,dwp_uuid=236ce648-33fa-11da-adae-
00000e2511c8,print=yes.html


Financial Times FT.com
r.
     OLUMNISTS


JVlartin Wolf

Obama was too cautious in fearful times
By Martin Wolf
Published: Au• ust 31 2010 22:48 j Last updated: August 31 2010 22:48




Suppose that the US presidential election of 1932 had, in fact, taken place in 1930, at an early stage in the Great
Depression. Suppose, too, that Franklin Delano Roosevelt had won then, though not by the landslide of 1932. How
different subsequent events might have been. The president might have watched helplessly as output and employment
collapsed. The decades of Democratic dominance might not have happened.
On such chances the wheel of history turns. But this time was different: the crisis brought Barack Obama to power close
to the beginning of the economic collapse. I (among others) then argued that policy needed to be hugely aggressive. Alas,
it was not. I noted on February 4 2009, at the beginning of the new presidency: "Instead of an overwhelming fiscal
stimulus, what is emerging is too small, too wasteful and too ill-focused." A week later, I asked: "Has Barack Obama's
presidency already failed? In normal times, this would be a ludicrous question. But these are not normal times. They are
times of great danger. Today, the new US administration can disown responsibility for its inheritance; tomorrow, it will own
it. Today, it can offer solutions; tomorrow it will have become the problem. Today, it is in control of events; tomorrow,
events will take control of it. Doing too little is now far riskier than doing too much." This was right.
The direction of policy was not wrong: policymakers — though not all economists — had learnt a great deal from the 1930s.
Sensible people knew that aggressive monetary and fiscal expansion was needed, together with reconstruction of the
financial sector.
But, as Larry Summers, Mr Obama's chief economic adviser, had said: "When markets overshoot, policymakers must
overshoot too". Unfortunately, the administration failed to follow his excellent advice. This has allowed opponents to claim
 that policy has been ineffective when it has merely been inadequate.
In consequence, the administration has lost credibility with the public and the chances of a renewed fiscal expansion have
 disappeared. With the Federal Reserve cautious, too, the likelihood of a lengthy period of weak growth and heavy
joblessness is high. So, too, are the chances of domestic and global political friction.
 True, the idea that the policies adopted in the last few months of the Bush administration and the first months of this one
 were far better than nothing is weirdly controversial in the US. A recent paper by Alan Blinder, former vice-chairman of the
 Fed, and Mark Zandi of Moody's argues that such critics are wrong. They use a standard macro-economic model to
 assess what would have happened without any intervention, without the financial interventions (including monetary policy)
 and without the fiscal action. They conclude that the peak to trough decline in gross domestic product would have been
 close to 12 per cent with no policy response, compared to an actual decline of just 4 per cent (see chart). Similarly, the
 unemployment rate would have peaked at 16.5 per cent, instead of the actual 10 per cent. The bigger collapse would also
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771192 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771192 Date: 08/31/2015



have meant a fiscal deficit of $2,600bn in fiscal year 2011. The outcome is also disastrous with the modest fiscal response
but no financial •olic res•onse. It is a little better the other way round.




The implication that the modest stimulus package of February 2009 — a mere 5.7 per cent of 2009 GDP, spread over
several years — made a positive contribution is supported by the analysis of the Congressional Budget Office: it argues
that in 2010, US GDP will be between 1.5 per cent and 4.1 per cent higher and the unemployment rate between 0.7 and
1.8 percentage points lower, as a result of the package.
Panglossians who believe the private economy is always in equilibrium, unless governments intervene, disagree. I wish
there were some way to run this experiment without hurting hundreds of millions of people. But I find the idea that allowing
the collapse of much of the financial system, avoiding unconventional monetary policy and struggling to close the fiscal
deficit would have been consistent with a more rapid and sustained recovery quite bizarre.
A fascinating perspective does come, however, from comparisons with what happened in other advanced countries. The
recession in US output (and so demand) has been relatively small, but the decline in employment has been exceptionally
large, as a result of an extraordinary surge in US productivity (see charts). This contrast between what would happen to
output and what would happen to employment was missed in the initial Congressional Budget Office analysis of the
stimulus.
Since the US was the epicentre of the financial crisis, the relatively small decline in output is remarkable. Moreover, since
fiscal and monetary stimuli bear directly on demand and output, not jobs, this is a policy success. At the same time, the
enthusiasm with which US managers laid off workers is also extraordinary. No doubt, some of this is due to the collapse in
construction. But some of it must be due to the ease with which US companies can lay off workers and the incentives for
managers to maintain profits in a downturn at the expense of jobs.
Debate is emerging on how much of the surge in unemployment is structural. My answer, from European experience, is
that one way to ensure it becomes structural is to let it linger. In the short run, the simplest way to prevent that from
happening is to expand demand and so output. Since there is huge slack in the labour market, not the slightest threat of
inflation — far more a risk of deflation — and no constraint from bond or foreign exchange markets on further monetary and
fiscal stimulus, these are the policies that have to be pursued. Yet, alas, the Fed seems to have decided to fall asleep and
the administration has lost the initiative.
So what is going to happen? I assume that, after the midterm elections, resurgent Republicans will offer new tax cuts and
ignore the fiscal deficits. They will pretend that this has nothing to do with any reviled stimulus, though it is much the same
thing — increasing fiscal deficits, thereby offsetting private frugality. That would put the administration on the spot. It would
have to choose between vetoing the tax cuts and accepting them, so allowing the Republicans to get the credit for their
"yacht and mansion-led" recovery. Any recovery is better than none. But it could have been much better than this. Those
who were cautious when they should have been bold will pay a big price.
 martin.wolf@ft.com
 More columns at www.ft.com/martinwolf
 Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2010. Print a single copy of this article for personal use. Contact us if you wish to
 print more to distribute to others.

                  "FT" and "Financial Times" are trademarks of the Financial Times. Privacy policy I Terms
                                          Copyright The Financial Times Ltd 2010.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771192 Date: 08/31/2015
