  UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766494 Date: 08/31/2015




                                  INNOVIDA - HAITI RELIEF EFFORT                              RELEASE
                                                                                              IN FULL
                                        PLEDGE OF 1,000 HOMES


InnoVida Holdings, LLC has pledged to donate 1,000 houses to Haiti. The Houses will be configured as
1Bed/lBath and 2Bed/1Bath — with floor plans ranging from 155 sqft to 300 sqft respectively. Houses are wind
and earthquake resistant (see specifications bellow).


InnoVida is currently in the process of partnering with different non-profit organizations that will assist us in this
endeavor (Among them World Vision http:fiwww.worldvision.org and Medishare http://projectmedishare.org )

We expect to have a first assessment of the situation by the beginning of February, including identifying possible
locations and the short-term requirements for buildings and housing needs. To this effect a delegation from
InnoVida will travel to Haiti on Saturday, Jan. 30th to meet with local authorities and NGO's local staff.


Our plans are to send the first structures during the course of the next three to four weeks. Presently, we believe
that we will initially send structures for hospitals and/or shelters as well as schools.


InnoVida will follow the construction guidelines established by the Haiti Recovery Team that is now in formation.
It is too early for us to have a design and a master plan of the exact type of house or where it would be built in the
country.


InnoVida will be ready to start shipping the first batch of 150 houses 30 days after a design is approved.


For the last six months, InnoVida has been planning the installation of manufacturing plan in Haiti. After the
earthquake, this plan has become a top priority, due to the housing needs in the country. This factory will also
create a significant amount of new jobs. We are actively seeking to have the factory installed and running in the
next 4 to 6 months.


INNOVIDA: An Ideal Housing Solution for Haiti


InnoVida is a U.S. company that manufactures building solutions which bridge the gap between energy efficiency,
affordability and high quality. Using its proprietary technology we manufacture Fiber Composite Panels (FCPs),
which are used to build houses, offices, schools, warehouses, medical centers, manufactured, modular, and
mobile homes, etc. without the use of cement, steel or wood and with significant savings in cost to build, time to
build and energy cost to operate.


1nnoVida's FCP is a load bearing insulating panel system with structural skins made of high-strength E-Glass fiber
fabrics impregnated with a fire-resistant polymeric epoxy resin and a core made of a construction foam material.
The end result of this combination is that FCP construction is a stronger and better way to build. The versatility of
the material and the advanced technology applied allows the construction of a complete structure from
foundation to roof. The building components include composite structural insulated panels that can be used to
manufacture exterior walls, interior walls, beams, columns, profiles, and roofing. InnoVida's FCPs' inherent
characteristics make them a better building alternative.


  UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766494 Date: 08/31/2015
  UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766494 Date: 08/31/2015




Inn°Vida Structures are:

   I> Built Fast — Structures built with InnoVidaPanels can be built one third faster than conventional building
       construction. These structures do not require heavy equipment and nominal skilled labor is required
       Earthquake Resistant — FCPs have a high deflection capacity of 20% compared to the traditional 5%
       before they reach their breaking point. Also, due to the lightweight nature of the FCP, any structurally
       damage that may occur will be much less harmful to the occupant than with traditional materials.
   •    Hurricane Resistant — The Wall Panel and Roof Panel were tested and approved for wind speeds above
       156 mph.

       Waterproof — Does not provide a food source for algae and mold.

   1> Fire Resistant — The Panel skins will not support combustion. Also, the chemicals released from fuel-fed
       fires held against the building surface are not poisonous to humans.

   •    Low Maintenance — Does not provide a living environment for termites or rodents and has a long life
       span.

   I> Energy Efficient — InnoVida's FCP has an R-value of 5.88 per inch with a total tested wall R-value of 14.6
        for the 2.5 inch Panel and 23.7 for the 4 inch Panel. The insulative core significantly reduces the amount
        of energy needed to heat and/or cool and provides excellent noise reduction.

    f> A Greener Alternative — Our products and processes are much less detrimental to the environment than
        conventional construction by producing very little construction-site waste, air pollution, and natural
        resource consumption.

    i> Limitless Architectural and Aesthetic Bounds — FCPs can be curved into any shape and be finished with
        any desired option (stone, stucco, paint, wallpaper, etc.).


InnoVida is committed to the Haiti Relief Effort. With our donation of 1,000 homes and the installation of a local
FCP manufacturing facility we hope to provide jobs as well as housing to thousands of Haitians with the greater
hope of assisting in the full developing, rebuilding and modernizing of the country.


For more information, visit our website at             wwwinnoVida.com or call +1-786-837-7200




  UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766494 Date: 08/31/2015
