      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769938 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                              B6




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Tuesday, June 22, 2010 9:45 AM
To:
Subject:                           FW: Syria Trip in the San Francisco Chronicle




From: Cohen, Jared A
Sent: Tuesday, June 22, 2010 8:32 AM
To: Slaughter, Anne-Marie; Chollet, Derek H; Burns, William 3; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob 3;
Jentleson, Bruce W; Ross, Alec 3; Crowley, Philip 3; Djerassi, Alexander M
Subject: Fw: Syria Trip in the San Francisco Chronicle

Fyi



Jared Cohen
Policy Planning Staff
Office of the Secretary of State
U.S. Department of State
Office Tel: 202-647-0531
Cell:
Twitter

This email is unclassified



From: Jared Cohen
To: Cohen, Jared A; alec.ross
Sent: Tue Jun 22 08:23:49 2010
Subject: Syria Trip in the San Francisco Chronicle

hay: //tinvurl.com/ 2afxnif

Bay Area execs seek to open doors with Syria
Andrew S. Ross
Sunday, June 20, 2010




Call it a dual purpose mission, with pretty high stakes.

Bay Area executives fromCisco Systems Inc.,Symantec Corp. andVeriSign Inc. returned Friday
from a trip to Syria, where they were tasked by the Obama administration with helping open business
and diplomatic doors to a member of what used to be called the "axis of evil."

Were the doors flung open to a country with whom U.S. businesses are still mostly forbidden to trade?


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769938 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769938 Date: 08/31/2015




Not exactly, given that Internet freedom, transparency, the elimination of corruption and a general
opening up, Syrian leaders were told, are among the sine qua non for getting them what they say they
want - U.S. businesses and investment there.

"Candid" was a word used by one delegation member to describe the four days of talks last week in
Damascus and Aleppo, a commercial center and Syria's largest city. "They provided a lot of clarity for
both sides. On our side, how receptive the Syrians are to U.S. companies doing business there, and for
the Syrians, what they need to do to get things going," said the delegation member, who agreed to
speak only on background.

The delegation, which also included senior executives fromMicrosoft Corp. andDell Inc., was led
byAlec Ross, Secretary of StateHillary Rodham Clinton's senior adviser for innovation,
andJared Cohen, a member of Clinton's policy planning staff.

There were sit-downs with Syrian PresidentBashar Assadand other government ministers and
meetings with business leaders, including those in the country's nascent high-tech sector, along with
students, academics and leaders of civic and social organizations.

Laying down the conditions:Unlike most U.S. companies, Cisco, Symantec and the other high-
tech firms on the trip are allowed to do business in Syria under a waiver granted, under certain
conditions, to U.S. information technology companies.

According to Syria's state news agency, Sana, "the American executives discussed setting up
authorized centers for (their) companies in Syria."

But in meeting after meeting, according to the delegate, the executives said there were too many
barriers to entry, including Internet access, which Clinton has said is a key plank of U.S. foreign
policy.

"They can't do business in a place that is not open," was the message, according to the delegate.
(While Syria remains a member in good standing of the axis of authoritarians, some of the same
concerns could be raised about countries these companies do conduct business with - like, dare we
say, China).

The Syrian government said it was considering a law that would require that the blocking of Web sites
- a common, often arbitrary and unpredictable happening there - be at least subject to judicial review.

"Now, we have to wait and see what the government does," the delegate said.

In an earlier statement about the trip, Symantec said it was also designed to help the Obama
administration's "effort to continue strengthening diplomatic relations throughout the Middle East."
That also remains to be seen.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769938 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769938 Date: 08/31/2015




It's not the first time the administration, responding to come-hither hints from Damascus, has, like
Charlie Brown, teed up the football, only to have it snatched away, Lucy-style, as Syria got cold and
persisted in allying itself with U.S. archenemy Iran.

Obama, announcing the renewal of sanctions on Syria last month, cited the country's "continuing
support for terrorist organizations and pursuit of weapons of mass destruction and missile programs,
(which) continue to pose an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy
and economy of the United States."

Opportunities in the sand:Meanwhile,Robert Ludden, chief operating officer of San
Francisco'sKMD Architects, is back in the Middle East seeking more business, particularly in
Dubai, Abu Dhabi and Saudi Arabia.

Recently Ludden nailed down the firm's first prime contract there, as designer of the $15 million
Imperial College of London diabetes center in Abu Dhabi, a showpiece facility for a disease that is
surprisingly prevalent in the region.

He sees the Middle East as a growing market for architects and designers, as a number of countries
there, especially the desert kingdoms, are seeking to develop sustainable communities.

"Saudi Arabia is the next big one," Ludden says.

Going global:TheBay Area Councilofficially opened its first "overseas global office" on Friday, in
Shanghai.

The office, located in Shanghai's Knowledge and Innovation Community, is meant to serve as a
gateway service for Bay Area companies looking to set up in China, as well as "guiding Chinese
companies and investment to the Bay Area."

Next up for a global office, the council says: India.

Blogging at sfgate.com/columns/bottomline. Facebook page at sfg.ly/doACKM. Tweeting
@andrewsross. E-mailbottomline@sfchronicle.com.
http://sfgate.com/cdi-bin/article.coi?f=/c/a/2010/06/20/BUOViEOPLD.DTL

This article appeared on pageD - lof the SanFranciscoChronicle




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769938 Date: 08/31/2015
