UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776492 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                          RELEASE IN FULL




                                          CONFIDENTIAL



     For: Hillary
     From: Sid
     Re: Kyrgyzstan crisis, report and recommendations


     Scott Horton has just returned from a week in Kyrgyzstan, where he held lengthy private
     conversations with a range of leaders. He has sent me his confidential report. In light of
     the crisis there—the pogroms that have created perhaps as many as 450,000 refugees,
     according to the U.N.—and on the eve of the June 27 constitutional referendum—he
     explains. why and how this is an opportunity for joint U.S.-Russian action and other U.S.
     initiatives. His policy recommendations follow his report.


     To:     Sid Blumenthal

     From: Scott Horton

     Date: June 17, 2010

     Subj: Developments in Kyrgyzstan



     I was in Kyrgyzstan from June 1– 6, during which time I met with almost all the
     members of the interim government, with special focus on foreign relations, security and
     legal issues. Here are major points that emerged from my visit:

      1. Crisis in the South. Although I departed before the pogroms had commenced in Osh,
      I found that the interim government fully expected violence to break out there but did not
      anticipate the inter-ethnic element. Several candidly acknowledged that the
      government's grip on the south, particularly Osh and Djalalabad provinces, was
      extremely tenuous. They said they had severe "loyalty" problems with key figures in the
      police and military. When I pressed on what they meant by "loyalty," I was told that the
      Bakiyev family had "its people" in key positions in the police and army and that they had
      intercepted communications between Janysh Bakiyev and a number of key security
      officers in the south. "Something is being planned to disrupt the referendum," I was told.
      Beknazarov told me he believed that, following the pattern of the last two revolutions,



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776492 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776492 Date: 08/31/2015




     they anticipated that there would be an attack on administrative offices in the south,
     following quickly within a few days by attacks in Bishkek. Government leaders I spoke
     with over the weekend told me they now recognize they had misassessed the data they
     had, that the Bakiyev plan was obviously to instigate inter-ethnic violence.

     Precisely what led to the tragedy in and around Osh is still unclear and requires careful
     investigation, but people I have spoken with in Osh describe police and army leaders
     directing the pogroms, and they were able to identify some of these individuals as
     persons close to the Bakiyevs. Moreover, the timing and some of the specific
     descriptions of events support this thesis—Bakiyev was the only person who clearly had
     something to gain from the violence. If that is so, then Bakiyev adopted an extremely
     cynical, indeed criminal strategy. His objectives would have been to derail the
     referendum, demonstrate the weakness of the interim government, and fuel calls for an
     iron-fisted central government through the resurrection of his presidency. The tactics
     used bear comparison with those used by Slobodan Milosevia and Radovan Karathle as
     Yugoslavia disintegrated or by the Soviet MVD in the waning days of the Soviet empire
     in programs like "Operation Koltso." If the government's charges bear out, serious
     crimes were committed by the Bakiyev faction.

     While Otunbayeva publicly states that order has been restored in the south and that
     foreign intervention is no longer needed, I am not persuaded that this is what she actually
     thinks. She is anxious to build public confidence in her government and its abilities.
     Confidentially she acknowledges that the interim government's grip over the situation in
     the south is extremely weak and that the government does not feel it can necessarily
     count on the local police and military there, whose loyalties are plainly divided. This in
     turn suggests that the international community should give active consideration to both
     the humanitarian and the security dimensions of the situation in the south. My sense
     remains that Otunbayeva would strongly welcome such an initiative.

     2. Internal Workings of the Interim Government. The interim government verges on
     being completely dysfunctional. It operates as a collection of individual fiefdoms, with
     leaders engaged in constant squabbles over patronage appointments. Career civil service
     personnel report being terrorized and extorted. I spent the better part of three days inside
     the current government headquarters on Staraya Ploshchod and was able to directly
     observe primitive horse-trading, threats and counterthreats between key government
     functionaries, sometimes in agitated voices. Roza Otunbayeva and a handful of figures
     closest to her were exceptions in this process—admonishing others about the
     unseemliness of their conduct, urging moderation and. restraint. But Otunbayeva also
     acknowledges that the limitations on her own authority and states that she "has to put up
     with it," at least for the moment. Three government members advised me during
     meetings of their intention to resign before the end of the month in order to start running
     for parliament. Significantly, I sense sharp rifts within the government—between
     Atembayev and Beknazarov, for instance, who could not refrain from criticizing one
     another in my interviews with them, or between Sariyev and Beknazarov.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776492 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776492 Date: 08/31/2015




     Only Otunbayeva (and to a lesser extent her close ally Elmira Ibraimova) appear to be the
     glue that holds things together, commanding the respect of the other government
     members. I found that the admiration for Otunbayeva was almost universal—she appears
     to be the only figure in the government emerging from the interim period with an
     untarnished reputation. Still the special order under which she has assumed power as
     "president of the interim government" presents some clear problems for her authority.
     She has a fixed term into 2011, but she will have no democratic mandate. After the new
     government is formed, based on the parliamentary elections, they will have democratic
     legitimacy and she will not—this sets up a situation in which her authority may well be
     eclipsed or at least made more narrow. Still, all the members of the current government
     recognize that she has essential skills that they do not—particularly her ability to
     conciliate and her ability to reach out to other leaders on the international stage.

     There is an expectation that the parliamentary elections will result in a weeding out of the
     government. The next government is expected to be formed through a parliamentary
     coalition. But only two or perhaps three of the current seven factions will survive. Much
     of the bickering and instability in the current government is keyed to the coming game of
     parliamentary moving chairs—there is an intense struggle now to secure personal loyalty
     and funds to use in the parliamentary elections; the entire process has an aura of sink or
     swim about it. Ironically the immediate prospect of parliamentary elections and the sense
     that they will be genuinely open and fair thus contributes to the ineptness and near
     chaotic appearance of the current government.

     3. Constitution and Referendum. Under the guidance of Tekebayev, the government
     put forward a proposed new constitution, which it seeks to have confirmed through a
     referendum vote on June 27. The constitution itself does shift the country further in the
     direction of a parliamentary democracy, and it contains unusual protection for
     parliamentary minority factions. Government leaders told me that Kazakh president
     Nursultan Nazarbayev had waded in on the question of the constitution directly, pressing
     them to retain a "strong president" system. They say this was coupled with not-very-
     subtle threats, and that the frontier between Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan remains closed,
     with harmful consequences for the Kyrgyz economy. A major question exists about
     holding the referendum as scheduled. The events in the south have resulted in the mass
     displacement of population and if held as planned, a large part of the population in the
     south would probably be disenfranchised. However, government leaders say that their
     current problems all come back to legitimacy, and they will not be able to form a
     government with democratic legitimacy without a new constitution and new elections.
     Accordingly, they resist any further delays and are even contemplating moving the date
     of the parliamentary election forward to the last week of August (it is now set for October
     10). The crisis in the south presents a severe dilemma in this regards, and it seems that
     this would have been Bakiyev's objective in instigating it, if indeed he did.

     4. Manas Transit Center. As expected, I discovered that the interim government is
     deeply fragmented on the question of MTC. One faction headed by Otunbayeva favors a
     "pragmatic solution" to the base issue under which it will be continued but placed on a
     more transparent basis in which the economic benefits to the government are clear.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776492 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776492 Date: 08/31/2015




     Otunbayeva argues that the base can only be accepted under circumstances in which it
     presents no friction for Kyrgyz-Russian relations; she seeks to have disputes surrounding
     fuel supply, for instance, resolved directly between the United States and Russia.
     Another faction, headed by Beknazarov, takes a more demagogic approach, denouncing
     the base and seeking its closing in internal meetings. Talking with Beknazarov, I had the
     clear impression that his attitudes were entirely opportunistic—he thinks this will be a
     good campaign issue to use on the hustings. He suggested rather strongly that he could
     accept a continued base presence under the right circumstances and that he views threats
     to close the base as a sort of stick to use to extort more money and other concessions
     from the Americans. In general, Beknazarov strikes me as hot-headed and crass and an
     untrustworthy partner in any future discussions. Atembayev also has somewhat
     demagogic impulses, though they are mild by comparison. Otunbayeva, the third and
     most senior member of the government engaged on base issues, is the critical voice of
     reason in the process. My impression based on discussions with numerous figures is that
     Otunbayeva's views currently hold sway. However, all the government members are
     agreed that the economic deal struck by Bakiyev is unfavorable to the Kyrgyz state and
     that the base must rest on transparent economic concessions and there can be no more
     under-the-table dealings with political figures.

     5. Resolving the Crisis in the South. I believe that two key points should be kept in
     mind when approaching the humanitarian crisis that has emerged in the south. First, the
     crisis probably has its origins in a raw struggle for power. The interim government's
     legitimacy deficit contributed to the problem, because it left the government with weak
     tools to control the situation in the south. A long-term solution to the problem must
     involve the creation of governments at the national (Bishkek) and regional (Osh,
     Djalalabad) levels that have an essential modicum of democratic legitimacy. Delaying
     this process may only hasten the entire country's continued descent into chaos. This
     highlights the need to conduct free, fair and open elections as quickly as possible.
     Second, the last thing the interim government needs is a "Sophie's choice" between the
     United States and Russian Federation. International assistance needs to reflect a joint
     U.S.-Russian approach and showcase U.S. and Russian leadership (not merely
     participation). With President Medvedev's visit to the White House now on the horizon,
     this would be a good opportunity to establish joint sponsorship of an international
     humanitarian initiative. Here, I believe, are the essential elements of a program that
     could achieve U.S.-Russian co-sponsorship:

             An Appeal for Restraint: Although the instigation of the conflict appears clearly
     to rest with ethnic Kyrgyz agitators, including a number in uniform and operating
     military equipment, at present both Uzbek and Kyrgyz armed groups are involved in
     random shootings designed to reinforce perceptions of their group being persecuted
     (rapes etc.) by another. Credible reports are suggesting that there has been political
     manipulation (including payment of money to drug and other criminal gangs) aimed at
     fomenting violence. The attack on a sports facility set up by a prominent Uzbek drug
     baron (murdered several years earlier) in Osh shortly before the violence started also
     suggests that criminal gangs involved in drug transshipment had another motivation for
     engaging in the violence. It may be that the violence was an initiative of the deposed




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776492 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776492 Date: 08/31/2015




     president, but once it began, it provided cover for numerous incidents of score-settling
     and criminal mischief. In these circumstances, a strong appeal for restraint is appropriate
     and martial law rules including curfews may legitimately be imposed by the interim
     government. An imprimatur of support from the international community would help
     establish the authority of the interim government in this process.

     •       Exit Corridors for Civilians: Civilians who feel threatened must be allowed to
     leave the high risk zones, and access of humanitarian aid, and creation of a safe zone for
     humanitarian operation should be priorities at locations created to shelter them. The EU,
     OSCE and UN issued a statement on June 16 calling for a humanitarian corridor in the
     southern regions of Osh and Jalalabad provinces, as well as of ensuring the equitable
     distribution of humanitarian aid among those in need. The cooperation of the Uzbek
     government may be particularly important in this process.

     •       Peacekeeping/Policing Operation: The international community should support
     special arrangements with broad international legitimacy and participation to enhance
     peacekeeping and police operations in the affected area. As I noted, even though
     Otunbayeva made a public statement on June 15 to the effect that foreign military/police
     intervention was no longer needed, the situation remains precarious and in her
     confidential discussions Otunbayeva acknowledges the benefits in confidence building
     that would emerge from an qualified, professional and international presence in the
     region. Peacekeeping/policing operations should at a minimum include security for
     designated sheltering areas for refugees and internally displaced persons and monitoring
     operations in tandem with local police and military, to build confidence in their protective
     functions.

     •       Investigation of Events: a broad, credible, independent investigation should be
     undertaken into the events and their origin. The investigation should be under the aegis
     of an international organization, such as the Security Council or OSCE and it should be
     conducted by an individual of stature with strong credentials as a fact-finder and
     prosecutor. The investigation should particularly take cognizance of accusations that
     crimes against humanity were perpetrated, potentially including crimes of genocide. The
     involvement of persons exercising ostensible government authority—policemen, military
     figures, leaders of the civil administration—should be given special scrutiny in this
     process. The person commissioned to handle the investigation should be specifically
     empowered to recommend criminal charges be brought against individuals identified in
     his investigation—either by the criminal authorities of the Kyrgyz Republic or before an
     international body seized of proper jurisdiction.

             Effective Post-Conflict Reconstruction. UN authorities are estimating that as
     many as 450,000 persons may have been displaced by the current violence. The
     devastation in central Osh and in numerous villages is reported to be near total. There
     will be an intense housing shortage and a crisis with respect to food supply and
     healthcare. The international community under United States and Russian leadership
     should provide generous support to jumpstart the reconstruction process, prioritizing its
     assistance to benefit those most egregiously injured by the violence.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776492 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776492 Date: 08/31/2015




    •       The Referendum/Parliamentary Elections. In view of the disruption and
    violence, the interim government may well conclude that the constitutional referendum
    must be postponed. However, if it does not postpone the referendum, then extraordinary
    measures should be taken.to insure that internally displaced persons and refugees are
    given an opportunity to vote—in both cases this will be a reemphasis of the bond of
    citizenship and a promise of inclusion in the democratic process that will be critical to the
    resolution of the crisis. The international community should also mobilize observers in
    connection with the parliamentary elections to help assure that candidates have fair
    access to the ballot and to media, that campaigns are permitted to proceed without
    unreasonable limitations and that voting occurs in a fair and free manner across the
    country. Special attention in this process should be given to the affected areas to insure
    that refugees and IDPs have a fair opportunity to vote and are freed from unreasonable
    limitations in the process.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05776492 Date: 08/31/2015
