       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772152 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Saturday, November 6, 2010 8:31 AM
To:
Cc:                                Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma
Subject:                           Gender- Melanne's Comments on QDDR



HRC:

[Huma can you print for HRC]

Melanne is stepping through the QDDR and giving specific edits on each section to ensure the integration of gender.

In addition to that help, she shared her thoughts/concerns on the reorganization as it affects s/GWI. We already
determined from your earlier feedback that S/GWI would maintain a direct report to S (I actually always thought that
even with the reorganization of homes for many of the S offices, we still were maintaining a direct S/reporting so we are
revisiting this issue writ-large for the next draft to you. For example, we now know statutorily that S/CT legislatively is a
required S report).

That said, here is her narrative for your review for when we speak. I have embedded comments in caps in text after
each graph where relevant.



TO:              Anne-Marie Slaughter
FROM:            Melanne Verveer
DATE:            November 4, 2010
RE:              Gender Integration in the QDDR



        The Secretary has declared time and time again that the empowerment of women is "at the heart of the foreign
policy of the United States." Our collective task is to realize this principle by integrating gender into the policies and
programs of the State Department and USAID in an enduring way.

        We are concerned that the current draft of the QDDR falls short of this call. In the existing draft, the Office of
Global Women's Issues falls under a new Under Secretary for Civilian Security, Democracy and Human Rights while
retaining the Ambassador-at-Large for Global Women's Issues who reports directly to the Secretary. This new structure
misses the simple but important reality that women are half of the world's population and that the major security,
economic and social challenges of this century cannot be solved without them. These issues cut across the work of the
department and touch virtually all regions, though we place special emphasis on regions in which women and girls
are most vulnerable, such as in countries experiencing conflict and transition. Locating the office within one bureau
makes it impossible for the Office to implement its very charge — to integrate gender effectively into the work of the
entire State Department.

          Therefore, gender must be integrated throughout all of the regional and functional bureaus rather than located
within one bureau. Women should be integral to all of our diplomatic efforts—from traditional bilateral and multilateral
relationships, strategic dialogues, and public diplomacy, to our relations with civil society, community leaders and other
non-state actors. Women are also important to consider in all of our policy initiatives, including global health, food
security, climate change, economic issues, human rights, and peace and security. We must institute rigorous
institutional mechanisms to ensure that all bureaus, both regional and functional, consider gender in diplomacy and
development.

       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772152 Date: 08/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772152 Date: 08/31/2015




       In order to integrate gender effectively throughout the work of the Department, we recommend the following
approach to planning, budgeting, structure and evaluation:

         Maintain visibility and focus on gender. Retain the Ambassador-at-Large for Global Women's Issues who
reports to the Secretary. This position embodies our commitment to and advocacy for gender equality as an essential
part of diplomacy and development and signals our understanding that this is important to the national security of the
United States. In addition, the office advances a coherent and coordinated strategy on gender throughout the State
Department and USAID. [DONE]

         Ensure that gender is effectively addressed throughout all bureaus and missions. We recommend the
following structural changes at State. First, make the Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary (PDAS) in all regional and
functional bureaus responsible and accountable for their bureaus' work on gender. The Office of Global Women's Issues
would serve as a resource to the PDAS on these issues. Second, assign specialized gender liaisons to regional bureaus
for purposes of integration, where needed. Third, include training and capacity development for employees on gender
Issues (in both Foreign and Civil Service as well as for political appointees). Fourth, evaluate the PDAS in each bureau on
gender integration in policies and programs (including, for example, as a component in the Performance Evaluation
System). Similarly, require each Chief of Mission to be responsible and accountable for the mission's work on gender, to
assign personnel with expertise to manage the work on gender, to require personnel to receive training on gender
issues, and to be evaluated on this work. A parallel structure should be put in place at USAID, and our diplomacy and
development work on gender should be coordinated and complimentary.

       [THIS IS RECOMMENDATION, WITH SOME VARIATION, MADE FOR MANY AREAS — PUBLIC DIPLOMACY,
MULTILATERAL AFFAIRS, AND OTHERS — CHALLENGE WILL BE TO IDENTIFY HOW TO ADDRESS EFFECTIVELY AND CREAT A
PDAS JOB THAT IS MEANINGFUL GIVEN THE NEW RESPONSIBILITIES SOUGHT TO BE IMPOSED THROUGH THAT
POSITION]

          Include gender in strategic planning and budget allocation. We recommend continuing the requirement
initiated last year that all bureaus include a plan for gender integration in their annual Strategic Plan and Budget
proposal. Each bureau is required to describe how their policies and programs will improve gender equality and how
that will strengthen their work more generally. They are also required, to the extent possible, to outline what portion of
their policies and programs target or affect women and girls. [THIS ALREADY IS IN PLACE AND WOULD BE RETAINED]

         Measure impact. Develop indicators and long-term evaluation systems to measure the impact of programs on
women and girls. There are efforts underway currently within F and at USAID to consider how to improve our
measurement of impact on women and girls and to develop different and additional indicators where
appropriate. [SAME AS IMMEDIATELY ABOVE —THIS IS ALREADY IN PROCESS]



 Happy to discuss.

 cdm




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772152 Date: 08/31/2015
