    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778459 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                         RELEASE
                                                                         IN PART B6
                                                                                                           918•110211568


From:                           Jake Sullivan _                                                                            B6
Sent:                           Thursday, December 16, 20107:06
                                                          -     PM
To:                             H
Subject:                        Fwd: FW: Richard (TNR)



I assume you saw this by now -- if not, it's worth a read.

         Forwarded message
From: Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivan.W.Dstate.goY>
Date: Wed, Dec 15, 2010 at 1:21 PM
Subject: FW: Richard (TNR)
To:                                                                                                                        B6




Published on The Neil, Republic (                 corn)




Richard
   O Leon Wieseltier
   O December 14. 201013:16 pm




Richard Holbrooke was a piece of work. He was a paradoxical man: a remarkably subtle thinker capable of the
most egregious lack of subtlety, a brilliant diplomat with one of the least diplomatic temperaments anybody
ever encountered. He was always cunning but never malevolent. Mentally, he was sleepless, relentlessly
pondering the meanings of even the most trivial events and experiences. An example: Decades ago Holbrooke
was strolling down Madison Avenue with a friend. .A man passed them and said "Hi, Dick". Holbrook.e stopped
in his tracks, turned to his friend, and said: "I wonder what he meant by that." Sleepless.) His powers of
observation were extraordinary, the cognitive advantage of his utter extroversion; and they were matched by his
massive powers of analysis, which never shut down. He was a disorderly man with an ordered mind; there was
rigorous reflection at the heart of the Whirlwind. He was, almost preposterously, in constant motion. a stranger
to cairn, a bull in search of a china shop; but in his thinking, and in his commitment to his country, he was one
of the steadiest men on earth.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778459 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778459 Date: 08/31/2015



The legend of his career, and the flamboyance of his person, has obscured a proper recognition of his
commitments. Holbrooke was not only a student of power; he was also a creature of beliefs. What he believed
in most of all, I think, was in the ability, and the duty, of the United States, by a variety of means, to better the
world.. He was, in his cast of mind., a realist, but his cast of mind was not his philosophy: this realist—the
Democrats' most accomplished Machiavellian--was always returning to first principles, to moral
considerations, to the alleviation of human suffering and the spread of political liberty as goals of American
statecraft. He came away. from his early years in Vietnam with lessons but without a syndrome. He was
unanguished about the use of American force, when it was morally justified and intelligently applied—which is
to say, he was the last of the postwar liberals. Even in his most virulent criticism of what he regarded as
America's military mistakes abroad, there was not a trace of the temptation to surrender a high sense of
America's role in history. Isolationism disgusted him. He had a natural understanding, it was almost an attribute
of his character, of the relationship between diplomacy and force. He had no illusions about the harshness of the
world, arid therefore about the toughness that is required for the creation of a world less harsh. His last
assignment, the increasingly Sisyphean attempt to bring Afghanistan into the community of open and. decent
societies, was a bet on this sober and unsentimental optimism. He cared famously about what worked, and he
could be brazen in his pragmatism, but Holbrook& s professional life was animated by goals and concepts that
no mere pragmatist could share. American interventionism, for him, was not just a policy; it was a way of
existing responsibly in the world, the measure of a national (and personal) ideal, the real greatness of a great
power.

It was this rare package of means and ends, of ideas and instruments, that made possible Holbrooke's triumph at
Dayton. He negotiated a peace with a villain whom he deeply despised, and thereby ended a genocide in which
W(, the United States, and an administration from his own party, had outrageously acquiesced. In this way hie
helped to restore the honor of his country after a period of disgrace. On the day that Holbrooke suffered the
cataclysmic collapse from which he never recovered, The New York Times reported that Henry Kissinger—the
Republicans' most accomplished. Machiavellian—remarked in 1973 that "if they put Jews into gas chambers in
the Soviet Union, it is not an American concern. Maybe a humanitarian concern." Such unforgettably filthy
words would never have crossed Richard Holbrooke's lips. In government and out, not least in his
groundbreaking work at Refugees international, his career was a loud and effective refutation of that chilling
"maybe."

He was also an intellectual. He edited, he wrote (for my pages, too), he read. He raised a lasting institution of
intellectuality in the American Academy in Berlin. His renowned attraction to journalists was not just a more or
less charming campaign of spin; in his unslakable desire for the latest news and the immediate interpretation of
it, he was one of their company. There was so much about which. this genuinely cosmopolitan 1-lan did not need
to be briefed. He had an appetite for complexity, though it never crippled him in his practice. it was Holbrook.e,
more than anybody else, NA1110 fbctised American planning upon the most disturbing contemporary complexity of
all: the grim fact that the pursuit of our national security in Central Asia depends as much, if not mole, upon
Pakistan than upon Afghanistan. And after he edited and wrote and read, and before, and during, he talked.
Holbrooke's talk was a kind of rolling chronicle of his times, a rush of concepts and gossip, brash, probing,
lin-patient, occasionally outrageous, with a fine feeling for absurdity in the mix—the richest display of his
prodigious vitality. He was faster on his feet than anybody I have ever known. it was a joy, and an amusement,
to behold.

We were friends for almost three decades. He was a constant source of fascination--I had never before
encountered such a union of iMrigue and idealism; but mostly he inspired admiration and affection. Now th.e
unstoppable man has been stopped, and the man who was everywhere is nowhere. If only he could have gotten
the angel of death around a table....

Leon Wieseliier is the literaty editor of The New Republic.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778459 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778459 Date: 08/31/2015



Source URL: http://www.tnr.conVarticle/79956/richard-holbrooke-wieseltier-obituarv




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778459 Date: 08/31/2015
