         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778445 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                                      RELEASE IN
                                                                                                      FULL



   From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
   Sent:                              Wednesday, December 15, 2010 10:49 PM
   To:
   Cc:                                 Mills, Cheryl D
   Subject:                            Fw: more wikithink



   Worth a read.



   From: Baer, Daniel B
   To: Sullivan, Jacob J
   Cc: Mills, Cheryl D; Klevorick, Caitlin B; Ross, Alec)
   Sent: Wed Dec 15 22:28:21 2010
   Subject: more wikithink

   Jake
   I am up in the middle of the night in Brussels and took a quick stab at stringing together some of the pieces of the "moral
   argument". I am not sure how coherent it all is, (caveat lector) and don't want to confuse efforts to pull together talkers
   for 5, but thought I'd share.

   This could be boiled down further into key points (and the below is meant to stand on its own as an argument but not be
   exclusive of others—re internet freedom and wikileaks, for example)

   But I think it gets at some of what I think is missing...esp the bit at the end about the alternative---
   D




1) Clear thinking demands avoiding simple analogies, or false syllogisms. Some have called WL
    whistleblowing. Some have lauded it for contributing to transparency. But the comparison and inferences don't
    hold up. Whistleblowing is when someone reveals an act of official wrongdoing, and because it is official
    wrongdoing we assume that it's in the public interest to know about this and hold the culprits
    accountable. Instead what WL is exposing, by and large, is a vast number of official acts of rightdoing-
    diplomats engaged often with partners from other governments or civil society, in solving the kind of practical
    problems that arise in a world made up of nearly two hundred nations. Many of the legitimate objectives of
    these officials—whether securing dangerous materials or negotiating agreements that will advance good
    governance and human rights—cannot be accomplished in a single conversation or interaction. Instead they are
    long-term ongoing projects that require trust, tactical sequencing of interactions, and above all, confidence. It's
    not the ultimate objectives that are confidential—indeed, they are quite public and leaders routinely outline
    them in speeches, world peace, security, prosperity, etc. Rather it's simply the case that accomplishing good
    objectives demands the kind of cooperative engagement that confidential relations permit, and so, while we can
    and should maintain a general commitment to transparency, we also can and should recognize that a responsible
    government that that is to be held accountable for delivering benefits for its people, will sometimes need to
    work in confidence in order to do so. Whistleblowing exposes misconduct that runs counter to the interests of
    citizens. Wikileaks undermines good conduct on behalf of citizens.
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778445 Date: 08/31/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778445 Date: 08/31/2015




2) Absent a world government, it is the relations between states and peoples, whether through formal institutions
   or everyday conversations and connections, that provides global governance. The formal relations between
   states, made up of so many constellations of individual interactions, weave the fabric of a blanket of peace and
   stability, one which creates a permissive environment in which states can live up to their responsibility to
   provide for and protect people's rights. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the ICCPR and other
   documents international and domestic lay out the standards, but it is the quality of governance at both the
   domestic and international levels that determines whether or not people enjoy those rights in their everyday
   lives.

3) Some of those who are cheering Assange mistakenly believe that his action constitutes a speech act in a debate
   about good governance—that his action constitutes a kind of critique, a demand for a particular kind of better
   behavior. But it doesn't constitute a critique or a demand—this is not an exchange with another interlocutor
   about a particular position or action. The exposure of 250,000 cables isn't a critique of any one of them; it's an
   attempt to harm the medium itself—confidential communication among governments—rather than a rejection
   of the messages. This isn't part of a particular debate, it's an action that undermines a key pillar of the system of
   governance in which all debates can safely take place, in which individuals can, if they're lucky enough to live
   in the kind of places that Assange has spent his life, make specific criticisms of the government, march, speak
   out, protest, and do so with the protection of the rule of law.

4) In this specific case it is the communications of the United States that have been compromised. We regret the
   embarrassment this has caused with some of our partners. We deplore the risk it has imposed on innocent
   people on the frontlines of struggles against corruption or rights abuses around the world. But we are taking
   steps to manage the consequences, address them, and to make future incidents less likely. But the attack on
   legitimate confidential relations between governments is not an attack on the particular government in question,
   it's an attack on the constellation of relationships and interactions referenced above, the informal agreements,
   debates, discussions, etc through which governments around the world manage—imperfectly to be sure—to
   work out their differences and find common ground and common cause; to maintain global order and stability
   on which the security of their citizens and the citizens of other nations depends; to support and sustain the
   commercial networks that can augment global prosperity; to do, in short, what citizens count on their
   governments to do.

5) If wikileaks seeks to undermine this mode of international politics, it's not clear what it seeks to replace it
   with. A world in which every step of climate negotiations were exposed in real time would not be more
   prepared to confront the threat of climate change. A world in which every discussion among finance ministers
   were immediately publicized would not have fewer financial crises. A world in which every discussion of how
   to counter plots of terrorists or secure dangerous nuclear materials were on the front pages of the world's
   newspapers would not be more safe.




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05778445 Date: 08/31/2015
