      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769638 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                         RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, June 3, 2010 8:33 AM
To:
Subject:                           FW: Brief memo for Cheryl Mills on Colombia - for Secretary Clinton



Fyi — cir to team for addressing as appropriate


From: Buhl, Cindy [mailto:Cindy.Buhl@mail.house.gov]
Sent: Wednesday, June 02, 2010 3:49 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Buhl, Cindy
Subject: Brief memo for Cheryl Mills on Colombia - for Secretary Clinton

Dear Cheryl —

        In my last email (Friday, 5/28), I attached the letter from the bipartisan Co-Chairs and
Executive Committee members of the Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission sent to Assistant
Secretary Mike Posner expressing grave concern about the recent rise in death threats, attacks
and murders of Colombian human rights defenders, religious, community and other NGO
leaders. Congressman McGovern also strongly encouraged the Secretary to meet with
representatives of those organizations and individuals being threatened, with a particularly
effort to reach out to and invite the Bishops of Tumaco (Narifio), Barrancabermeja/Medio
Magdalena (Santander), and we would now add Putumayo, since the Colombian Catholic Church
just advised us yesterday of increased death threats against religious workers there. In addition, we
recommended inviting Monsetior Hector Fabio Henao, director of Pastoral Social, at the
Archdiocese in Bogota, who represents all the pastoral work of the Church throughout the country,
as well as representatives from the Mennonite and Lutheran churches, in particular.

       While in Colombia, the most important thing the Secretary can do is avoid effusive praise
for President Alvaro Uribe, who leaves office in August. Inside Colombia, the visit by the
Secretary is being described as focusing solely on the free trade agreement and continuing support
of the counterdrug strategy/Plan Colombia. Without changes in the human rights situation and the
culture of impunity, it is unlikely that anything the Secretary might say or do will alter the equation
on Capitol Hill regarding the trade agreement. It should be noted that the October 2008 GAO
report on the counter-drug operations in Colombia concluded that U.S. assistance was successful in
increasing security in parts of the country, but a failure in the areas of counter-narcotics (GAO-09-
71) and a subsequent April 2009 USAID evaluation on U.S. aid for Plan Colombia for illegal crop
reduction and Colombian countemarcotics policies actually contribute to increased coca
production.

       The Colombian president has been a solid backer of U.S. policy and U.S. interests in the
region, and has achieved some important improvements in the country's security situation. It is
important to recognize that, but to do so without repeating the tone of Defense Secretary Gates'
April visit, in which he called Uribe a "great hero" and failed even to mention any concerns.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769638 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769638 Date: 08/31/2015




        These concerns are of critical importance, and while the Secretary need not list them all, at
least some deserve public acknowledgement — some recognition that it is important to the United
States that Colombia, including the current government and its successor, show the necessary
political will to deal with them:

   • A sharp rise in alleged military killings of civilians. In many cases, these are so-called "false
     positives": non-combatants murdered and later presented as members of armed groups killed
     in combat. These, notes UN Special Rapporter for Extrajudicial Executions Philip Alston,
     "began occurring with a disturbing frequency across Colombia from 2004." Citing
     prosecutors' and NGOs' reports, Alston indicates that Colombia's security forces may have
     killed 1,486 civilians during the first six years of Alvaro Uribe's presidency. Alston notes
     that the Defense Ministry only began to address the situation after the media broke the story
     of the false-positives and the subsequent negative publicity and horrified public outcry.

      The prosecution of "false positives" is moving with excruciating slowness. In perhaps the
      most notorious case — the murders of about twenty young men from the poor Bogota suburb
      of Soacha — nearly all of the accused soldiers and officers have been released from prison,
      pending trial, as deadlines for timely prosecution have run out. Since their arrest in late 2008,
      their case has been prolonged by numerous delaying tactics by the defense, including
      attempts to have their cases tried in the military court system as "acts of service." Alston
      reports that the impunity rate on these extrajudicial murders by security forces may be as
      high as 98.5 percent.

   • Mounting allegations that the President's intelligence service, the DAS, was put at the
     service of paramilitary leaders and narcotraffickers; used to spy on and intimidate Supreme
     Court justices, opposition politicians, journalists and human rights defenders; and employed
     in a campaign of sabotage and smears against political opponents.

      Prosecutors are alleging that the orders to have the DAS carry out wiretaps, surveillance and
      "political warfare" came from high up in the Colombian presidency, though the question of
      "what President Uribe knew, and when he knew it" remains unanswered. Meanwhile efforts
      to reform or dissolve the DAS are stalled in Colombia's Congress.

   • President Uribe's political coalition has also been hit by a scandal known in Colombia
     as "para-politics." This coalition has included dozens of political bosses from regions
     beyond the capital. Many are large landholders with ties to narcotrafficking, the same local
     leaders who created and fostered the brutal pro-government paramilitary groups that killed
     tens of thousands of non-combatants in the 1990s and early 2000s.

      Evidence, much of it from former paramilitary leaders, has brought about 300 criminal
      investigations against legislators, governors, mayors and other local officials, nearly all of
      them Alvaro Uribe's political supporters, who made common cause with the far-right
      warlords. To date, of the 278 congresspeople and senators elected in 2006, 68 are under
      official investigation, on trial, or convicted for paramilitary ties. Those embroiled in
      parapolitics include the President's cousin, Mario Uribe; the brother of his former foreign


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769638 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769638 Date: 08/31/2015




      minister; and individuals whom the President had named to be Colombia's ambassadors to
      Chile, the Dominican Republic, and Canada.

       The Colombian prosecutors, investigators, witnesses and non-governmental organizations
trying to uncover the truth about these abuses are working under conditions of great personal risk.
They, too, are heroes and would benefit greatly from a public expression of concern about the
cases they are investigating, and a reminder that their work is legitimate and important to
U.S. interests in Colombia.

       At the same time, it is important to avoid appearing to endorse any candidate in the June
20 runoff elections. Between the first and second rounds of a country' s presidential election is a
politically awkward time for a high-level official visit. Though President Uribe's former defense
minister, Juan Manuel Santos, is the overwhelming favorite given his margin of success in the May
301first round of balloting over former Bogota mayor Antanas Mockus, it is necessary at this stage
to convey a sense of balance and a willingness to work closely with whoever wins. As a result, any
kind words for one candidate should be balanced by praise for the other.

        Finally, it would be helpful to remind the Colombian people that the United States
supports a peaceful resolution of Bogota's worsening differences with Venezuela. While
President Chavez' s behavior is a significant concern, it would be most unhelpful to be perceived on
this trip as fanning the flames of conflict with Colombia — or playing into the Chavez rhetoric that
the U.S. and Colombia have military aspirations in the region.

      Hope this memo, along with last week's copy of the TLHRC letter to Assistant Secretary
Posner, are helpful and useful materials for the Secretary as she plans her trip.

Very best wishes —

On behalf of Cong. Jim McGovern

Staff Contact: Cindy Buhl (202-225-6101 or cindy.buhl@mail.house.gov)




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769638 Date: 08/31/2015
