   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772011 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL


From:                              Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Sent:                              Monday, November 29, 2010 11:31 AM
To:
Cc:                                Abedin, Huma; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject:                           A Foreign Policy 100 top global thinkers plug for the QDDR



For a tiny bit of good news in such a bleak week, you and President Clinton came in at no. 13 in
Foreign Policy's second annual list of top global thinkers, with special commendation to you for
launching the QDDR (and for cookstoves and women's rights, as well as for your strong position
on American leadership). Michele Flournoy and I also tied for no. 74 on the basis of our respective
roles in the QDR and other reviews at DoD and the QDDR here at State. Here are the write ups



                          13. Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton
                          for proving that you don't need to be president to act presidential.


                                          FORMER PRESIDENT I NEW YORK


                                       SECRETARY OF STATE I WASHINGTON


Speaking to the Council on Foreign Relations in September, Hillary Rodham Clinton sounded a confident             note:
"After years of war and uncertainty, people are wondering what the future holds, at home and abroad. So let me say
it clearly: The United States can, must, and will lead in this new century."
Ironically, two of the people most crucial to the new global century are the Clintons themselves: the ex-president and
the ex-would-be-president, the power couple now defined by their position just outside the highest reaches of power.
Except that, these days, both Clintons are more influential, and more beloved, than ever. Bill's Clinton Global
Initiative is starting to feel like a sexier, more effective competitor not just to Davos but to the United Nations itself,
bringing world leaders together to commit their resources to fighting poverty with market-based, technocratic
solutions. As of this summer, his foundation had contributed $23 million and countless man-hours to the effort to
rebuild Haiti. Polls have shown he's a better advocate for Democratic candidates than the actual president, and he
spent most of the fall stumping for woebegone Dems from Orlando to Seattle.


Meanwhile, Hillary showed up in one recent poll as the most popular political figure in the United States, an
accolade she has earned through a no-drama approach to an array of thankless tasks: brushing off Vladimir Putin's
temper tantrum to reach agreement on nuclear disarmament and Iran sanctions, promoting women's rights over the
objections of entrenched traditionalists, and launching an innovative effort to bring clean cookstoves to the world's


   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772011 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772011 Date: 08/31/2015




poorest. But what she has mainly stood for is American competence, with her Quadrennial Diplomacy and
Development Review a major, if unglamorous step toward making U.S. statesmanship a more agile beast. If this is
what Clinton nostalgia looks like, bring it on.




             74. Michele Flournoy and Anne-Marie Slaughter
                         for setting the tone of how the United States engages with the world.


              POLICY PLANNING CHIEFS, DEFENSE AND STATE DEPARTMENTS I WASHINGTON


Barack Obama campaigned in 2008 on the promise of changing not just the style but the substance of how the
United States deals with its allies and enemies abroad, and the job of figuring out how to enact the changes fell
largely to two people in particular. At the State Department, Anne-Marie Slaughter, director of policy planning, is
spearheading the department's Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review. The review aims to rejuvenate
marginalized civilian agencies such as the U.S. Agency for International Development, preparing for a world in
which America's worst threats are not great-power rivals but the upheavals associated with failed and failing states.


Slaughter's Pentagon counterpart is Undersecretary for Policy Michele Flournoy, co-founder of the Center for a New
American Security think tank, who articulated a vision for a new Democratic realism in foreign policy that both
candidates Hillary Clinton and Obama embraced in the 2008 election. In 2010 she oversaw the Pentagon's own
quadrennial review, a blueprint that cuts back on big-ticket weapons systems and focuses instead on the immediate
needs posed by today's asymmetrical conflicts. Flournoy has also been a vocal advocate for Obama's Afghanistan
strategy, albeit a pragmatic one: "I don't want to suggest that achieving success will be simple or easy," she told
the Senate in February. "We need to prepare for the possibility that things may get harder before they get better."




Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Dept (silent of State
(202) 647-2972




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772011 Date: 08/31/2015
