      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769116 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Monday, June 21, 2010 7:33 AM
To:
Cc:                                Abedin, Huma
Subject:                           Quartet statement



Below is the final text of the Quartet statement, which Lavrov, Ban, and Ashton have now agreed to release *without a
call.* Sounds like your discussion with Lavrov did the trick:

The Quartet re-affirms that the current situation in Gaza, including the humanitarian and human rights situation of the
civilian population, is unsustainable, unacceptable, and not in the interests of any of those concerned. The Quartet
reiterates its call for a solution that addresses Israel's legitimate security concerns, including an end to weapons
smuggling into Gaza; promotes Palestinian unity based on the Palestine Liberation Organization commitments and the
reunification of Gaza and the West Bank under the legitimate Palestinian Authority; and ensures the unimpeded flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza, consistent with United Nations Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009). The Quartet declares its readiness to work closely with Israel, the Palestinian Government and
international donors in order to achieve sustainable economic development on the basis of the full implementation of
the Agreement on Access and Movement of 2005 and in the broader perspective of the two-state solution.

Consistent with these objectives, the Quartet and the Quartet Representative have worked with Israel, as well as
consulting the Palestinian Authority, Egypt, and other concerned parties, to effect a fundamental change in policy in
Gaza. The new policy towards Gaza just announced by the Government of Israel is a welcome development. The Quartet
notes that the elaboration of further details and modalities of implementation will be important in ensuring the
effectiveness of the new policy. Full and effective implementation will comprise a significant shift in strategy towards
meeting the needs of Gaza's population for humanitarian and commercial goods, civilian reconstruction and
infrastructure, and legitimate economic activity as well as the security needs of Israel. The Quartet will continue to work
with Israel, the Palestinian Authority, and other concerned parties to ensure these arrangements are implemented as
quickly as possible. The Quartet affirms that much work remains to achieve fully the solution stated above, and, in
consultation with the concerned parties, it will monitor closely the implementation of the policy in all its aspects. It will
actively explore additional ways to improve the situation in Gaza, encourage involvement of the PA at the crossings and
promote greater commerce between the West Bank and Gaza.

The Quartet stresses the importance of United Nations and other international interventions, as well as the work of local
non-governmental organizations, to be expanded in Gaza to meet urgent civilian needs, and calls on all parties to fully
enable this work.

The Quartet recognizes that Israel has legitimate security concerns that must continue to be safeguarded, and believes
efforts to maintain security while enabling movement and access for Palestinian people and goods are critical. The
Quartet commits to work with Israel and the international community to prevent the illicit trafficking of arms and
ammunition into Gaza. It urges all those wishing to deliver goods to do so through established channels so that their
cargo can be inspected and transferred via land crossings into Gaza. The Quartet emphasizes that there is no need for
unnecessary confrontations and calls on all parties to act responsibly in meeting the needs of the people of Gaza.

The Quartet also calls for an end to the deplorable detention of Gilad Shalit in advance of the fourth anniversary of his
capture on June 25; it further condemns the violation of Hamas' international obligation to provide him access by the
International Committee of the Red Cross and demands that Hamas immediately remedy the situation.

The Quartet also reiterates its support for proximity talks toward the resumption, without pre-conditions, of direct
bilateral negotiations that resolve all final status issues as previously agreed by the parties. The Quartet believes these

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769116 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769116 Date: 08/31/2015




negotiations should lead to a settlement, negotiated between the parties within 24 months, that ends the occupation
which began in 1967 and results in the emergence of an independent, democratic, and viable Palestinian state in the
West Bank and Gaza, living side by side in peace and security with Israel and its other neighbours.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769116 Date: 08/31/2015
