     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770442 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                        RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                        B6



From:                          sbwhoeop
Sent:'                         Thursday, May 13, 2010 11:37 PM
To:
Subject:                       H: IMPORTANT. Memo for Hague meeting. Sid
Attachments:                   hrc memo hague meeting 102009.docx




                                    CONFIDENTIAL



                                            May 13, 2010



For: Hillary
From: Sid
Re: Hague meeting


On your meeting on Friday, May 14, with new British Foreign Secretary William Hague you might explore a
number of issues below. (I've discussed with Shaun.)

   Northern Ireland. Cameron has pledged to reduce public sector spending in NI. But the impact of public
      sector spending there is not the same as in other parts of the UK because of 40 years of troubles.
      Political stability depends upon economic stability. Removing funding specifically threatens community
      policing, creating a vacuum that the Real IRA and other men of violence would rush into. Cutting the
      public sector would make it difficult to increase private sector investment. Does the new government
      understand the US interest in NI and appreciate the fragility of the situation?
   Defense and Foreign Policy Cuts. The new government program is to slash the deficit, cutting deeply into
       government programs. This really cannot be done without defense and foreign policy reductions. Seek
       claficiation on exactly whether and where these cuts be made. Will they affect Afghanistan policy and
       over what schedule? How will cuts in the foreign service affect British influence in other areas?
   Trident and Nuclear Deterrent. The coalition agreement between the Conservative and Liberal Democrats
       allows the LDs to abstain in parliamentary votes on four issues that will apparently let the Tories have
       their way: marriage tax allowances; nuclear power; college tuition fees; and Trident and the nuclear
       deterrent. During the campaign, the LDs ran on eliminating the Trident and erasing the UK nuclear
       deterrent. How will this actually work in practice?
   Political Changes. The new government, because the coalition is fundamentally at odds with itself, has
       proposed to pass a parliamentary bill that establishes a five year term for a government and furthermore
       establishes that a vote of no confidence can only be passed on a 55 percent vote. You might just seek
       Hague's view on how this will work.



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770442 Date: 08/31/2015
