        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769102 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                RELEASE IN PART B6
                                                                                                                    +11111.10211111111111111


From:                              sbwhoeop                                                                                                    B6
Sent:                              Sunday, March 28, 2010 12:50 AM
To:                                H
Subject:                           H: FYI, Sid




   •      aClose Window




    •     Print this lop_ag_

From The Sunday Times
March 28, 2010


It's over: MPs say the special relationship with
  S is dead


Winston Churchill, Franklin D Roosevelt and Josef Stalin
Michael Smith
BRITAIN'S special relationship with the US          forged by Winston Churchill and Franklin Roosevelt in the second world
war -- no longer exists, says a committee of influential MPs.
Instead, America's relationship with Britain is no more special than with its other main allies, according to a report by the
Commons foreign affairs committee published today.
The report also warns that the perception of the UK after the Iraq war as America's "subservient poodle" has been highly
damaging to Britain's reputation and interests around the world. The MPs conclude that British prime ministers have to
learn to be less deferential to US presidents and be "willing to say no" to America.
The report, entitled Global Security: UK-US Relations, says Britain's relationship with America is "extremely close and
valuable" in a number of areas, particularly intelligence co-operation. However, it adds that the use of the phrase special
relationship, in its historical sense, "is potentially misleading and we recommend that its use should be avoided".
It does not reflect the "ever-evolving" relationship between the two countries and raises unrealistic expectations, the MPs
say.
"Over the longer term, the UK is unlikely to be able to influence the US to the extent it has in the past," the committee
 adds.
In an apparent rebuke to Tony Blair and his relationship with President George W Bush, the report says there are "many
 lessons" to be learnt from Britain's political approach towards the US over Iraq.
 "The perception that the British government was a subservient poodle to the US administration is widespread both among
 the British public and overseas," the MPs say. "This perception, whatever its relation to reality, is deeply damaging to the
 reputation and interests of the UK."
 While the relationship between the American president and the British prime minister was an important part of dealings
 between the two countries, the cabinet and parliament also had a role to play. "The UK needs to be less deferential and
 more willing to say no to the US on those issues where the two countries' interests and values diverge," the MPs say.
 They are also critical of the US use of extraordinary rendition and torture. The report calls for a comprehensive review of
 the use by the CIA of British bases, such as that on the Indian Ocean island of Diego Garcia, to carry out extraordinary
 rendition.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769102 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769102 Date: 08/31/2015




"The issues relating to rendition through Diego Garcia to which we have previously drawn attention raise disturbing
questions about the uses to which US bases on British territory are put", the MPs say.
They express regret at "considerable restraints" on the ability of both the government and parliament to scrutinise US
activities carried out on British territory.
"We recommend that the government should establish a comprehensive review of the current arrangements governing
US military use of facilities within the UK and in British overseas territories." The review should "identify shortcomings in
the current system of scrutiny and oversight ... and report to parliament on proposals to remedy these".
The report also demands a statement from the government on the implications of the Court of Appeal judgment regarding
the alleged collusion of MI5 in the torture of Binyam Mohamed, a British resident.
Last month the court ordered the government to release evidence from American intelligence reports which showed that
MI5 was aware of the torture.
Senior US officials subsequently suggested that releasing such evidence might prevent the US from sharing some
intelligence with Britain.
Contact our advertising team for advertising and sponsorship in Times Online, The Times and The Sunday Times, or
place your advertisement.

Times Online Services: Dating I Jobs I Property Search I Used Cars I Holidays I Births lvlarriages, Deaths I
Subscrlptions I E-paper
News International associated websites: Milkround

Copyright 2010 Times Newspapers Ltd.
This service is provided on Times Newspapers' standard Terms and Conditions. Please read our Privacy Policy.To inquire
about a licence to reproduce material from Times Online, The Times or The Sunday Times, click hece.This website is
published by a member of the News International Group. News International Limited, 1 Virginia St,-London E98 1XY, is
the holding company for the News International group and is registered in England No 81701. VAT number GB 243 8054
69.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769102 Date: 08/31/2015
