       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769758 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJ1@state.gov>
Sent:                              Tuesday, February 9, 2010 10:50 AM
To:
Subject                            FW: Sargsyan message to Gul



FYI.


From: Gordon, Philip H
Sent: Tuesday, February 09, 2010 10:09 AM
To: Steinberg, James B; Sullivan, Jacob
Cc: Scanlon, Amy B
Subject: Sargsyan message to Gul

Jim: Sargsian sent this nice message to Gul as he crossed into Turkish airspace today. Understand Gul plans to
reciprocate. Should at least help the atmosphere. Separately, the two sides have (more or less) agreed to enter
the cone of silence starting today. Will see how long it lasts.
Jake — might want to share this with S.




09.02.2010
President Serzh Sargsyan sent a message to the President of the Republic of Turkey Abdullah Gul.

The message states,

"Excellency,

Passing through Turkish airspace, I send my greetings to you and the people of neighboring Turkey.

Our initiative, aimed at the normalization of the Armenian-Turkish relations, holds attention of the international community.
This is a historic moment, indeed, and it is recognized not only by us, but also by the global community. Efforts of the
countries engaged in the region, aimed at the improvement of bilateral relations, are indispensable. I am confident that it
wouldn't be possible to move forward without their support. At the same time, I believe no matter how interested friendly
states might be in a positive resolution of the impasse, there are certain things that can be done only by our two nations.

Mr. President,

I hope you will agree that the Armenian and Turkish peoples assign the main task of getting rid of the stereotypes
regarding each other and establishment of the atmosphere of mutual trust to their respective govemments. We can
achieve results only if there are trust, resolve, and unfaltering stance. A situation when words are not supported by deeds
gives rise to mistrust and skepticism, providing ample opportunities to counteract for those, who oppose the process. We
should be mindful of the fact that in this particular case, the time is working not for but against the process.

If until now we have been able to bring our bilateral relations up to a level which made the prospects of building normal
relations between our two countries more tangible and discernible, now the time has come to manifest determination to
make next major step and leave to the coming generations a stable and secure region.

Please accept, Excellency, the assurances of my highest esteem."




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769758 Date: 08/31/2015
