UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772383 Date: 08/31/2015




     Reflections on the Mideast Peace Talks                                 RELEASE IN FULL
     By Louise Diamond, Ph.D.


     As the direct Israeli-Palestinian peace talks in Washington progress, the U.S.
     mediation team will need to be attentive to several invisible dynamics. Even as the
     parties are talking about specifics - boundary lines, water rights, and such - there's
     more going on under the surface that, if ignored, can derail a successful conclusion.

     The first concerns leadership. Everyone already knows the basic elements of a two-
     state solution. What we have never seen is the personal and political will and
     courage, on all sides and at the same time, to make the deal. There are bitter pills
     and unfulfilled dreams for both parties in this settlement, and pockets of resistance
     to it - sometimes violent - in both populations.

     To manage that successfully, leaders need to articulate the immense gains as well, a
     positive future vision so compelling as to make the sacrifices worthwhile. This
     vision needs to be framed from a big-picture perspective: a just, viable, and
     sustainable peace between Israeli and Palestinian states and peoples that also
     brings regional security, stability, and prosperity. Every concrete item under
     discussion should be referred to that goal: how will agreeing or not agreeing on any
     one matter contribute to that ultimate outcome?

     In addition to a shared vision, the other factor essential to true peace is a
     commitment to end, and eventually heal, the acute pain and suffering. In deep-
     rooted conflicts such as this, the parties develop recognizable patterns intended to
     help ameliorate the pain. They will emphasize accusing each other of being the
     roadblock; setting up the other side to fail so it can be blamed for lack of progress;
     or seeking to convince outsiders that the other side is at fault so as to avoid taking
     responsibility for its own actions.

     Another pattern involves competing victimhoods. While each side has indeed been
     the target of un-rightable wrongs, emphasizing the role of victim might seem easier
     than seeing how one's own behavior has contributed to a mutual dance of spiraling
     enmity. Or each party may insist that its suffering is bigger, stronger, or more
     worthy of sympathy than that of the other side, as if there were a yardstick for
     suffering.

     What is true, here and in all violent conflicts, is that the loss of life, homes, loved
     ones, hope, land, and way of life in each individual's experience is immeasurable.
     There is deep trauma on both sides. Each side has inflicted harm on the other, and
     has experienced its own pain within the context of its history and collective
     narrative. Clearly the road to peace will need to involve the building of trust, the
     healing of wounds, and ultimately, reconciliation.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772383 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772383 Date: 08/31/2015




    These current peace talks are an opportunity for the parties to stop the cycle of
    violence before it escalates, even further. Each missed opportunity only makes the
    healing journey that much harder, and with decades of broken bodies, agreements,
    and dreams, that road is already difficult enough.

    So, the combination of a compelling vision and a commitment to stop the violence
    and start the healing are the true components of a successful peace process,
    regardless of any specific details of an agreement. Necessary, but not sufficient, I
    would suggest. The third element has to do with transforming the essential story of
    the relationship.

    Jews and Arabs have been in a family relationship from biblical times. Every family
    fights occasionally, but this feud has infected the whole world with its bitter and
    deadly consequences. The only way to get a viable peace is to change the core story
    of this relationship from the rabid `us' against 'them' narrative to one about 'we.'

     `We' are in this relationship together and always will be, and can choose to take
    each other down or raise each other up. `We' are more than just ourselves; `we' are
    also our neighbors in a larger regional story. `We' are our ancestors through whose
    courage and anguish we came to this point, and our grandchildren who will bear the
    consequences of what we create. Forging a partnership of `we' can and must be the
    lynchpin of this peace journey.

     There is a difference between signing a peace accord and securing a lasting peace.
     The U.S. mediation team will be concerned primarily with the former in this current
     round of talks. I sincerely hope they will also keep in mind the latter, and the
     invisible dynamics at play in the process. Secretary Clinton speaks of moving from a
     multi-polar world to a multi-partner world. These peace talks are a unique
     opportunity on that road.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772383 Date: 08/31/2015
