      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768302 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                B6


From:                              sbwhoeop
Sent:                              Saturday, March 20, 2010 5:54 PM
To:
Subject:                           H: fyi. sid



H: Uri Avnery, the Israeli analyst and activist, is privately circulating this analysis today. One consequence: Petraeus
cannot run as a Republican. At least Putin didn't bring his big dogs in with him like he did with Merkel. Cheers, Sid



Uri Avnery
20.3.10

                                     The Doomsday Weapon

IT IS already a commonplace to say that people who don't learn from history are condemned
to repeat their mistakes.

Some 1942 years ago, the Jews in the province called Palaestina launched a revolt against the
Roman Empire. In retrospect, this looks like an act of madness. Palestine was a small and
insignificant part of the world-wide empire which had just won a crushing victory against the
rival power — the Parthian Empire (Persia) — and put down a major rebellion in Britain. What
chances could the Jewish revolt have?

God knows what was going on in the mind of the "Zealots". They eliminated the moderate
leaders, who warned against provoking the empire, and gained sway over the Jewish
population of the country. They relied on God. Perhaps they also relied on the Jews in Rome
and believed that their influence over the Senate would restrain the Emperor, Nero. Perhaps
they had heard that Nero was weak and about to fall.

We know how it ended: after three years, the rebels were crushed, Jerusalem fell and the
temple was burned down. The last of the Zealots committed suicide in Masada.

The Zionists did indeed try to learn from history. They acted in a rational way, did not provoke
the great powers, endeavored in every situation to attain what was possible. They accepted
compromises, and every compromise served them as a basis for the next surge forward. They
cleverly utilized the radical stance of their adversaries and gained the sympathy of the whole
world.

But since the beginning of the occupation, their mind has become clouded. The cult of
Masada has become dominant. Divine promises once again start to play a role in public
discourse. Large parts of the public are following the new zealots.

 The next phase is also repeating itself: the leaders of Israel are starting a rebellion against the
 new Rome.


 WHAT BEGAN as an insult to the Vice President of the United States is developing into
 something far bigger. The mouse has given birth to an elephant.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768302 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768302 Date: 08/31/2015




Lately, the ultra-right government in Jerusalem has started to treat President Barack Obama
with thinly veiled contempt. The fears that arose in Jerusalem at the beginning of his term
have dissipated. Obama looks to them like a paper black panther. He gave up his demand for a
real settlement freeze. Every time he was spat on, he remarked that it was raining.

Yet now, ostensibly quite suddenly, the measure is full. Obama, his Vice President and his
senior assistants condemn the Netanyahu government with growing severity. Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton has submitted an ultimatum: Netanyahu must stop all settlement activity,
East Jerusalem included; he must agree to negotiate about all core problems of the conflict,
including East Jerusalem, and more.

The surprise was complete. Obama, it seems, has crossed the Rubicon, much as the Egyptian
army had crossed the Suez Canal in 1973. Netanyahu gave the order to mobilize all the
reserves in America and to move forward all the diplomatic tanks. All Jewish organizations in
the US were commanded to join the campaign. AIPAC blew the shofar and ordered its
soldiers, the Senators and Congressmen, to storm the White House.

It seems that the decisive battle has been joined. The Israeli leaders were certain that Obama
would be defeated.

And then an unusual noise was heard: the sound of the doomsday weapon.


THE MAN who decided to activate it was a foe of a new kind.

David Petraeus is the most popular officer of the United States army. The four-star general,
son of a Dutch sea captain who went to America when his country was overrun by the Nazis,
stood out from early childhood. In West Point he was a "distinguished cadet", in Army
Command and General Staff College he was No. 1. As a combat commander, he reaped
plaudits. He wrote his doctoral thesis (on the lessons of Vietnam) at Princeton and served as
an assistant professor for international relations in the US Military Academy.

He made his mark in Iraq, when he commanded the forces in Mosul, the most problematical
city in the country. He concluded that in order to vanquish the enemies of the US he must win
over the hearts of the civilian population, acquire local allies and spend more money than
ammunition. The locals called him King David. His success was considered so outstanding
that his methods were adopted as the official doctrine of the American army.

His star rose rapidly. He was appointed commander of the coalition forces in Iraq and soon
became the chief of the Central Command of the US army, which covers the whole Middle East
, except Israel and Palestine (which "belong" to the American command in Europe).

When such a person raises his voice, the American people listen. As a respected military
thinker, he has no rivals.


THIS WEEK, Petraeus conveyed an unequivocal message: after reviewing the problems in his
AOR (Area Of Responsibility) — which includes, among others, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran,
Iraq and Yemen — he turned to what he called the "root causes of instability" in the region. The
list was topped by the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768302 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768302 Date: 08/31/2015




In his report to the Armed Services Committee he stated: "The enduring hostilities between
Israel and some of its neighbors present distinct challenges to our ability to advance our
interests in the AOR...The conflict foments anti-American sentiment, due to a perception of
U.S. favoritism for Israel. Arab anger over the Palestinian question limits the strength and
depth of U.S. partnerships with governments and peoples in the AOR and weakens the
legitimacy of moderate regimes in the Arab world. Meanwhile, al-Qaeda and other militant
groups exploit that anger to mobilize support. The conflict also gives Iran influence in the
Arab world through its clients, Lebanese Hizballah and Hamas."

Not content with that, Petraeus sent his officers to present his conclusions to the Joint Chiefs
of Staff,

In other words: Israeli-Palestinian peace is not a private matter between the two parties, but a
supreme national interest of the USA. That means that the US must give up its one-sided
support for the Israeli government and impose the two-state solution.

The argument as such is not new. Several experts have said more or less the same in the past.
(Immediately after the 9/11 attacks, I wrote in a similar vein and prophesied that the US would
change its policy. It did not happen then.) But now this is being stated in an official document
written by the responsible American commander.

The Netanyahu government immediately went into damage-limitation mode. Its
spokespersons declared that Petraeus represents a narrow military approach, that he doesn't
understand political matters, that his reasoning is faulty. But it is not this that made people in
Jerusalem break out into cold sweat.


AS IS well known, the pro-Israel lobby dominates the American political system without limits
— almost. Every American politician and senior official is mortally afraid of it. The slightest
deviation from the strict AIPAC line is tantamount to political suicide.

But in the armor of this political Goliath there is a chink. Like Achilles' heel, the immense
might of the pro-Israel lobby has a vulnerable point that, when touched, can neutralize its
power.

It was illustrated by the Jonathan Pollard affair. This American-Jewish employee of a sensitive
intelligence agency spied for Israel. Israelis consider him a national hero, a Jew who did his
duty to his people. But for the US intelligence community, he is a traitor who endangered the
lives of many American agents. Not satisfied with a routine penalty, it induced the court to
impose a life sentence. Since then, all American presidents have refused the requests of
successive Israeli governments to commute the sentence. No president dared to confront his
intelligence chiefs in this matter.

But the most significant side of this affair is reminiscent of the famous words of Sherlock
Holmes about the dogs that did not bark. AIPAC did not bark. The entire American Jewish
community fell silent. Almost nobody raised their voice for poor Pollard.

Why? Because most American Jews are ready to do anything — just anything — for the
government of Israel. With one exception: they will not do anything that appears to hurt the
security of the United States. When the flag of security is hoisted, the Jews, like all Americans,
snap to attention and salute. The Damocles sword of suspicion of disloyalty hangs above their
heads. For them, this is the ultimate nightmare: to be accused of putting the security of Israel
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768302 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768302 Date: 08/31/2015




ahead of the security of the US. Therefore it is important for them to repeat endlessly the
mantra that the interests of Israel and the US are identical.

And now comes the most important general of the US Army and says that this is not so. The
policy of the present Israeli government is endangering the lives of American soldiers in Iraq
and Afghanistan.


FOR NOW, this is being said only as a side remark, in a military document that has not been
widely aired. But the sword has been drawn from its scabbard - and American Jews have
started to tremble at the distant rumble of an approaching earthquake.

This week, Netanyahu's brother-in-law has used our own doomsday weapon. He declared that
Obama is an "anti-Semite". The official newspaper of the Shas party has asserted that Obama
is really a Muslim. They represent the radical right and its allies, who argue in speech and in
writing that "Hussein" Obama is a Jew-hating black who must be beaten in the coming
congressional elections and in the next presidential ones.

(Yet an important poll in Israel published yesterday shows that the Israeli public is far from
convinced by these insinuations: the vast majority believes that Obama's treatment of Israel is
fair. Indeed, Obama got higher marks than Netanyahu.)

If Obama decides to fight back and activate his doomsday weapon - the accusation that Israel
puts the lives of American servicemen at risk - this would have catastrophic consequences
for Israel.

 For the time being, this is only a shot across the bow - a warning shot fired by a warship in
 order to induce another vessel to follow its instructions. The warning is clear. Even if the
•present crisis is somehow damped down, it will inevitably flare up again and again as long as
 the present coalition in Israel stays in power.

When the movie "Hurt Locker" won its awards, the entire American public was united in its
concern about the lives of its soldiers in the Middle East. If this public becomes convinced
that Israel is sticking a knife in their back, it will be a disaster for Netanyahu. And not just for
him.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768302 Date: 08/31/2015
