      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772909 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART B6



From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                               Tuesday, January 19, 2010 7:23 AM
To:                                 'millscd@state.gov.
Subject:                            Re: Hope you are well, where ever you get this-- below are ideas re: education corps for
                                    Haiti that you asked for



Great ideas (no surprise). Let's work toward solid proposal maybe to Red Cross and Clinton Foundation since they have
unencumbered $

    Original Message
From: Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
To: H
Cc: Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent: Tue Jan 19 03:43:19 2010
Subject: Fw: Hope you are well, where ever you get this-- below are ideas re: education corps for Haiti that you asked for

Read all the way down (2 emails)

Cdm




From: David Domenici <
To: David Domenici <                          ›; Mills, Cheryl D; Cheryl Mills <
Sent: Mon Jan 18 21:05:40 2010
Subject: RE: Hope you are well, where ever you get this-- below are ideas re: education corps for Haiti that you asked for




One other thought.

If the idea of building network of small new schools is just nuts given the infrastructure challenges, an alternative is
more of the 'street school' approach. We take storefronts, little mom and pop storefronts, etc...and do minor
reconfiguration and you have a whole set of little street schools clustered around central location. This could work,
poses some challenges re: isolation of teachers, ability to offer a robust set of classes/offerings, but can still do the job,
and can still have clear grand openings to help jumpstart culture, etc.

dd




From: David Domenici
Sent: Monday, January 18, 2010 7:55 PM
To: 'Mills, Cheryl D'; 'Cheryl Mills'
Subject: Hope you are well, where ever you get this-- below are ideas re: education corps for Haiti that you asked for




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772909 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772909 Date: 08/31/2015




Hey Cheryl,




Here are some quick thoughts on re-building school infrastructure in Port-au-Prince. Feel free to share with whomever
you'd like.




I have little idea of the larger context here — how many schools/kids are we looking at, but one thing we've learned in
the US in the last 5 years is that good teachers are the #1 lever of change in education. If we got 1,000 really great
teachers into Port-au-Prince (w/ even a modicum of support and materials), they'd make a big difference and touch the
lives of 30,000-60,000 kids.




I think this is totally doable, in short-order, in a magnificent way that could set the foundation for a well-educated
generation of Haitians who could lead the country out of poverty, to self-sustainability, self-governance and openness.




To do--

Goal 1: Bring immediate influx of human capital into education sector in concentrated areas, and map out plan for long-
term development of teachers/human capital.

Goal 2: Build curriculum, instructional materials that will support current Haitian elementary age students learning the
academic and related skills they need to lead country to long-term sustainability.

Goal 3: Build/reconstruct schools and training centers that will support high quality education, and on their own,
motivate and inspire children, families, and communities to send children to school.

Goal 4: Create (develop) family, community, economic, cultural, socio-political infrastructure that encourages and
support all children going to school through elementary school, with goal of eradicating illiteracy and expanding the
average level of education for Port-a-Prince residents to the [6th/8th] grade.




Goal 1: Human Capital:

Create Haiti Teacher Corps. Model loosely off of Peace Corps/Teach for America, CityYear

      Teacher corps (US): Recruit, train, and place 500-1000 teachers from US this spring and summer. We can do this.

o     Recruiting: Limit variable this year, and build up and out as we go. This spring we go to Georgetown, Univ of
Maryland and Univ of Miami and University of Florida/S. Florida. Given crisis, current opportunities in the US, we could
easily hire 500 college graduates of very high quality from 4 major universities under 2 year contracts.

o     Summer institute is 8 weeks in US; language training, intensive teacher training; onsite at two major universities
(College Park, Univ. of Miami).




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772909 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772909 Date: 08/31/2015



o     Language/culture training: TDB — find the best folks out there to train in French/Creole, and Haitian culture,
current socio-political situation — 50% of the training program.

o    Academic training: We'll work w/ TFA and others and develop 8 week intensive teacher training program for other
50% of program.

      Teacher Corps (Haitian):

o     I need to learn more on this...but this would likely be critical both short-and long-term.

o      Need to know who/how to recruit. Avoid political pitfalls; focus on what we've learned about good teachers—you
want people who have excelled in something—almost anything; so, we set up recruiting team on the ground in Haiti to
find cohort of 500 new teachers; training is nearly identical to US teaching corp (i.e., modeled off of TFA summer
institute).

o     Training: either bring them over to US to live and learn w/ US counterparts, or if that's too precarious, look to
move them out of the city for 6-8 weeks over the summer. Find space 100 miles out and build summer camp/institute
for them.

      Teacher leaders/principals/trainers:

o    Much easier than you'd think. Huge network now in the charter and ed reform community of hard-working,
mission-driven teacher-leaders who would take this on.

o    (US Based) TFA/New Teacher Project alumni are in schools all over the US. They have taught for 2-6 years, want a
chance to do something totally meaningful. This is is. We'll recruit 100-200 of them, and they will lead cohorts of 20
teachers...

o     Haiti-based: Less clear what the teacher-leader pipeline is like...but we can figure out and get whoever we can.

      Compensation, related.

o     We should build dorms/apts for people. Serve food in cafeteria's on-site at the schools; have community kitchens
available, etc.

o     All US staff gets paid minimally during their tour/commitment, but earns stipends/completion bonuses. If folks
convinced their expenses will be covered, they will have money to spend, we then backload this. So, might be a $10,000
salary and a $10,000 bonus upon completion. You live cheap; two years later, you get check that amounts to what you
would have saved if you had been living, working, paying bills, etc. in the US.

o     Not sure about how to do Haitian pay. But structure similarly.

      What do we need to accomplish the Human Capital Goal?

o     In the US, not much.

      A small staff of the right people could recruit, interview, assess and hire 500 corp members and we could get that
done between Feb 1 and June 1, 2010—easily.

§     Cot:

     2-4 staff on board by 2.1; 10-15 staff on board by 3.1.10; that team will get everyone hired by 6.1.10



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772909 Date: 08/31/2015
-
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772909 Date: 08/31/2015



      Summer training institutes: 500-100 teachers, housing at universities; training/supervision staff at 1:20 ratio to
recruits


      8.1.10—Teaching Corp heads to Haiti, ongoing cost of housing, stipends/salary, health care, training/supervision,
etc (we could build out draft operating budget quickly, but not doing that now).

o    In Haiti, less clear, but I think if we identify the right people, we'd concurrently recruit, interview, assess, hire 500
people.

       Staffing and Cost: See notes above re: US recruitment and training. Assess current status in Haiti, and set up
staffing, recruiting, hr function.

      Concurrently, we have team that is developing summer training materials, and working on curriculum/content
(see below).

      Concurrently, we have team that is working on facilities (see below)

      Concurrently, we have team working on community outreach (see below).




Goal 2: Build a robust curriculum and teacher instruction program

We need to immediately tilt teaching and learning in the early grades to the skills and contents that are necessary in
Haiti so that it people can enable it grow and develop economically, politically.




I am not a curriculum expert, but I think this is really doable, as well, so long as we get the right team—which in this case
is likely a team of leading experts from Haiti, possibly other countries that have intentionally undergone an intensive
ramp-up in the education sector, and US curriculum writers.




      US-Team:

o    Similar to above, there is incredible talent in the charters, and in a few major cities where structural education
reform has taken hold.

o     We just need a small team to join us for 1 year to help us jump start the project.

      Haiti/Other countries:

o    We need to talk w/ folks in Haiti and find current state of curriculum, standards, instructional guides, books,
materials, etc.

-     Backwards Mapping: This is not as hard as it seems.

o      We get the right people to help us figure out what a 10-12 year old Haitian should know and we map backwards,
all the way to preschool.

o     Once we get an end goal in key areas – math, reading, writing, history/social studies, science...we map backwards
and start to define what we will teach.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772909 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772909 Date: 08/31/2015




o     And once we decide this, we use some of the tools we've developed in the US in the last 5-10 years to help us
write curriculum, produce instructional materials.

o     This will be a jumbled mess to start...but will work and sort itself out.

o     We build it in clusters and in modules that can be swapped in and out, and mixed and matched. You want to give
teachers tools so they can be successful with kids of different ages and abilities, particularly early on when we're likely
to be operating more like one-room school houses than grade level schools we're used to here.

o     We build in assessments, standards, and teach teachers how to recognize when kids are falling behind, how to
build in supports and tutorials.

o     The goal is to get large cohort of younger kids, I think, who start to learn and be taught to standards...all the while,
we push hard in the upper grades, knowing it will be a lot less clear (and possibly much more directed towards helping
current teens develop basic skills they need to be employable and contributing members of the rebuilding efforts –so
this may be basic literacy, key vocational skills, etc.).

       Cost/staffing: Small US team that works with Haitian/other country team. Within a year or so, this team should be
Haiti-based, w/ possible long-term support/membership from the US team. The start-up team sets up framework,
establishing learning standards, builds tools and cranks out curricular materials—some of which are developed
specifically for Haiti, but many of which may be translations from high quality materials from US and elsewhere.




Goal 3: Build high quality, durable schools that entice families, children into education.




In spite of current situation, this seems like another very doable goal.




       Get some schools built quickly to entice attendance.

o     Once rebuilding starts up, we can build schools quickly, affordably. And once they are up, if done correctly, they
will immediately be attractive to families and communities. This, ironically, will be the case if we can get schools up
quickly—while much of the other infrastructure is still in poor shape. Families will Want kids in schools if the schools are
safe, offer food, health care and structure—much of which will be wanting in devastated, poor neighborhoods.

-      I'm not facilities expert, either; this is an area where we can look to other examples in the developing world for
best practices. Nonprofits and governments have worked together to build great schools in many places in Africa, South
America, and even recently in the Middle East.

      To think about: Consider technology and technology infrastructure as a part of the initial construction plan so it's
not add-on later.

      To think about: Keeping the schools small, functional, really basic will help us get them up; including significant
health care and related services complicates planning, build-out, but increases functionality.

      Cost/staffing: I don't have enough knowledge about this, particularly in Haiti. I think it would be quite easy to find
the best models and quickly develop turnkey model for design/build that would ensure functionality, safety, and cost
compliance.

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772909 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772909 Date: 08/31/2015




      Once we have this, we either develop this capacity internally, or contract out and get these built, quickly.




Goal 4: Create family, community impetus for all school age children to be in school




This is both the end-game and a necessary condition along the way.




       The simpleton in me thinks that highly engaged, spirited teachers, inside safe, modern school buildings that serve
healthy meals at no charge will, for some period of time (years) be a catalyst for socio-political change. And if we can
get traction for a few years, and get large cohorts of young children actively engaged in school, then it will be hard to
unwind the long-term, salutary benefits.

      Clearly, if families remain in poverty, and adults have no means to earn enough money to support families, then
children of all ages, but particularly as they move toward teen years, will be attracted to alternatives other than school—
some legitimate, but low-wage, and others illegal and destructive.

       In short-term, while we are developing program, we should be doing extensive community outreach and in all
cases, getting neighborhoods and communities engaged in the pre-planning process. Families everywhere get excited
about a new school, new teachers, and a new chance. And w should play on this—this will enable us to do necessary
planning around enrollment, student/family needs, etc. We shouldn't sort of move slowly from no school to some
school, we should go from no school to a new school and fresh start—even if that delays opening a bit. The first day
should be major community event, that everyone can reflect upon and hold to in difficult times.




Gotta run. See you shortly.

xo,

dd




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772909 Date: 08/31/2015
