      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772633 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                  RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                  B5


From:                               McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sent:                               Sunday, October 10, 2010 11:12 AM
To:
Subject:                            Re: InterAction op-ed on branding in Pakistan


Thx. I feel the same way! Just got off a call with usaid, srap and my team. We are drafting a response. I think we need
something firm, accurate and rapid. Still deciding who will sign and whether it will be an op ed or letter to the editor. I
want to be sure we avoid a public battle with the ngo community on this issue. UsAID is recommending that Raj meet
with Worthington and read him the riot act for the op ed.

Will forward the draft before we send.

8TW, USAID confirmed that there was no USG branding in the attacks Worthington references.

Jm

     Original Message
From: H <HDR22@clintonemail.com>
To: McHale, Judith A
Sent: Sun Oct 10 10:48:22 2010
Subject: Re: InterAction op-ed on branding in Pakistan

Thx--I love working w you--I feel sometimes we were separated at birth! Onward!

    Original Message
From: McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
To: H
Sent: Sun Oct 10 09:07:53 2010
Subject: Re: InterAction op-ed on branding in Pakistan

I agree. As you know I believe passionately that it is not in our national interests to continue to provide billions of dollars
in aid and assistance without the very people we are helping knowing we are the ones providing the assistance. Some of
our research in Pakistan indicates that many people believe the assistancee is coming from China and of course the
Chinese do nothing to correct the record.

I asked INR to provide me with an assessment of the current situation after the floods to determine the impact of our
assistance. I have also asked them to work with the IC to give us an accurate and unbiased assessment of the security
risks involved. I aksed for it a couple of weeks ago so hopefully they will have something we can use now which might be
helpful in drafting a response.

In terms of the security arguments he makes, it is worth noting that the incidents he references are situations where the
attacks occured in places where there was NO USG branding. The reality is that the terrorists attack any group or
institution which might impede their ability to prevail.

I had already planned a USAID/State meeting to address this issue this week. I'll try to get everyone together today or
tomorrow and will report back to you.

   Original Message
From: H <HDR22@clintonemail.com>
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772633 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772633 Date: 08/31/2015




To: McHale, Judith A
Sent: Sun Oct 10 08:08:19 2010
Subject: Re: InterAction op-ed on branding in Pakistan

JM-
                               HRC

    Original Message
From: McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
To: H; Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>; Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>; Reines, Philippe I
<reinesp@state.gov>
Sent: Sun Oct 10 05:50:43 2010
Subject: Fw: InterAction op-ed on branding in Pakistan

Fyi




From: Schwartz, Larry
To: McHale, Judith A; Douglas, Walter T; Davidson, Mark .1
Sent: Sun Oct 10 01:35:11 2010
Subject: FW: InterAction op-ed on branding in Pakistan




Interaction op-ed that Raj Shah was told will appear in the Washington Post also appeared in Sunday Daily Times in
Pakistan.




by Samuel A. Worthington




The work that relief and humanitarian organizations carry out in Pakistan is far from easy or safe. We go to difficult areas
and are targets for militants seeking to destroy our lifesaving mission through a campaign of killing, kidnapping and
intimidation.




Overtly branding our efforts as sponsored by the U.S. government — as the Obama administration wants us to do —
only makes our jobs harder and more dangerous.




I have the privilege of leading InterAction, an alliance of U.S.-based nongovernmental organizations conducting relief
work around the world; nearly a quarter of our 200 members are responding to the recent floods in Pakistan, and many
 of them have been in Pakistan for decades.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772633 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772633 Date: 08/31/2015




Though our efforts are supported by public donations, much of the assistance we deliver — whether food, water,
essential health care or education — comes via funding from the U.S. government. And in recent weeks, the Obama
administration has pressured us to make that link as clear and public as possible. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham
Clinton questioned our courage, suggesting last month that some NGOs are too "afraid to have association with the U.S.
government" while distributing aid in Pakistan.




None of the NGO workers in Pakistan — living under a daily threat of kidnappings or targeted killings — are cowards.
The dangers they face are immense, and their bravery must be commended as they help people whose lives have been
devastated by terrorism or the epic floods.




Of course, I understand where the administration is coming from. The U.S.-funded assistance we provide saves lives and
helps struggling communities rebuild. In the battle for hearts and minds in Pakistan, U.S. officials argue, the failure to
clearly advertise that the American government is behind this help — with, for instance, logos on medicines or signs on
food-distribution centers — is a missed opportunity. In 2009 the United States approved $7.5 billion in assistance to
Pakistan over the next five years; however, as Washington Post columnist David Ignatius noted recently, Pakistanis read
more about American drone attacks than about these aid dollars.




In countries such as Liberia or Democratic Republic of Congo, U.S. NGOs that get funding from the U.S. government
routinely promote the fact that they are delivering help "from the American people." But in Pakistan, where aid workers'
lives are more often at stake, an enforced branding campaign could undermine our ability to deliver assistance as fast as
possible without being a lightning rod for protests or attacks. It would also put the lives of Americans and their Pakistani
colleagues at risk. (It is usually Pakistani nationals who do the bulk of the work on the ground.)




In an environment where we are often soft targets for militants, drawing attention to our connection to the U.S.
government makes us even more vulnerable.




In March, one of InterAction's most active members in Pakistan, World Vision — which works on issues from health care
to farming to literacy — was attacked in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (formerly called the North-West Frontier Province), and
seven of its employees were killed. And a year ago, the office of the World Food Program in Islamabad was attacked,
and five employees were killed.




There must be a balance among mitigating the risks NGOs face, communicating U.S. goodwill and delivering assistance
effectively. NGOs must be allowed to strike that balance on their own every day — even if the upshot is that we don't
include U.S. signs on new health clinics.




In some cases, particularly in less-volatile regions of Pakistan, conspicuously identifying aid as American may not pose a
threat to our work. But in areas where militants are particularly active, the risks to those delivering the aid may be great.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772633 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772633 Date: 08/31/2015




These judgments must be made by the NGOs on the ground, depending on local circumstances, and not directed by the
State Department's branding concerns.




In Pakistani tribal areas along the Afghan border, for instance, the U.S. Agency for International Development has
granted our members waivers allowing us not to brand U.S. assistance, but there is growing pressure by the government
for these waivers to be phased out. While I agree that U.S. aid to the Pakistani people and government needs to be more
visible, this could put humanitarian workers' lives in jeopardy.




The American people are enormously generous, as shown after Haiti's devastating earthquake in January and in the
aftermath of the December 2004 tsunami in Asia. In Pakistan, the United States — through military and civilian
assistance, as well as through NGOs — is playing a major role in response to the recent floods, which forced at least 15
million people from their homes. The humanitarian groups I represent are providing basics, including clean water,
medicine and shelter.




The debate over branding our efforts is not simply another technical policy decision; for us, it can be a matter of life and
death. NGOs and the Obama administration must work together to find a solution that allows humanitarian workers in
the field flexibility to brand or not, according to security conditions on the ground.




We are ready and eager to have that dialogue. The lives of our front-line workers depend on it.




Samuel A. Worthington is president of InterAction, an alliance of U.S.-based nongovernmental organizations carrying out
international humanitarian and development work.

END




SBU

This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772633 Date: 08/31/2015
