     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768859 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                                     RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                     B6



From:                             sbwhoeop
Sent:                             Wednesday, March 24, 2010 11:11 PM
To:
Subject:                          h: FYI, Iran document Gary Sick sent me. Sid




From Gary Sick

Mojtaba Samareh Hashemi is a senior adviser to President Ahmadinejad and a devoted proponent of the Divine Right of
Kings doctrine of ultra-conservative ayatollah Mesbah-Yazdi. Many regard him as an eminence grise of the Iranian regime
and an important bridge between the Revolutionary Guards, the fanatic-fringe ayatollahs, and the presidency. So his
words are worth listening to as clues to what is happening inside the closed circles of the Iranian leadership.

Today he was quoted by the Fars news agency (in Persian) on the troublesome issue of U.S.-Iran relations. Although the
statement was translated into English, it needs more than a word-for-word translation in order to be understood. So I have
added my own interpretation of what Mojtaba really meant to say.



"Obama not only did not manage to realize his slogan [of change], but has pursued the dark policies of Bush all over the
world ever more energetically..."

[real meaning: Oh, how we miss George Bush! He was such an easy target. With him we were winning everywhere and
America's credibility was falling to the point of disappearance even among its friends.]

"The Bush presidency is one of the darkest eras of the United States and the greatest hatred emerged internationally
towards the United States..."

[Why can't Obama be more like Bush? In the good old days we didn't have to keep answering questions about why we
would not accept an outstretched hand of friendship. It was all so much easier then.]

"Today we see that the United States rather than moving its military forces out of Iraq and Afghanistan has increased their
number which has led to mass murder of the people and increased impoverishment in these countries. Obama had said
that he wanted to oppose violation of human rights and wanted to close Guantanamo and secret prisons in Europe. Did
this happen? Of course not..."

[The United States has announced its withdrawal from Iraq and actually seems to be on schedule; in the meantime, our
favorite parties and politicians in Iraq have not done all that well in the Iraqi elections despite our support. The Shi'i
religious leaders in Najaf openly dismiss the idea of an Islamic Republic and are increasingly competing with us, instead
of following our lead. In Afghanistan, the Americans seem to be serious about announcing a date certain for withdrawal,
and they even seem to be edging up to a Karzai reconciliation strategy with the Taliban. How can we attack them with a
straight face when they behave this way!]

"There has also not been any correction of the dark policy of Bush towards Iran's nuclear program or [the United State's]
opposition towards the Iranian nation..."

[Their willingness to meet with us and that dastardly offer of a uranium swap were hugely embarrassing. Now every time
we sit down with a foreign leader we have to listen to tiresome suggestions that we should reconsider our position on the
uranium swap — even from the Russians and Chinese. You can't trust anyone these days!]

"We do not want anything from the United States. The Iranian nation demands its rights to be recognized and
respected..."

[All we want from the Americans is the return of George Bush! Even John McCain would be an improvement. I wonder if
Sarah Palin has any chance? We'll keep our fingers crossed.]

"The Islamic Republic has not become isolated, rather, it is expanding [its foreign relations] ever more and is finding new
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768859 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768859 Date: 08/31/2015



friends... if they have claims, they must show it in their actions so the Iranian nation gradually trusts them..."

[We have never been so alone since the earliest years of the revolution. Even dictators and police states are privately
expressing sympathy to us for the way our crackdown on the Green Movement attracted sympathetic attention all over the
world. And it's all the fault of that *&!*Obama and the %$#! internet. The shah never had all these problems. Ah, for the
good old days...]




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05768859 Date: 08/31/2015
