       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773753 Date: 08/31/2015

                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                       B6




From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Sunday, December 26, 2010 9:27 AM
To:                              H
Subject:                         Fw: Kristof on qddr/3 ds



Nice piece

Caitlin had made me talk to him last monday



From: Caitlin Klevorick
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Sun Dec 26 09:21:45 2010
Subject: Kristof on qddr/3 ds


December 25, 2010




The Big (Military) Taboo
By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF
We face wrenching budget cutting in the years ahead, but there's one huge area of government
spending that Democrats and Republicans alike have so far treated as sacrosanct.

It's the military/security world, and it's time to bust that taboo. A few facts:

• The United States spends nearly as much on military power as every other country in the world
combined, according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. It says that we spend
more than six times as much as the country with the next highest budget, China.

• The United States maintains troops at more than 560 bases and other sites abroad, many of them a
legacy of a world war that ended 65 years ago. Do we fear that if we pull our bases from Germany,
Russia might invade?

• The intelligence community is so vast that more people have "top secret" clearance than live in
Washington, D.C.

• The U.S. will spend more on the war in Afghanistan this year, adjusting for inflation, than we spent
on the Revolutionary War, the War of 1812, the Mexican-American War, the Civil War and the
Spanish-American War combined.

This is the one area where elections scarcely matter. President Obama, a Democrat who symbolized
new directions, requested about 6 percent more for the military this year than at the peak of the Bush
administration.
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773753 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773753 Date: 08/31/2015




"Republicans think banging the war drums wins them votes, and Democrats think if they don't chime
in, they'll lose votes," said Andrew Bacevich, an ex-military officer who now is a historian at Boston
University. He is author of a thoughtful recent book, "Washington Rules: America's Path to
Permanent War."

The costs of excessive reliance on military force are not just financial, of course, as Professor Bacevich
knows well. His son, Andrew Jr., an Army first lieutenant, was killed in Iraq in 2007.

Let me be clear: I'm a believer in a robust military, which is essential for backing up diplomacy. But
the implication is that we need a balanced tool chest of diplomatic and military tools alike. Instead, we
have a billionaire military and a pauper diplomacy. The U.S. military now has more people in its
marching bands than the State Department has in its foreign service — and that's preposterous.

What's more, if you're carrying an armload of hammers, every problem looks like a nail. The truth is
that military power often isn't very effective at solving modern problems, like a nuclear North Korea
or an Iran that is on the nuclear path. Indeed, in an age of nationalism, our military force is often
counterproductive.

After the first gulf war, the United States retained bases in Saudi Arabia on the assumption that they
would enhance American security. Instead, they appear to have provoked fundamentalists like Osama
bin Laden into attacking the U.S. In other words, hugely expensive bases undermined American
security (and we later closed them anyway). Wouldn't our money have been better spent helping
American kids get a college education?

Paradoxically, it's often people with experience in the military who lead the way in warning against
overinvestment in arms. It was President Dwight Eisenhower who gave the strongest warning: "Every
gun that is made, every warship launched, every rocket fired signifies, in the final sense, a theft from
those who hunger and are not fed, those who are cold and are not clothed." And in the Obama
administration, it is Defense Secretary Robert Gates who has argued that military spending on things
large and small can and should expect closer, harsher scrutiny; it is Secretary Gates who has argued
most eloquently for more investment in diplomacy and development aid.

American troops in Afghanistan are among the strongest advocates of investing more in schools there
because they see firsthand that education fights extremism far more effectively than bombs. And
here's the trade-off: For the cost of one American soldier in Afghanistan for one year, you could build
about 20 schools.

There are a few signs of hope in the air. The Simpson-Bowles deficit commission proposes cutting
money for armaments, along with other spending. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton unveiled a
signature project, the quadrennial diplomacy and development review, which calls for more emphasis
on aid and diplomacy in foreign policy.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773753 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773753 Date: 08/31/2015




"Leading through civilian power saves lives and money," Mrs. Clinton noted, and she's exactly right.
The review is a great document, but we'll see if it can be implemented — especially because House
Republicans are proposing cuts in the State Department budget.

They should remind themselves that in the 21st century, our government can protect its citizens in
many ways: financing research against disease, providing early childhood programs that reduce crime
later, boosting support for community colleges, investing in diplomacy that prevents costly wars.

As we cut budgets, let's remember that these steps would, on balance, do far more for the security of
Americans than a military base in Germany.

I invite you to comment on this column on my blog, On the Ground. Please also join me on Facebook, watch my YouTube
videos and follow me on Twitter.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773753 Date: 08/31/2015
