    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772088 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                       RELEASE
                                                                                                       IN PART B6


From:                               PVerveer
Sent:                               Saturday, December 18, 2010 1:22 PM
To:
Subject:                            child marriage defeat


The defeat of the Child Marriage bill, I fear, is a harbinger of what's to come. After passing the Senate unanimously, there
was every expectation that it would fly through the House on suspension. How this too became an abortion issue is truly
distressing. We have our work more than cut out for us.

On another note, i ran into Ray and Shaista the other night. They were recently in Pakistan and stayed with Zardari the
whole time. It might make sense for someone to brief Ray. Zardari considers him his informal ambassador to the US.




                            z..L             ;; ;•=r-i                  e    fo rc,; e
       Posted: i7 Dec 2010 03:08 PM PS'

       Incoming House Foreign Affairs chairwoman ileana Ros-Lehtinen. (R-FL) defeated a bill Thursday evening that
      would have committed the United States to combating forced child marriages abroad, by invoking concerns about
       the legislation's cost and that funds could be uses to finance abortions. The episode highlights the tough road that
       the °barna administration will face in advancing its women's rights and foreign aid agenda during the next
      Congressional session.

      Non-governmental organizations, women's rights advocates, and. lawmakers from both parties spent years
      developing and lobbying for the "International Protecting Girls by Preventing Child Marriage Act of 2010," which
      the House failed to pass in a vote Thursday. The bill failed even though 241 Congressmen voted, for it and only 166
      voted against, because House Speaker Nancy Petosi (D-CA) brought it up under "suspension of the rules." This
       procedure has the advantage of not allowing any amendments or changes to the bill, but carries the disadvantage of
       requiring two-thirds of the. votes for passage.

    ; Even still, supporters in both parties fully expected the bill to garner the 290 votes needed -- right up until the bill.
       failed. After all, it passed the Senate unanimously Dee. i with the co-sponsorship of several Republicans. including
       Appropriations Committee ranking Republican Thad Cochran (R-MS), Foreign Relations Committee member
       Roger ‘Vick-er (P.-MS), and human rights advocate Sam Brownback (R-KS).

       if passed, the bill would have authorized the president to provide assistance "to prevent the incidence of child
       marriage in developing countries through the promotion of educational, health, economic, social, and legal
       empowerment of girls and women." It would have also mandated that the administration develop a multi-year
       strategy on the issue and that the State Department include the incidence of forced child marriage during its annual
       evaluation of countries' human rights practices.

       So what happened? Ros-Lehtinen first argued that the bill was simply unaffordable. In a Dec. i6"
             she objected to the Post of the bill, which would be Si.08 million over five years, and criticized it for not
       providing an accounting of how much the U.S. was already spending on this (Alba The                                 '


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772088 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772088 Date: 08/31/2015




  said the bill would authorize $1o8 million, but would only require $67 million in outlays from fiscal years 2011 to
  2015.


  Ros-Lehtinen introduced her own version of the bill, which she said would only cost $1 million. But in a fact sheet
  gDF.), organizations supporting the original legislation said that Ros-Lehtinen's bill removed the implementation
  procedures that gave the legislation teeth. "Without such activities, the bill becomes merely a strategy with no actual
  implementation. And without implementation of a strategy, the bill will have an extraordinarily limited impact,"
  they wrote.

  Regardless, the supporters still thought the bill would pass because House Republican leadership had not come out
  against it. But about one hour before the vote, every Republican House office received a message on the bill
  from GOP leadership, known as a Whip Alert, saying that leadership Nyould vote "no" on the bill and encouraging all
  Republicans do the same. The last line on the alert particularly shocked the         supporters.

  "There are also concerns that funding will be directed to NGOs that promote and perform abortion and efforts to
  combat child marriage could be usurped as a way to overturn pro-life laws," the alert read.

  The bill doesn't contain any funding for abortion activities and federal funding for abortion activities is already
; prohibited by what's known as the                    almen`e" which has been boiler plate language in appropriations
  bills since 1973.

  Invoking the abortion issue sent the bill's supporters reeling. They believed that it was little more than a stunt,
  considering that Republican pro-life senators had carefully reviewed the legislation and concluded it would not have
  an impact on the abortion issue.

  Rep. Stephen LaTourrette (R-OH)                  -   the Republican leadership for invoking the abortion issue to defeat
  the forced child marriage act in a floor speech .Friday morning.

  "Yesterday I was on the floor and I was a co-sponsor with [on] a piece of legislation with [Rep. Betty McCollum
  (D-MN)] that would have moved money, no new money, would have moved money so that societies that are
  coercing young girls into marriage... we could make sure that they stay in school so they're not forced into marriage
  at the age of 12 and 13," LaTourette said. "Ail of a sudden there was a fiscal argument. When that didn't work people
  had to add an abortion element to it. This is a partisan place. I'm a Republican. I'm glad we beat their butt in the
  election, but there comes a time when, enough is enough."

  But it was too late for LaTourette and other Republicans who had fought hard for the bill, including Aaron Schoch,
  (R-11). The bill is even less likely to pass next year, when the GOP will control the House and Ros-Lehtinen will
  control the Foreign Affairs committee.

  The main author of the bill was Senate Majority Whip Dick Durbin (D-IL), who was incensed when the bill failed
  in the House.

  -The action on the House floor stopping the Child 'Marriage bill tonight will endanger the lives of millions of women.
  and girls around the world," Durbin said in a Thursday statement. "These .voung girls, enslaved in marriage, will be




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772088 Date: 08/31/2015
 UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772088 Date: 08/31/2015




  brutalized and many will die when their young bodies are torn apart while giving birth. Those who voted to continue
  this barbaric practice brought shame to Capitol Hill."

   For the NGO and women's advocacy community, the implications of this defeat extend much further than just this
  bill. They also saw Republicans invoke the abortion issue when objecting to the International Violence Against
  Women Act and expect the new Congress to push for reinstatement of the "Mexico City Policy," which would
  prevent federal funding for any organizations that even discuss abortion.

  "Any time a health bill that has to do with women and girls comes to the House floor, we're going to see a debate
  like the one we just saw," said one advocacy leader who supported the bill. "It's hard to imagine how any
  development bills are going to pass in this environment."

  The protection of women and girls is a major focus of Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who promised to elevate
  the issue Thursday when rolling out the State Department's Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review. She
  has said that forced child marriage is "a clear and unacceptable violation of human rights", and that "the
  Department of State categorically denounces all cases of child marriage as child abuse".

  State's Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues Melanne Verveer has worked hard on the issue behind
  the scenes. But at the eleventh hour, when the going got tough, the bill's supporters said that the administration was
  nowhere to be found. In October, the White House decided to waive all penalties under the Child Soldiers
  Prevention Act, another Durbin led bill that the NCO community supports.

  United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) estimates that 6o million girls in developing countries now between the
  ages of 20 and 24 were married before they reached 18. The Population Council,
  reproductive and child health, estimates that the number will increase by too million over the next decade if current
  trends continue.




          !


  One of the two biggest problems identified in the Afghanistan-Pakistan Strategy Review released Thursday (?• :) is
  the Pakistani militasy's failure to crack down on some of the terrorist groups using Pakistan's tribal areas as a safe
- haven from which to launch attacks across the border into Afghanistan.

  Pakistan •         a major offensive, involving approximately go,000 troops, against extremists in South
  Waziristan in October 2009, and its military has also undertaken efforts to stamp out militants in other border
  areas. However, the military has yet to launch offensive military operations in North Waziristan, where insurgent
  groups wreaking havoc in Afghanistan reside.

  Pakistan's envoy in Washington, Ambassador Husain Haggai* reacted to the report by saying that Pakistan will
  engage isla.mist groups in North Waziristan, including the •Hartgani network (no relation), but only when there is



 UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772088 Date: 08/31/2015
 UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772088 Date: 08/31/2015




  sufficient support in all areas of Pakistan's government for the effort, and not until they are confident that the
  mission can be completed effectively.

  "Pakistan has made it very clear that we are fighting terrorists because they are a threat to our own existence as a
  modern democratic nation. We will fight all groups in all parts of our country," Haqqani said in an exclusive
  interview with The Cable. "But we will follow timelines that suit our own capabilities and can lead to success."

  Haqqani said that the Pakistani army, which has taken the fight to six out of the seven regions inside Pakistan in
  which domestic militant groups operate and suffered thousands of casualties in the process, is simply not in a
  position to expand its war on the extremists now.

  "Right now, it's only a question of operational capability and readiness. Our armed forces have been engaged in
  dealing with flood relief work," he said. "We have to see what resources we will allocate in which part of the country,
  and those rather than any political factors are responsible for any waiting period."

  He also noted that "there is a fragile consensus in Pakistan in favor of military action against regional elements,"
  and that Pakistan's government has no choice but to make the decision to attack North Waziristan groups on a
  timeline that prioritized Pakistani considerations over American ones.

  "Sometimes it's easy for our allies to tell us what to do and for us to tell our allies what to do. But everyone makes
  decisions based on their own perceptions and analysis of on ground realities," Haqqani said.

  In several discussions with other Pakistani officials, an even more complicated picture of the Pakistani position on
  attacking groups in North Waziristan emerges. The Pakistanis largely believe that the U.S. government is being
  unrealistic in terms of the timelines it wants for cracking down on terrorist safe havens along the Afghanistan-
  Pakistan border, which have existed for decades.

, "There will always be a gap between our two countries because the Americans want things done quickly and done
  their way," another Pakistani government official said.

; A third senior Pakistani official said that many Pakistanis feel that the ()barna administration is placing too much of
  the blame on Pakistan for the lank of progress in the 'U.S.-led war in Afghanistan.

  'The U.S. keeps telling Pakistan to do more, but Pakistan keeps telling the U.S. to do more on certain questions such
  as speeding up building up of Afghan army, establishing a real process toward reconciliation, and providing
  Pakistan the means for large scale operations," the official said.

  The United States has provided Pakistan with several billions of dollars in military and economic aid to support its
  war against domestic insurgents. But many in the Pakistani government have criticized what they say characterize
  as the slow arrival of these funds, which they say are in any case too small to address Pakistan's severe problems.

  "It's very simplistic to measure success in amount of assistance provided to Pakistan," one Pakistani official said.

  In remarks delivered during the rollout of the strateu review Thursday, President Obama was diplomatic when
  discussing his administration's ongoing drive to push Pakistan to do more in North Waziristan.



  UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772088 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772088 Date: 08/31/2015




 "Increasingly, the Pakistani government recognizes that terrorist networks in its border regions are a threat to all
 our countries, especially Pakistan. We've welcomed major Pakistani offensives in the tribal regions. We will
 continue to help strengthen Pakistanis' capacity to root out terrorists," said Obama. "Nevertheless, progress has not
 come fast enough. So we will continue to insist to Pakistani leaders that terrorist safe havens within their borders
 must be dealt with."

 Undersecretary of Defense for Policy Michele Flournoy acknowledged in an interview the same day that there
 was more work to be done on the relationship before the Pakistanis were willing to fully support the U.S. and
 NATO-led mission in Afghanistan.

 "Given the ups and downs of our historical relationship with Pakistan, they fear our abandonment," she said. "Their
 calculus is very much affected by the long-term commitment they feel from us and in working in a strategic
 partnership."

 The White House recognizes that its efforts have fallen short so far. "The bottom line is that Pakistan is a country
 where we have little influence, little access and little credibility," one of Obama's aides to■..-:), The New York Times.

 The administration's official line, therefore, is to agree with the Pakistani government and express sensitivity to its
 claim that they simply can't expand their war against extremists at this time.

 "We would like them to move tomorrow, we would like them to take out these people tomorrow,"                 the new U.S.
 Ambassador to Pakistan Cameron Munter. "But we understand they're telling us honestly about the capacity of
 their military, and when they are able, we are convinced they will move in."

 But for many in Washington, the open-ended delay in Pakistan.s promise to expand military operations into North.
 Waziristan represents a strategic choice, and is not just a result of the military's operational limitations. But
 whatever Pakistan's reasons, the delay doesn't inspire confidence that the Obama administration can meet its
 timelines for making progress in Afghanistan.

 "Pakistan, meanwhile, iS hedging its bets, supporting proxy actors like the Quetta Shura Taliban and Haosiani
 Network that might counter Indian interests in Kabul after the United States and its allies eventually withdraw,"
       Andrew Extnn of the Center for a New American Security. 'The insurgent sanctuaries in Pakistan are one of
 the two Achilles heels in the NATO strategy."




                 ‘0        tt"
 Posted: 17 Dec iOO C 4:42 AM PST



 In a rare instance of bipartisanship, the House of Representatives moved to pass a resolution Friday honoring the
 life and work of the recently departed Ambassador Richard Holbrooke.

 The resolution C,                  was sponsored by outgoing House Appropriations State and Foreign Ops
 Subcommittee chairwoman Nita Lowey (D-NY), and cosponsored by incoming House Foreign Affairs chairwoman


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772088 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772088 Date: 08/31/2015




Ileana Ros-Lehtinen (R-FL), Howard Berman (D-CA), and Mike Turner (R-OH). The bill is "a concurrent
resolution honoring the exceptional achievements of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke and recognizing the
significant contributions he has made to United States national security, humanitarian causes and peaceful
resolutions of international conflict."

"The passing of Ambassador Holbrooke on Monday, December 13th, is a great loss for the American people," Lowey
said in a statement. "One of our nation's most talented diplomats, Richard Holbrooke possessed a fierce
determination and unsurpassed brilliance in advocating for American security, diplomatic, and development
interests around the world - in Southeast Asia and post-Cold War Europe, at the United Nations, and most recently
in Afghanistan and Pakistan. His exceptional accomplishments as a peace-maker, diplomat, writer, scholar,
manager and mentor will define his legacy as one of the true great foreign policy giants of our time."

Ros-Lehtinen praised Holbrooke as "one of the most consequential world diplomats of the last half-century," and
said that "his tireless work in pursuit of United States national interests and international peace have put us all in
his debt."

After praising his career -- which included two stints as assistant secretary of state, peace negotiator in the Balkans,
U.S. ambassador to the U.N., and service as U.S. special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan -- Ros-
Lehtinen called for reform of the United Nations and protection of Israel within its bodies.

"In New York at the UN, [Holbrooke] did much of the heavy lifting on Congressionally-led efforts to rein in UN
spending, to make more equitable the dues paid by the United States, and to improve the standing of Israel in that
multinational body," she said. "Sadly, those concerns have returned with a renewed urgency -- with the need for
fundamental reform of UN budget and the virulently anti-Israel UN Human Rights Council -- and the Congress can
only hope to have such a tenacious, principled partner in the future."




You are subscribed to email updates from                                                       Email delivery Dowered by Google
To stop receiving these emaIls, you may .r...hs■-.;


Inc. 20 West Kinzie, Chicago IL USA 60610




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772088 Date: 08/31/2015
