      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773833 Date: 08/31/2015

                                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL




From:                               H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                               Wednesday, February 10, 2010 11:30 AM
To:                                 'sullivanjj@state.gov'
Subject:                            Re: Blair statement



Well, that is certainly worthy of being top secret. Fine to go w Mitchell version; Blair's seems written as an oral
statement.

    Original Message
From: Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivanil@state.gov>
To: H
Sent: Wed Feb 10 11:26:11 2010
Subject: Blair statement

The first has Mitchell's edits, the second is original from Blair's guy to Mara:

Draft Statement by the Secretary as Revised by Senator Mitchell

This Administration has, from the beginning, worked to bring about comprehensive peace in the Middle East, including a
two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. On that issue our approach has been three-fold: (1) to help build
the economy and capacity to govern of a Palestinian state; (2) to renew political negotiations to enable the earliest
possible establishment of that state; and (3) to achieve these in a manner that ensures the security of Israel and of the
Palestinians.

Consistent with Prime Minister Fayyad's plan for a future Palestinian state, and to support the political negotiations,
Tony Blair, as the Quartet representative, will intensify his partnership with Senator Mitchell to mobilize the efforts of
the international community: (1) to build support for the institutional capacity and governance of a future Palestinian
State; (2) to improve freedom of movement and access for Palestinians; (3) to encourage further private sector
investment; and (4) to bring change in the living conditions of the people in Gaza.

Original Draft Statement by the Secretary Submitted by Tony Blair

The United States is determined to bring about a two-state solution. Believes there is a strong basis for doing
so. Believes it can be done by combining a renewed political negotiation with change on the ground, bottom up, as set
out in Prime Minister Fayyad's plan for a Palestinian state.

To this end, Tony Blair, as Quartet Representative, will work in partnership with Senator Mitchell to support the political
negotiation by mobilizing the efforts of the international community: (1) to build support for the institutional capacity
and future governance of a future Palestinian state; (2) to improve freedom of movement and access for Palestinians;
(3) to encourage further private sector investment; and (4) to bring change in the living conditions of the people in Gaza.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773833 Date: 08/31/2015
