      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773667 Date: 08/31/2015
                                                                                            RELEASE IN
                                                                                            PART B6




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, December 23, 2010 2:13 PM
To:
Subject:                           FW: steve in the cable



FYI

    Original Message--
From: Caitlin Klevorick [mailto:
Sent: Thursday, December 23, 2010 12:54 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: steve in the cable

Names: Radelet from State to USAID
Posted By Josh Rogin Thursday, December 23, 2010 - 12:34 PM Share

Steve Radelet, who joined the State Department last January to be Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's top advisor on
development, is moving over to USAID to be their first ever Chief Economist.

Radelet left his post as a senior fellow the Center for Global Development to help Clinton during the development of the
Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review, which was unveiled earlier this month. While at State he co-led the
QDDR task force on aid effectiveness and helped stand up the Feed the Future Initiative, a huge program that will be
transferred to USAID as part of the ODOR implementation. The Chief Economist job at USAID is new.

"The new position of Chief Economist (CE) will help establish USAID as a global leader for innovative policy analysis,
research, and implementation," read an internal USAID email about Radelet's move, obtained by The Cable. Radelet will
be part of the senior management team and report director to USAID Administrator Rajiv Shah.

According to the email, the job will have four functions:

1. Building USAID's capacity to conduct rigorous economic analysis, especially macroeconomic analysis, 2. Developing a
network of leading economic researchers and development economists, 3. Cultivating a new generation of economists
and research analysts at the Agency, and 4. Providing strategic and analytical support to USAID's work in priority
countries, and implementation of Presidential Initiatives and the Presidential Policy Directive.

Before working at CGD, Radelet was a founding co-chair of the Modernizing Foreign Assistance Network. He was Deputy
Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Africa, the Middle East, and Asia from
2000 to 2002.

Read the full job description after the jump:

Chief Economist

The new position for Chief Economist (CE) will help establish USAID as a global leader for innovative policy analysis,
research, and implementation by:

1.   Building USAID's capacity to conduct rigorous economic
analysis, especially macroeconomic analysis,



      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773667 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773667 Date: 08/31/2015




2.   Developing a network of leading economic researchers and
development economists,


3.   Cultivating a new generation of economists and research
analysts at the Agency, and


4.   Providing strategic and analytical support to USAID's work in
priority countries, and implementation of Presidential Initiatives and the Presidential Policy Directive.


Structure:


The Chief Economist will work extensively across the agency with both the functional and regional bureaus.


The CE will report to the Administrator and be a member of the Senior Management Team. The CE will be part of the
Front Office and have a special assistant and administrative support.


The CE will serve in an advisory capacity to the Bureau of Policy Planning and Learning (PPL) and the Bureau for
Sustainable Economic Growth (SEG). Given the cross cutting nature of the CE's work, and the resources and capacity it
will draw upon from both PPL and SEG, the CE will need to work in close alignment with the leadership of these two
Bureaus. The CE will participate in leadership meetings at both PPL and SEG, and be actively involved in advising both
bureaus. The details of this functional relationship will require further discussion between the CE and the Assistant
Administrators for PPL and SEG.


Build USAID's capacity to conduct rigorous economic analysis


Conduct focused economic and policy analysis in support of Administrator priorities at the direction of the Administrator
and serve as an economics advisor to the Administrator Enhance USAID's abilities to evaluate and understand the cost-
effectiveness and economic impacts of projects and programs.
Working closely with SEG, build USAID's capacity to incorporate rigorous economic analysis into project design,
implementation, and evaluation.
Strengthen USAID's capacity for understanding innovative ideas from external research and analysis and best practices
from other agencies, and incorporating these ideas into USAID programs.
Strengthen the knowledge base of all USAID staff on development economics through seminars, teaching, and training.
Establish regular development economics training seminars and courses for USAID staff and other staff from the
interagency.
Develop a network of researchers and development economists


Build and sustain networks of development economists from both inside and outside of the federal government
Establish and lead an interagency group of development economists and allow for USAID to be seen as a leader for inter-
agency thinking, analysis, and debate on development issues.
Develop strong partnerships between economic units and other major donor organizations such as World Bank, IMF,
DFID, etc.
Develop a "brain trust" / advisory board consisting of the world's leading development economists. The "Brain trust"
would be a mechanism under ACFVA and would leverage outside expertise and analysis in support USAID's economic
growth agenda.
Publish thought pieces for the agency on key priority economic growth issues.
Lead, mentor and guide a network of Agency economists and researchers


Working with SEG and PPL, help cultivate a cadre of senior, mid-career and junior professional policy analysts and
researchers that combine solid analytic and research skills with practical development experience.
Provide structured mentorship, support and guidance for the 77 economists working throughout the Agency.
Mentor and train a new generation of DLI economists.
Provide critical outlet and exchange function for Agency economists with the academic/ intellectual community.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773667 Date: 08/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773667 Date: 08/31/2015



Provide strategic and analytical support for priority Missions and Initiatives

Support PPL and the Missions in providing analysis and guidance as they lead implementation of the enhanced
engagement countries.
Support SEG in bringing economic analysis - particularly macroeconomics, trade and investment analysis to Feed the
Future and Climate Change Initiatives Review from time to time the effectiveness of economic growth programming.
Advise the Administrator on broad Agency policy issues, as needed.
Provide support to the Administrator to serve as the deputy governor at the regional development banks Working with
PPL, lead a process in developing a new economic growth agenda and vision for USAID, articulating the Agency's
contributions in relation to other USG agencies and the wider USG growth agenda.
Work with PPL, State and NSC to strategically increase the frequency with which USAID has the lead role in interagency
policy analysis, discussion, and debate for major development issues.
Working closely with PPL, support efforts in the lead up to the November 2011 South Korean Aid effectiveness meeting.
Working closely with the SEG focal point on the MCC, provide advice and analysis to the Administrator in his role as a
Board member of the MCC.
Represent the Agency at a senior level in interagency meetings and discussions, as appropriate.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773667 Date: 08/31/2015
