      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772371 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                     McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sent:                                     Wednesday, October 6, 2010 8:48 AM
To:                                       H; Sullivan, JacobJ
Subject:                                  FW: NHL scores big PD win in St. Pete!



At the end of the day, it's all about sports


From: Mellott, Joseph
Sent: Wednesday, October 06, 2010 8:43 AM
To: McHale, Judith A; DiMartino, Kitty
Subject: NHL scores big PD win in St. Pete!

First-Ever NHL-CHL Exhibition Game Helps Break International Ice in St. Petersburg: Thanks to U/S
Judith McHale who brought National Hockey League VP Ken Yaffe to Moscow under the auspices of the U.S.-
Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission for an icebreaker with Continental Hockey League representatives, St.
Petersburg's beloved SKA hockey team hosted the Carolina Hurricanes for an exhilarating exhibition game at
the Ice Palace. From the opening ceremony featuring both the U.S. and Russian national anthems, the capacity
crowd of 4,500 — including St. Petersburg Governor Valentina Matviyenko, SKA owner and Gazprom
Chairman Alexey Miller, Hurricanes owner and Compuware Corporation CEO Peter Karmanos, Jr., and U.S.
Consul General Sheila Gwaltney — cheered the two teams on. The heart-pounding, high-scoring game included
dazzling play by the 'Canes Eric Staal and Jeff Skinner (Carolina's game MVP) plus SKA favorites Alexei
Yashin (SKA's game MVP) and Maksim Sushinski. With Rossiya TV announcing that "we've waited 20 years
for this," SKA broke the second period tie and led their team to a 5-3 victory over the 'Canes in the last
period. SKA's enthusiastic organ player rocked the crowd with themes from "Ghostbusters" and "The Addams
Family" — plus Tina Turner's "Simply the Best" — and helped the Russian crowd give their home team their
traditional electrifying support. Continuing the "sports diplomacy" after the game, dozens of avid Russian
hockey fans waited patiently by the team buses and were elated when 'Canes Goalie Cam Ward signed
autographs and posed for photographs with them. The Russian crowd's enthusiasm for this match as well as
their admiration for the American team were ice-crystal clear from the capacity crowd (the stadium only sells
out for championship matches or games against their arch rival Moscow team), their cheers for the Hurricanes,
plus the extensive media presence, including live nation-wide coverage on Rossiya TV.



Joe Mellott
Special Assistant
Office of the Under Secretary for Public Diplomacy
U.S. Department of State
HST Rm. 5931
202-647-9901

mellottistate.qov

"A Help save paper - do you need to print this email?




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772371 Date: 08/31/2015
