UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767158 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                           RELEASE IN FULL




              Successfully Engaging Global Media
   About the U.S. Role and International Cooperation in Haiti
                             Examples of Post Efforts to Date

                                           EUROPE

  • Reinforcing the Secretary's message, U.S. Ambassador to France Rivkin
    engage directly with over 100 journalists in an event streamed live on-line by
    CNN, where he highlighted U.S. assistance to Haiti and the cooperation of the
    US with France, the UN and the international community. Embassy Paris also
    reached out to senior officials in the Elysee, MFA, French media and civil
    society at all levels to underscore the message of positive coordination with our
    French partners and to set the record straight on the work of the USG in Haiti.
    As a result, leading French officials dismissed rumors of rising diplomatic
    tensions between the two countries. Leading officials consistently praised the
    work of the Obama administration in Haiti and the need for a strong US role in
    the emergency response.

  • Embassy London's media blitz featured Ambassador Susman, who underlined
    the U.S. commitment to Haiti at an Embassy Martin Luther King Jr. holiday
    event with actor James Earl Jones; the event was covered by BBC World News
    (audience 270 million worldwide) and various U.K. papers. The Ambassador
    and the JO also spoke about Haiti on January 20-22 on BBC TV 2's "Daily
    Politics Show," BBC Radio, the BBC TV Evening News, and other media and
    helped embed an ITV journalist on the USNS Comfort to help balance ITV's
    previously negative reporting and reached out personally to BBC producers to
    call attention to inaccurate reporting alleging that the U.S. military prevented
    Medicins Sans Frontiers from delivering aid and supplies to the airport in Port
    Au Prince.

   • With media coverage growing more critical, U.S. Ambassador to Greece
     Speckhard gave an interview to Ta Nea newspaper and DCM Deborah
     McCarthy, who previously served in Haiti, was interviewed by Real Sunday
     newspaper, resulting in positive stories about U.S. assistance to Haiti.
     Meanwhile, the PAO spoke with the Director of Elefterotypia, whose paper has
     run some of the most misdirected coverage of Haiti, and received a commitment
     to run an Embassy-produced story to counteract the misinformation.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767158 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767158 Date: 08/31/2015




                                          AFRICA

 • Four African posts — Senegal, Ghana, Nigeria and Tanzania — organized
   highly successful outreach programs based on the diversion of the USS Gunston
   Hall to Haiti. The ship, with African officers aboard, was headed to western
   Africa under AFRICOM's African Partnership Station maritime security
   training program when it was diverted to provide relief to Haiti. With African
   officers working alongside U.S. military officers to deliver assistance to
   Haitians, PAOs at those posts connected local reporters with the ship to conduct
   live interviews of the Africans for their home media, resulting in excellent
   media placement in all four countries.

 • On January 20 U.S. Ambassador to South Africa Gips gave a 10-minute live
   interview on Haiti with 5FM, a leading youth station with listenership of approx
   800,000. The Ambassador highlighted the depth and breadth of US support and
   congratulated South Africa for sending emergency teams. The radio hosts told
   the Embassy afterward that e-mails and SMS messages were pouring into the
   station in support of U.S. efforts. Ambassador Gips reached out to additional
   audiences via broadcast media on January 21 and recorded a program via the
   Africa Regional Media Hub with SABC-International TV's "Rendezvous
   Africa" program (broadcast across the continent) and live interviews with drive-
   time radio programs on two national stations.

 • As a result of a press conference hosted by the Embassy on January 22, all major
   Angolan media gave positive coverage to U.S. efforts in Haiti, including Radio
   Nacional de Angola and the Jornal de Angola newspaper, which ran an editorial
   January 23 that stated: "We need to believe and let those on the ground do their
   work because the old tactics of criticizing who is doing something for the
   Haitian People just for the sake of criticizing at a moment like this is not
   acceptable. . . Just see the numbers of daily flights that arrive in Haiti to have an
   idea and quickly come to the conclusion that the possible failures and omissions
   do not supersede the positive and timely work done by the entities undertaking
   the relief efforts in Haiti."

                                  EAST ASIA-PACIFIC

 • The U.S. Ambassador to Indonesia's January 21 byliner on Haiti ran as the lead
   item on the editorial page of Sep utar Indonesia daily, and it was subsequently
   picked up by Antara, the Indonesian national news agency, and subsequently
   appeared in most Indonesian media.



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767158 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767158 Date: 08/31/2015




   • South Korea: Looking to help Korean audiences connect with the situation in
     Haiti, PA Seoul arranged a Digital Video Conference with the U.S. Consul in
     Nagoya, Japan, who had previously served as Information Officer in Port-au-
     Prince and was a fluent Korean speaker. CG Kwak underlined the long tradition
     of US humanitarian assistance to Haiti as well as the massive US response to the
     current crisis and noted Korea's own active involvement in the relief work. The
     U.S. Ambassador's blog on January 22, dedicated to the earthquake and those
     affected by it, received more than 1,500 hits in three days, with almost all
     comments supporting U.S. concerns.

   The EAP Regional Media Hub in Tokyo hosted a journalists' roundtable with
    Gordon Duguid in Haiti on January 25 that included journalists from Hong
    Kong's Ming Pao newspaper, Malaysia's New Straits Times newspaper,
    BERNAMA (Malaysian National News Agency), and Australia's Canberra
    Times newspaper and Radio 6PR (Perth), and resulted in favorable stories
    appearing over the next few days in all participating media.

                                         NEAR EAST

   • Lebanon: Television station Al-Jadid is not Hezbollah-affiliated, with most of
     its funding coming from the Gulf and Libya. Their coverage is also routinely
     sensationalistic and mirrored Al-Manar's coverage. PAS Beirut clarified aspects
     of USG assistance in Haiti to Al-Jadid on January 20. On Saturday January 23,
     Al-Jadid hosted the PAO for 30 minutes on morning news talk-show al-Hadath
     to discuss American relief efforts in Haiti. The PAO was able to address many
     of the accusations carried in the Al-Manar report, including the myriad
     "weapons testing" myths being propagated by Russian and Venezuelan media
     outlets. [Post cannot engage directly with Hezbollah television station Al-Manar
     as it was designated as a Special Designated Global Terrorist organization in
     2006 under E.O. 13224]

   • Morocco: On 1/28/10 the nationalist French-language daily L 'Opinion
     published an op-ed entitled, "Haiti: After terror, the dread..." The paper is
     generally considered to be fairly hostile to the USG, however, on 1/29/10, PAO
     Rabat and an FSN went to L 'Opinion to discuss the op-ed. Post was amazed to
     find the staff, including the writer himself, accommodating and even apologetic
     during the meeting. The editor-in-chief immediately agreed that the piece had
     been unfair, and the writer somewhat sheepishly explained himself by saying



UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767158 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767158 Date: 08/31/2015




    that public opinion had not quite recovered from "the Bush years," but readily
    acknowledged as well that the article was not balanced. PAO gave the writer a
    dossier of Washington File articles and some information from Infocentral's
    regular updates, which he promised to use in writing a counterpoint article. On
    2/1/10, L 'Opinion published an article entitled, "The massive humanitarian
    action of the United States," based on the articles provided by Post. The
    excellent article underscored the scope of American assistance, both government
    and private sector, to aide Haiti's earthquake victims.

 • Syria: Syrian state-run media coverage of the USG role in Haiti relief efforts
   has been largely negative and inaccurate, portraying the U.S. military as
   occupying Haiti. Examples include the Ba'ath party's Al-Baath newspaper
   publishing three critical articles (1/21/01) under the headlines: "US Crimes in
   Haiti," "US Military Forces Tighten Grip on Haiti," and "US Forces Stop
   Humanitarian Planes from Landing." On 1/25/10, government-owned Tishreen
   published an op-ed claiming that the superpowers were rushing towards a
   military conquest of Haiti in order to profit from reconstruction operations,
   which is the new method of colonialism. On 1/28/10, DAS Maura Connelly met
   with Syrian Ambassador Mustafa, who promised to work to halt the negative
   coverage coming from some Syrian outlets. To encourage more balanced
   coverage, Embassy Damascus will host a roundtable 2/3/10 with journalists
   from government-owned and independent Syrian media. Post also extended a
   personal invitation to an advisor of the Minister of Information.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767158 Date: 08/31/2015
