       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766418 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                          RELEASE IN
                                                                                                          FULL


From:                                Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                                Tuesday, January 26, 2010 3:55 AM
To:
Subject                              Fw: NYT Piece on Eikenberry Cables



Fyi


From: Mills, Cheryl D
To: Kennedy, Patrick F
Cc: Smith, Daniel B; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Verma, Richard R; Mills, Cheryl D; Lew, Jacob J; Koh, Harold Hongju; Steinberg,
James B; Boswell, Eric J
Sent: Tue Jan 26 03:54:57 2010
Subject: Fw: NYT Piece on Eikenberry Cables

The leaking of classified material is a breach not only of trust, it is I WI also a breach of the law.

In either event, we should seek a full investigation and send a deterrent message to the community that this type of
security breach is unacceptable and seriously jeopardizes our national interest.

Can you advise what have been steps taken in the past in these types of matters as I would like to ensure we take
agressive action.

Cdm


From: Syed, Zia S
To: Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob 3; Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: S_SpecialAssistants; Macmanus, Joseph E
Sent: Mon Jan 25 22:41:13 2010
Subject: NYT Piece on Eikenberry Cables

FYI, there is a just released story on the front page of NYTimes.com that re-prints in full Amb. Eikenberry's November
2009 Cables (full story pasted below):

http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/26/worldiasia/26strategy.html?hp and
http://documents.nytimes.com/eikenberry-s-memos-on-the-strategy-in-afghanistan?hp#p=1

January 26,2010

U.S. Envoy's Cables Show Concerns on Afghan
War Plans
By ERIC SCHMITT


WASHINGTON — The United States ambassador in Kabul warned his superiors here in
November that President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan "is not an adequate strategic
partner" and "continues to shun responsibility for any sovereign burden," according to a

       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766418 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766418 Date: 08/31/2015




classified cable that offers a much bleaker accounting of the risks of sending additional
American troops to Afghanistan than was previously known.

The broad outlines of two cables from the ambassador, Karl W. Eikenberry, became public
within days after he sent them, and they were portrayed as having been the source of
significant discussion in the White House, heightening tensions between diplomats and
senior military officers, who supported an increase of 30,000 American troops.

But the full cables, obtained by The New York Times, show for the first time just how
strongly the current ambassador felt about the leadership of the Afghan government, the
state of its military and the chances that a troop buildup would actually hurt the war effort
by making the Karzai government too dependent on the United States.

The cables — one four pages, the other three — also represent a detailed rebuttal to the
counterinsurgency strategy offered by Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal, the top American and
NATO commander in Afghanistan, who had argued that a rapid infusion of fresh troops
was essential to avoid failure in the country.
They show that Mr. Eikenberry, a retired Army lieutenant general who once was the top
American commander in Afghanistan, repeatedly cautioned that deploying sizable
American reinforcements would result in "astronomical costs" — tens of billions of dollars
— and would only deepen the dependence of the Afghan government on the United States.

"Sending additional forces will delay the day when Afghans will take over, and make it
difficult, if not impossible, to bring our people home on a reasonable timetable," he wrote
Nov. 6. "An increased U.S. and foreign role in security and governance will increase
Afghan dependence, at least in the short-term."
Without offering details, Mr. Eikenberry has said in public hearings since then that his
concerns have been dealt with, and that he supported the White House's troop increase
plan.

But it is not clear what might have changed about his assessment of President Karzai as a
reliable partner, and the strong language of the cables may increase tensions between the
ambassador and the Karzai government, especially as world leaders meet in London on
Thursday to discuss a much-debated Afghan plan to reintegrate Taliban fighters. It also
coincides with a strong effort by the administration to mend ties with Mr. Karzai.
An American official provided a copy of the cables to The Times after a reporter requested
them. The official said it was important for the historical record that Mr. Eikenberry's
detailed assessments be made public, given that they were among the most important
documents produced during the debate that led to the troop buildup.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766418 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766418 Date: 08/31/2015




On Nov. 6, Mr. Eikenberry wrote: "President Karzai is not an adequate strategic partner.
The proposed counterinsurgency strategy assumes an Afghan political leadership that is
both able to take responsibility and to exert sovereignty in the furtherance of our goal — a
secure, peaceful, minimally self-sufficient Afghanistan hardened against transnational
terrorist groups.

"Yet Karzai continues to shun responsibility for any sovereign burden, whether defense,
governance or development. He and much of his circle do not want the U.S. to leave and
are only too happy to see us invest further," Mr. Eikenberry wrote. "They assume we covet
their territory for a never-ending 'war on terror' and for military bases to use against
surrounding powers."

He continued, "Beyond Karzai himself, there is no political ruling class that provides an
overarching national identity that transcends local affiliations and provides reliable
partnership."

In a second cable, dated Nov. 9, he expressed new concerns: "In a PBS interview on
November 7, Karzai sounded bizarrely cautionary notes about his willingness to address
governance and corruption. This tracks with his record of inaction or grudging compliance
in this area."

On Monday, Mr. Eikenberry declined through an embassy spokeswoman, Caitlin M.
Hayden, to comment on the cables and his views on Mr. Karzai. She said by e-mail, "We
stand by what we provided during the review process, which got us to the clear strategy
we're now implementing, that the ambassador unequivocally supports."

In his memos, Mr. Eikenberry raised other concerns. He said he had serious doubts about
the ability of the Afghan police and military forces to take over security duties in the
country by 2013. "The Army's high attrition and low recruitment rates for Pashtuns in the
south are crippling," he wrote. "Simply keeping the force at current levels requires tens of
thousands of new recruits every year to replace attrition losses and battlefield casualties."
The ambassador, who left the military last April to become Mr. Obama's emissary, also
complained about an inadequate civilian counterpart organization to the NATO military
command in Afghanistan. Nearly three months later, he is still expressing concerns about
too few civilian experts in Afghanistan.
He also noted worries that the success of Mr. Obama's Afghanistan policy hinged on
Pakistani forces' eliminating militants' havens in the mountainous region near the Afghan
border.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766418 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766418 Date: 08/31/2015




"Pakistan will remain the single greatest source of Afghan instability so long as the border
sanctuaries remain," he wrote. "Until this sanctuary problem is fully addressed, the gains
from sending additional forces may be fleeting."

"As we contemplate greatly expanding our presence in Afghanistan, the better answer to
our difficulties could well be to further ratchet up our engagement in Pakistan," he wrote
without elaboration.

On Nov. 9, he repeatedly warned against rushing into a large deployment of more
American forces without further study.
He urged that the White House appoint a bipartisan panel of "civilian and military experts
to examine the Afghanistan-Pakistan strategy" and provide recommendations by the end
of 2009. The recommendation, which would have extended a White House-led policy
review of many months, was not accepted.

Mr. Eikenberry suggested sending a relatively small force to train Afghan security forces
and protect some population centers, and to condition more troops on the Afghans'
meeting objectives, like committing to taking full responsibility for national defense by a
specific date.
And while General McChrystal warned of failure if additional troops were not deployed,
Mr. Eikenberry concluded by cautioning of competing risks "that we will become more
deeply engaged here with no way to extricate ourselves, short of allowing the country to
descend again into lawlessness and chaos."




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766418 Date: 08/31/2015
