        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                                    RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                    B6



From:                               sbwhoeop
Sent:                               Monday, August 23, 2010 10:22 AM
To:
Subject:                            Re: H: Yes, there is a vast right wing conspiracy. Sid


Or I could send the endless pieces on Obama and his troubles or Haaretz on the new negotiations. I'll skip the torrent of
Obama pieces (see Politico lead piece today, if you want to catch the full updraft of new conventional wisdom), but include
Haaretz below from its editorial editor and Teddy Kollek's former spokesman:




    •    Home
    •    Print Edition
    •    News

    •    Published 01:58 23.08.10
    •    Latest update 01:58 23.08.10


        ith a victory like this..
The direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians
have preconditions - dictated by Israel.
By At. tiye Elder: Tags: Israel news M:ddist East peace
Two years ago, a basketball tournament was held at Tel Aviv University with the participation of student teams from 14
cOuntries, including a Palestinian team from the occupied territories. The games were purportedly held "without
preconditions," and every team put its best players on the court and aimed to win.
But unsurprisingly, the Shin Ben security service permitted only seven Palestinian players, including bench players, to
enter Israel. Some of the key players on the team were compelled to stay at home. After several losses (by 30 to 40
points), when it was the Palestinians turn to face a team from one of the Israeli colleges, their coach announced that he
had decided to spare his players another humiliation, and requested that the game be canceled.
The illuminating movie "Friendship Games," to be shown tonight on the Yes Docu channel (directed by Ram Levy, along
with Ibtisam IVIara'ana, Duki Dror and Yoav Shamir), documents the tournament, which was the initiative of Ed Peskowitz,
an American Jew and co-owner of the Atlanta Hawks basketball team in the NBA. The camera follows the Israeli coach to
the Palestinian locker room. After a long while, he tells his players that in order to even out the teams, two of them will join
the other side. He tells two of the Israeli bench players, including one known as Fats(); to don the shirts of the Palestinian
team. The game ends with a decisive victory for the Israeli team and a strong sense of missed opportunity..
The direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians, like the basketball game, have preconditions. Not the
conditions demanded by the Palestinians, but conditions dictated by Israel. The refusal to freeze Israeli building in East
Jerusalem is a precondition, just like the demand to freeze it. The refusal to resume negotiations from the point where
talks between the previous prime minister, Ehud Olmert, and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas left off after the
Annapolis conference is no less a precondition than the demand to resume talks from square one.
The head referee, the president of the United States, has twisted the arms of his colleagues in the Quartet and is dragging
Abbas to Washington. Barack °barna decided that the negotiations will be held without any commitment regarding
building in East Jerusalem, and will be opened without even a declaration of principles stating that the talks will be held on
the basis of a general formula, like peace and security for Israel and a state along the 1967 borders for the Palestinians.
It's time to jump into the fountain in Rabin Square and cheer: The Palestinians have been shafted!
If Benjamin Netanyahu's aim is to play around as much as possible with the ball, and sometimes kick the opponent, then
he can really chalk up another victory. But Israel's success in the negotiations, like the success of the student team in the
tournament, is not measured by the terms "victory" or "defeat." What is victory over a weak Palestinian team worth, if it
was won in friendly games that ended with virtually no interaction between the participants? What is a political process
with the Palestinians worth if it erodes Abbas' standing and leads nowhere?

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015



What have we to gain from humiliating our partner before his constituency on the way to the negotiating table? If Israel's
approach on every one of the core issues is that winning is everything, there's no point in bothering so many VIPs with
another unnecessary summit. Let's assume that we'll succeed, with the help of the Jewish power around Obama, to twist
Abbas' arm some more and extract, for example, an agreement in which he concedes sovereignty over the Temple
Mount. How many hours would such an agreement last?
All we need is a few more "victories" like the invitation to the launch of direct negotiations, "without preconditions," and
we'll lose our last partners to a settlement that will prevent Israel from turning into an apartheid state or a Palestinian state
(the binational model is a nightmare, as far as I'm concerned).
What will we do if Abbas announces that he's had enough of losing in purportedly friendly games, and that he's decided
the time has come to step down? Will we declare another victory and invite Hamas leader Khaled Meshal and Iranian
president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad to the party?
         This story is lojr:


    •          kiva Eldar


Akiva Eldar is the chief political columnist and an editorial writer for Haaretz. His columns also appear regularly in the
Ha'aretz-Herald Tribune edition. In May 2006 The Financial Times selected him among the most prominent and influential
commentators in the world, "whose comments inspire callers from across the political spectrum".
Between 1993 and 1996, Eldar served as the Haaretz U.S. Bureau Chief and Washington correspondent, covering the
peace process, U.S.-Israel relations, American issues and Israel-Diaspora relations. Prior to this, Eldar spent 10 years as
the diplomatic correspondent for Haaretz, as well as its municipal correspondent for Jerusalem from 1978 to 1983. Before
joining Haaretz, Eldar was a reporter and editor for Israel Radio and spent two years as spokesperson for former Mayor of
Jerusalem, Teddy Kollek.

Eldar is the author of several books on Israel and the Middle East, including "The ambush on Jerusalem", which deals
with U.S.-Israel-Jewish community relations, and "Lords of the Land", an exploration of the Jewish settlements in the West
Bank. In 2007 he received the annual "Search for Common Ground" award for Middle East journalism.

Eldar was a special consultant to Abba Eban's PBS television documentaries on the history of Israel and the Oslo peace
initiative. He regularly appears on major television and radio networks in the U.S., Canada, Australia, Europe and Israel.
He appeared many times on news programs such as Nightline, The Lehrer Show, Charlie Rose Show, CNN News and
CBS Morning News, current affair programs on Israeli television, as well as NPR talk shows.

Eldar contributes to the op-ed pages of The New York Times, LA Times, The Philadelphia Inquirer, The International
Herald Tribune and The New York Jewish Week. During his stay in the U.S. Mr. Eldar lectured extensively for the Jewish
community and on campuses throughout the U.S., Canada and Australia. He has also participated in various Israeli-Arab-
European seminars.

Mr. Elder was born in Haifa, Israel in 1945. He is a graduate of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, where he majored in
Economics, Political Science and Psychology.




    Original Message
From: H <HDR22@clintonemail.com>
To: 'sbwhoeop
Sent: Mon, Aug 23, 2010 10:13 am
Subject: Re: H: Yes, there is a vast right wing conspiracy. Sid

Ah, a little lite vacation reading!




          Original Message




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015



From: sbwhoedE


To: H


Sent: Mon Aug 23 10:06:23 2010


Subject: H: Yes, there is a vast right wing conspiracy. Sid




A must read piece that looks at the Koch brothers' control and funding of the


tea party and right wing.




1-IttJ:-//www rs.ewynrker (Dm'reoorting:2010/u,, d!I,A_,A33ra        maveff



<htLp://www.ne-,Qorker.com/Leporting/2010108/30/100830fa fact, m.aver?Rrint4j.e=tru0b:zzO.:sQ
uvTobT>




A REPORTER AT LARGE




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015



COVERT OPERATIONS




The billionaire brothers who are waging a war against Obama.




by Jane Mayer
<http://www.newYo       com/magazi      ics/jane mayer,_,earc ?contributorName=ane%20maver>


AUGUST 30, 2010




David H. Koch in 1996. He and his brother Charles are lifelong libertarians and


have quietly given more than a hundred million dollars to right-wing causes.


On May 17th, a black-tie audience at the Metropolitan Opera House applauded as a


tall, jovial-looking billionaire took the stage. It was the seventieth annual


spring gala of American Ballet Theatre, and David H. Koch was being celebrated


for his generosity as a member of the board of trustees; he had recently donated


$2.5 million toward the company's upcoming season, and had given many millions


before that. Koch received an award while flanked by two of the gala's


co-chairs, Blaine Trump, in a peach-colored gown, and Caroline Kennedy


Schlossberg, in emerald green. Kennedy's mother, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, had


been a patron of the ballet and, coincidentally, the previous owner of a Fifth


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




Avenue apartment that Koch had bought, in 1995, and then sold, eleven years


later, for thirty-two million dollars, having found it too small.


The gala marked the social ascent of Koch, who, at the age of seventy, has


become one of the city's most prominent philanthropists. In 2008, he donated a


hundred million dollars to modernize Lincoln Center's New York State Theatre


building, which now bears his name. He has given twenty million to the American


Museum of Natural History, whose dinosaur wing is named for him. This spring,


after noticing- the decrepit state of the fountains outside the Metropolitan


Museum of Art, Koch pledged at least ten million dollars for their renovation.


He is a trustee of the museum, perhaps the most coveted social prize in the


city, and serves on the board of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, where,


after he donated more than forty million dollars, an endowed chair and a


research center were named for him.


One dignitary was conspicuously absent from the gala: the event's third honorary


co-chair, Michelle Obama. Her office said that a scheduling conflict had


prevented her from attending. Yet had the 'First Lady shared the stage with Koch


it might have created an awkward tableau. In Washington, Koch is best known as


part of a family that has repeatedly funded stealth attacks on the federal


government, and on the Obama Administration in particular.


With his brother Charles, who is seventy-four, David Koch owns virtually all of


Koch Industries, a conglomerate, headquartered in Wichita, Kansas, whose annual


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




  revenues are estimated to be a hundred billion dollars. The company has grown


  spectacularly since their father, Fred, died, in 1967, and the brothers took


  charge. The Kochs operate oil refineries in Alaska, Texas, and Minnesota, and


  control some four thousand miles of pipeline. Koch Industries owns Brawny paper


  towels, Dixie cups, Georgia-ea ific lumber, Stainmaster carpet, and Lycra, among


  other products. Forbes ranks it as the second-largest private company in the


  country, after Cargill, and its consistent profitability has made David and


  Charles Koch—who, years ago, bought out two other brothers—among the richest men


  in America. Their combined fortune of thirty-five billion dollars is exceeded


  only by those of Bill Gates and Warren Buffett.


  The Kochs are longtime libertarians who believe in drastically lower personal


' and corporate taxes, minimal social services for the needy, and much less


  oversight of industry—especially environmental regulation. These views dovetail


  with the brothers' corporate interests. In a study released this spring, the


  University of Massachusetts at Amherst's Political Economy Research Institute


  named Koch Industries one of the top ten air polluters in the United States. And


  Greenpeace issued a report identifying the company as a "kingpin of climate


  science denial." The report showed that, from 2005 to 2008, the Kochs vastly


  outdid ExxonMobil in giving money to organizations fighting legislation related


  to climate change, underwriting a huge network of foundations, think tanks, and


  political front groups. Indeed, the brothers have funded opposition campaigns


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




  against so many Obama Administration policies—from health-care reform to the


  economic-stimulus program—that, in political circles, their ideological network


  is known as the Kochtopus.


  In a statement, Koch Industries said that the Greenpeace report "distorts the


  environmental record of our companies." And David Koch, in a recent, admiring


  article about him in New York, protested that the "radical press" had turned his


  family into "whipping boys," and had exaggerated its influence on American


  politics. But Charles Lewis, the founder of the Center for Public Integrity, a


. nonpartisan watchdog group, said, "The Koons are on a whole different level.


  There's no one else who has spent this much money. The sheer dimension of it is


  what sets them apart. They have a pattern of lawbreaking, political


  manipulation, and obfuscation. I've been in Washington since Watergate, and I've


  never seen anything like it. They are the Standard Oil of our :times."


  few weeks after the Lincoln Center gala, the advocacy wing of the Americans for


  Prosperity Foundation—an organization that David Koch started, in 2004—held a


  different kind of gathering. Over the July. 4th weekend, a summit called Texas


  Defending the American Dream took place in a chilly hotel ballroom in Austin.


  Though Koch freely promotes his philanthropic ventures, he did not attend the


  summit, and his name was not in evidence. And on this occasion the audience was


  roused not by a dance performance but by a series of speakers denouncing


  President Barack Obama. Peggy Venable, the organizer of the summit, warned that


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




Administration officials "have a socialist vision for this country."


Five hundred people attended the summit, which served, in part, as a training


session for Tea Party activists in Texas. An advertisement cast the event as a


populist uprising against vested corporate power. "Today, the voices of .average


Americans are being drowned out by lobbyists and special interests," it said.


"But you can do something about it:" The pitch made no mention of its corporate


funders. The White House has expressed frustration that such sponsors have


largely eluded public notice. David Axelrod, Obama'-s senior adviser, said, "What


they don't say is that, in part, this is a grassroots citizens' movement brought


to you by a bunch of oil billionaires."


In April, 2009, Melissa Cohlmia, a company spokesperson, denied that the Kochs


had direct links to the Tea. Party, saying that Americans for Prosperity is "an


independent organization and Koch. companies do not in any way direct their


activities." Later, she issued a statement: "No funding has been provided by


Koch companies, the Koch foundations, or Charles Koch or David Koch specifically


to support the tea parties." David Koch told New York; "I've never been to a


tea-party event. No one representing the tea party has ever even approached me."


At the lectern in Austin, however, Venable-a longtime political operative who


draws a salary from Americans for Prosperity, and who has worked for Koch-funded


political groups since 1994-spoke less warily. "We love what the Tea Parties are


doing, because that's how we're going to take back America!" she declared, as


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




the crowd cheered. In a subsequent interview, sh described herself as an early


member of the movement, joking, "I was part of the Tea Party before it was


cool!" She explained that the role of Americans for Prosperity was to help


"educate" Tea Party activists on policy details, and to give them "next-step


training" after their rallies, so that their political energy could be


channelled "more effectively." And she noted that Americans for Prosperity had


provided Tea Party activists with lists of elected officials to target. She said


of the Kochs, "They're certainly our people. David's the chairman of our board.


I've certainly met with them, and I'm very appreciative of what they do."


Venable honored several Tea Party "citizen leaders" at the summit. The Texas


branch of Americans for Prosperity gave its Blogger of the Year Award to a young


woman named Sibyl West. On June 14th, West, writing on her site, described Obama


as the "cokehead in chief." In an online thread, West speculated that the


President was exhibiting symptoms of "demonic possession (aka schizophrenia,


etc.)." The summit featured several paid speakers, including Janine Turner, the


actress best known for her role on the television series "Northern Exposure."


She declared, "They don't want our children to know about their rights. They


don't want our children to know about a God!"


During a catered lunch, Venable introduced Ted Cruz, a former solicitor general


of Texas, who told the crowd that Obama was "the most radical President ever to


occupy the Oval Office," and had hidden from voters a secret agenda—"the


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




government taking over our economy and our lives." Countering °barna, Cruz


proclaimed, was "the epic fight. of our generation!" As the crowd rose to its


feet and cheered, he quoted the defiant words of a Texan at the Alamo: "Victory,


or death!"


Americans for Prosperity has worked closely with the Tea Party since the


movement's inception. In the weeks before the first Tax Day protests, in April,


2009, Americans for Prosperity hosted a Web site offering supporters "Tea Party


Talking Points." The Arizona branch urged people to send tea bags to Obama; the


Missouri branch urged members to sign up for "Taxpayer Tea Party Registration"


and provided directions to nine protests. The group continues to stoke the


rebellion. The North Carolina branch recently launched a "Tea Party Finder" Web


site, advertised as "a hub for all the Tea Parties in North Carolina."


The anti-government fervor infusing the 2010 elect-ions represents a political


triumph for the Kochs. By giving money to "educate," fund, and organize Tea


Party protesters, they have helped turn their private agenda into a mass


 movement. Bruce Bartlett, a conservative economist and a historian, who once


 worked at the National Center for Policy Analysis, a Dallas-based think tank


 that the Kochs fund, said, "The problem with the whole libertarian movement is


 that it's been all chiefs and no Indians. There haven't been any actual people,


.like voters, who give a crap about it. So the problem for the Kochs has been


 trying to create a movement." With the emergence of the Tea Party, he said,


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




"everyone suddenly sees that for the first time there are Indians out


there—people who can provide real ideological power." The Kochs, he said, are


"trying to shape and control and channel the populist uprising into their own


policies."


A Republican campaign consultant who has done research on behalf of Charles and


David Koch said of the Tea Party, "The Koch brothers gave the money that founded


it. It's like they put the seeds in the around. Then the rainstorm comes, and


the frogs come out of the mud—and they're our candidates!"


The Kochs and their political operatives declined requests for interviews.


Instead, a prominent New York public-relations executive who is close with the


Kochs put forward two friends: George Pataki, the former governor of New York,


and Mortimer Zuckerman, the publisher and real-estate magnate. Pataki, a


Republican who received campaign donations from David Koch, called him "a


patriot who cares deeply about his country." Zuckerman praised David's "gentle


decency" and the "range of his public interests."


The Republican campaign consultant said of the family's political activities,


"To call them under the radar is an understatement. They are underground!"


Another former Koch adviser said, "They're smart: This right-wing, redneck stuff


works for them. They see this as a way to get things done without getting dirty.


themselves." Rob Stein, a Democratic political strategist who has studied the


conaervative movement's finances, said that the Kochs are "at the epicenter of


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




the anti-Obama movement. But it's not just about Obama. They would have done the


same to Hillary Clinton. They did the same with Bill Clinton. They are out to


destroy progressivism."


ddly enough, the fiercely capitalist Koch family owes part of its fortune to


Joseph Stalin. Fred Koch was the son of a Dutch printer who settled in Texas and


ran a weekly newspaper. Fred attended PLI.T., where he earned a degree in


chemical engineering. In 1927, he invented a more efficient process for


converting oil into gasoline, but, according to family lore, America's major oil


companies regarded him as a threat and shut him out of the industry. Unable to


succeed at home, Koch found work in the Soviet Union. In the nineteen-thirties,


his company trained Bolshevik engineers and helped Stalin's regime set up


fifteen modern oil refineries. Over time, however, Stalin brutally purged


several of Koch's Soviet colleagues. Koch was deeply affected by the experience,


and regretted his collaboration. He returned to the U.S. In the headquarters of


his company, Rock Island Oil & Refining, in Wichita, he kept photographs aimed


at proving that some of those Soviet refineries had•been destroyed in the Second


World War. Gus diZerega, a former friend of Charles Koch, recalled, "As the


Soviets became a stronger military power, Fred felt a certain amount of guilt at


having helped build them up. I think it bothered him a lot."


In 1958, Fred Koch became one of the original members of the John Birch Society,


the arch-conservative group known, in part, for a highly skeptical view of


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




governance and for spreading fears of a Communist takeover. Members considered


President Dwight D. Eisenhower to be a Communist agent. In a self-published


broadside, Koch claimed that "the Communists have infiltrated both the Democrat '


and Republican Parties." He wrote admiringly of Benito Mussolini's suppression


of Communists in Italy, and disparagingly of the American civil-rights movement.


"The colored man looms large in the Communist plan to take over America," he


warned. Welfare was.a secret blot to attract rural blacks to cities, where they


would foment "a vicious race war." In a 1963 speech that prefigures the Tea


Party's talk of a secret socialist plot, Koch predicted that Communists would


"infiltrate the highest offices of government in the U.S. until the President is


a Communist, unknown to the rest of us:"


Koch tarried Mary Robinson, the daughter of a Missouri physician, and they had


four sons: Freddie, Charles, and twins, David and William. John Damgard, the


president of the Futures Industry Association, was David's schoolmate and


friend. He recalled that Fred Koch was "a real John Wayne type." Koch emphasized


rugged pursuits, taking his sons big-game hunting in Africa, and requiring them


1- o do -Farm labor at the family ranch. The Kochs lived in a stone mansion on a


large compound across from Wichita's country club; in the summer, the boys could


hear their friends splashing in the pool, but they were not allowed to join


them. "By instilling a work ethic in me at an early age, my father did me a b


favor, although it didn't seem like a favor back then," Charles has written. "By


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




the time I was eight, he made sure work occupied most of my spare time." David


Koch recalled that his father also indoctrinated the boys politically. "He was


constantly speaking to us children about what was wrong with government," he


told Brian Doherty, an editor of the libertarian magazine Reason, and the author


of "Radicals for Capitalism," a 2007 history of the libertarian movement. "It's


something I grew up with—a fundamental point of view that big government was


bad, and imposition of government controls on our lives and economic fortunes


was not good."


David attended Deerfield Academy, in Massachusetts, and Charles was sent to


military school. Charles, David, and William all earned engineering degrees at


their father's alma meter, M.I.T.,, and later joined the family company. Charles


eventually assumed control, with David as his deputy; William's career at the


company was less successful. Freddie went to Harvard and studied playwriting at


the Yale School of Drama. His father reportedly disapproved of him, and punished


him financially. (Freddie, through a spokesperson, denied this.)


In 1967, after Fred Koch died, of a heart attack, Charles renamed the business


Koch Industries, in honor of his father. Fred Koch's will made his sons


extraordinarily wealthy. David Koch joked about his good fortune in a 2003


speech to alumni at Deerfield, where, after pledging twenty-five million •


dollars, he was made the school's sole "lifetime trustee." He said, "You might


ask: How does David Koch happen to have the wealth to be so generous? Well, let


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




me tell you a story. It all, started when I was a little boy. One day, my father


gave me an apple. I soon sold it for five dollars and bought two apples and sold


them for ten. Then I bought four apples and sold them for twenty. Well, this


went on day after day, week after week, month after month, year after year,


until my father died and left me three hundred million dollars!"


David and Charles had absorbed their father's conservative politics, but they


did not share all his views, according to diZerega, who befriended Charles in


the mid-sixties, after meeting him while browsing in a John Birch Society


bookstore in Wichita. Charles eventually invited him to the Kochs' mansion, to


participate in an informal political-discussion group. "It was pretty clear that


Charles thought some of the Birch .Scciety was bullshit," diZerega recalled.


DiZerega, who has lost touch with Charles, eventually abandoned right-wing


views, and became a political-science professor. He credits Charles with opening


his mind to political philosophy, which set him on the path to academia; Charles


is one of three people to whom he dedicated his first book. But diZerega


believes that the Koch brothers have followed a wayward intellectual trajectory,


transferring their father's paranoia about Soviet Communism to a distrust of the


U.S. government, and seeing its expansion, beginning with the New Deal, as a


tyrannical threat to freedom. In an essay, posted on Beliefnet, diZerega writes,


"As state socialism failed . . . the target for many within these organizations


shifted to any kind of regulation at all. 'Socialism' kept being defined


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




downwards."


Members• of the John Birch Society developed an interest in a school of Austrian


economists who promoted free-market ideals. Charles and David Koch were


particularly influenced by the work of Friedrich von Hayek, the author of "The


Road to Serfdom" (1944), which argued that centralized government planning led,


inexorably, to totalitarianism. Hayek's belief in unfettered capitaiisth has


proved inspirational to many conservatives, and to anti-Soviet dissidents;


lately, Tea Party supporters have championed his work. In June, the talk-radio


host Glenn Beck, who has supported the Tea Party rebellion, promoted "The Road


to Serfdom" on his show; the paperback soon became a No. 1 best-seller on


Amazon. (Beck appears to be a fan of the Kochs; in the midst of a recent on-air


parody of Al Gore, Beck said, without explanation, "I want to thank Charles Koch


for this information." Beck declined to elaborate on the relationship.)


Charles and David also became devotees of a more radical thinker, Robert


LeFevre, who favored the abolition of the state but didn't like the label


"anarchist"; he called himself an "autarchist." LeFevre liked to say that


"government is a disease masquerading as its own cure." In 1956, he opened an


institution called the Freedom School, in Colorado Springs. Brian Doherty, of


Reason, told me that "LeFevre was an anarchist figure who won Charles's heart,"


and that the school was "a tiny world of people who thought the New Deal was a


horrible mistake." According to diZerega, Charles supported the school


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




financially, and even gave him money to take classes there.


Throughout the seventies, Charles and David continued to build Koch Industries.


In 1980, William, with assistance from Freddie, attempted to take over the


company from Charles, who, they felt, had assumed autocratic control. In


retaliation, the company's board, which answered to Charles, fired William.


("Charles runs it all with an iron hand," Bruce Bartlett, the economist, told


me.) Lawsuits were filed, with William and Freddie on one side and Charles and


David on the other.. In 1983, Charles and David bought out their brothers' share


in the company for nearly a billion dollars. But the antagonism remained, and


litigation continued for seventeen more years, with the brothers hiring rival


private investigators; in 1990, they walked past one another with stony


expressions at their mother's funeral. Eventually, Freddie moved to Monaco,


which has no income tax. He bought historic estates in France, Austria, and


elsewhere, filling them with art, antiques, opera scores, and literary


manuscripts. William founded his own energy company, Oxbow, and turned to


yachting; he spent an estimated sixty-five million dollars to win the America's


Cup, in 1992.


With Charles as the undisputed chairman and C.E.O., Koch Industries expanded.


rapidly. Roger Altman, who heads the investment-banking firm Evercore, told me


that the company's performance has been "beyond phenomenal." Charles remained in


Wichita, with his wife and two children, guarding his privacy while supporting


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




community charities. David moved to New York City, where he is an executive


vice-president of the company and the C.E.O. of its Chemical Technology Group. A


financial expert who knows Koch Industries well told me, "Charles is the


company. Charles runs      ." David, described by associates as "affable" and "a


bit of a lunk," enjoyed for years the life of a wealthy bachelor. He rented a


yacht in the South of France and bought a waterfront home in Southampton, where


he threw parties that the Web site New York Social Diary likened to an "East


Coast version of Hugh Hefner's soirees." In 1996, he married Julia Flesher, a


fashion assistant. They live in a nine-thousand-square-foot duplex at 740 Park


Avenue, with their three children. Though David's manner is more cosmopolitan,


and more genial, than that of Charles, Brian Doherty, who has interviewed both


brothers, couldn't think of a single issue on which the brothers disagreed.


As their fortunes grew, Charles and David Koch became the primary underwriters


of hard-line libertarian politics in America. Charles's goal, as Doherty


described it, was to tear the government "out at the root." The brothers' first


major public step came in 1979, when Charles persuaded David, then thirty-nine,


to run for public office. They had become supporters of the Libertarian Party,


and were backing its Presidential candidate, Ed Clark, who was running against


Ronald Reagan from the right. Frustrated by the legal limits on campaign


donations, they contrived to place David on the ticket, in the Vice-Presidential
                                                                       •

slot; upon becoming a candidate, he could lavish as much of his personal fortune


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




    as he wished on the campaign. The ticket's slogan was "The Libertarian Party has


    only one source of funds: You." In fact, its primary source of funds was David


    Koch, who spent more than two million dollars on the effort.


    Many of the ideas propounded in the 1980 campaign presaged the Tea Party


    movement. Ed Clark told The Nation that libertarians were getting ready to stage


    "a very big tea party," because people were "sick to death" of taxes. The


    Libertarian Party platform called for the abolition of the F.B.I. and the


°   .C.I.A., as well as of federal regulatory agencies, such as the Securities and


    Exchange Commission and the Department of Energy. The Party wanted to end Social


    Security, minimum-wage laws, gun control, and all personal and corporate income


    taxes; it proposed the legalization of prostitution, recreational drugs, and


    suicide. Government should be reduced to only one function: the protection of


     individual rights. William F. Buckley, Jr., a more traditional conservative,


     called the movement "Anarcho-Totalitarianism."


     That November,. the Libertarian ticket received only one per cent of the vote.


     The brothers realized that their brand of politics didn't sell at the ballot


     box. Charles Koch became openly scornful of conventional politics. •"It tends to


     be a nasty, corrupting business," he told a reporter at the time. "I'm


     interested in advancing libertarian ideas." According to Doherty's book, the


     Kochs came to regard elected politicians as merely "actors playing out a


     script." A longtime confidant of the Kochs told Doherty that the brothers wanted


         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




to "supply the themes and words for the scripts." In order to alter the


direction of America, they had to "influence the areas where policy ideas


percolate from: academia and think tanks."


fter the 1980 election, Charles and David Koch receded from the public arena.


But they poured more than a hundred million dollars into dozens of seemingly


independent organizations. Tax records indicate that in 2008 the three main Koch


family foundations gave money to thirty-four political and policy organizations,


three of which they founded, and several of which they direct. The Kochs and


their company have given additional millions to political campaigns, advocacy


groups, and lobbyists. The family's subterranean financial role has fuelled


suspicion on the 'left; Lee Fang, of the liberal blog ThinkProgress, has called


the Kochs "the billionaires behind the hate."


Only the Kochs know precisely how much they have Spent on politics. Public tax


records show that between 1998 and 2008 the Charles G. Koch Charitable


Foundation spent more than forty-eight million dollars. The Claude R. Lambe


Charitable Foundation, which is controlled by Charles Koch and his slife, along


with two company employees and an accountant, spent more than twenty-eight


million. The David H. Koch Charitable Foundation spent more than a hundred and


twenty million. Meanwhile, since 1998 Koch Industries has spent more than fifty


million dollars. on lobbying. Separately, the company's political-action


committee, KochPAC, has donated some eight million dollars to political


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




campaigns, more than eighty per cent of it to Republicans. So far in 2010, Koch


Industries leads all other energy companies in political contributions, as it


has since 2006. In addition, during the past dozen years the Kochs and other


family members have personally spent more than two million dollars on political


contributions. In the second quarter of 2010, David Koch was the biggest


individual contributor to the Republican Governors Association, with a


million-dollar donation. Other gifts by the Koons may be untraceable; federal


tax law permits anonymous personal donations to politically active nonprofit


groups.


In recent decades, members of several industrial dynasties have spent parts of


their fortunes on a conservative agenda. In the nineteen-eighties, the Olin


family, which owns a chemicals-and-manufacturing conglomerate, became known for


funding right-leaning thinking in academia, particularly in law schools. And


during the nineties Richard Mellon Scaife, a descendant of Andrew Mellon, spent


millions attempting to discredit President Bill Clinton. An Rabin-Havt,


vice-president at the Democratic-leaning Web site Media Matters, said that the


Kochs' effort is unusual, in its marshalling of corporate and personal funds:


"Their role, in terms of financial commitments, is staggering."


Of course, Democrats give money, too. Their most prominent donor, the financier


George Soros, runs a foundation, the Open Society Institute, that has spent as


much as a hundred million dollars a year in America. Soros has also made


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




generous private contributions to various Democratic campaigns, including


Obamas. But Michael Vachon, his spokesman, argued that Soros's giving is


transparent, and that "none of his contributions are in the service of his own


economic interests." The Kochs have given millions of dollars to nonprofit


groups that criticize environmental regulation and support lower taxes for


industry. Gus diZerega, the former friend, suggested that the Kochs' youthful


idealism about libertarianism had largely devolved into a rationale for


corporate self-interest. He said of Charles, "Perhaps he has confused making


money with freedom."


Some critics have suggested that the Kochs' approach has subverted the purpose


of tax-exempt giving. By law, charitable foundations must conduct exclusively


nonpartisan activities that promote the public welfare. A 2004 report by the


National Committee for *Responsive Philanthropy, a watchdog group, described the


*Kochs' foundations as being self-serving, concluding, "These foundations give


money to nonprofit organizations that do research and advocacy on issues that


impact the profit margin of Koch Industries."


The Kochs have gone well beyond their immediate self-interest, however, funding


'organizations that aim to push the country in a libertarian direction. Among the


institutions that they have subsidized are the Institute for Justice,. which


files lawsuits opposing state and federal regulations; the Institute for Humane


Studies, which underwrites libertarian academics; and the Bill of Rights


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




Institute, which promotesa conservative slant on the Constitution. Many of the


organizations funded by the Kochs employ specialists who write position papers


that are subsequently quoted by politicians and pundits. David Koch has


acknowledged that the family exerts tight ideological control. "If we're going


to give a lot of money, we'll make darn sure they spend it in a way that goes


along with our intent," he told Doherty. "And if they make a wrong turn and


start doing things we don't agree with, we withdraw funding."


he Kochs' subsidization of a pro-corporate movement fulfills, in many ways, the


.vision laid out in a secret 1971 memo that Lewis Powell, then a Virginia


attorney, wrote two months before he was nominated to the Supreme Court. The


antiwar movement had turned its anger on defense contractors, such as Dow


Chemical, and Ralph Nader was leading a public-interest crusade against


corporations. Powell, writing- a report for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, urged


American companies to fight back. The greatest threat to free enterprise, he


warned, was not Communism or the New Left but, rather, respectable elements of


soCiety"—intellectuals, journalists, and scientists. To defeat them, he wrote,


business leaders needed to wage a long-term, unified campaign to change public


opinion.


Charles Koch seems to have approached both business and politics with the


 deliberation of an engineer. "To bring about social change," he told Doherty,


 requires "a strategy" that is "vertically and horizontally integrated," spanning


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




"from idea creation to policy development to education to grassroots


organizations to lobbying to litigation to political action." The project, he


admitted, was extremely ambitious. "We have a radical philosophy," he said.


In 1977, the Kochs provided the funds to launch the nation's first libertarian


think tank, the Cato Institute. According to the Center for Public Integrity,


between 1986 and 1993 the Koch family gave eleven million dollars to the


institute. Today, Cato has more than a hundred full-time employees, and its


experts and policy papers are widely quoted and respected by the mainstream


media. It describes itself as nonpartisan, and its scholars have at times been


critical of both parties. Put it has consistently pushed for corporate tax cuts,


reductions in social services, and laissez-faire environmental policies.


When President Obama, in a 2008 speech, described the science on global warming


as "beyond dispute," the Cato Institute took out a full-page ad in the Times to


contradict him. Cato's resident scholars have relentlessly criticized political


attempts to stop global warming as expensive, ineffective, and unnecessary. Ed


Crane, the Cato Institute's founder and president, told me that "global-warming


theories give the government more control of the economy."


Cato scholars have been particularly energetic in promoting the Climategate


scandal. Last year, private e-mails of climate scientists at the University of


East Anglia, in England, were mysteriously leaked, and their exchanges appeared


to suggest a willingness to falsify data in order to buttress the idea that


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




global warming is real. In the two weeks after the e-mails went public, one Cato


scholar gave more than twenty media interviews trumpeting the alleged scandal.


But five independent inquiries have since exonerated the researchers, and


nothing was found in their e-mails or data to discredit the scientific consensus


on global warming.


Nevertheless, the controversy succeeded in spreading skepticism about climate


change. Even though the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration recently


issued a report concluding that the evidence for global warming is unequivocal,


more Americans are convinced than at any time since 1997 that scientists have


exaggerated the seriousness of global warming. The Kochs promote this statistic


on their company's Web site but do not mention the role that their funding has


played in fostering such doubt.


In a 2002 memo; the Republican political consultant Frank Luntz wrote that.so


long as "voters believe there is no consensus about global warming within the


scientific community" the status quo would prevail. The key for opponents of


environmental reform, he said, was to question the science—a public-relations


strategy that the tobacco industry used effectively for years to forestall


regulation. The Kochs have funded many sources of environmental Skepticism, such


as the Heritage Foundation, which has argued that "scientific facts gathered in


the past 10 years do not support the notion of catastrophic human-made warming."


The brothers have given money to more obscure groups, too, such as the


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




Independent Women's Forum, which opposes the presentation of global warming as a


scientific fact in American public schools. Until 2008, the group was run by


Nancy Pfotenhauer, a former lobbyist for Koch Industries. Mary Beth Jarvis, a


vice-president of a Koch subsidiary, is on the group's board.


Naomi Oreskes, a professor of history and science studies at the University of


California, San Diego, is the co-author of "Merchants of Doubt," a new book that


chronicles various attempts by American industry to manipulate public opinion on


science. She noted that the Mocha, as the heads of "a company with refineries


and pipelines," have "a lot at. stake." She added, "If the answer is to phase out


fossil fuels, a different group of people are going to be making money, so we


shouldn't be surprised that they're fighting tooth and nail."


David Koch told New York that he was unconvinced that global warming has been


caused by human activity. Even if it has been, h said, the heating of the


planet will be beneficial, resulting in longer growing seasons in the Northern


Hemisphere. "The Earth will be able to support enormously more peoplebecause


far greater land area will be available to produce food," he said.


n the mid-eighties, the Kochs provided millions of dollars to George Mason


University, in Arlington, Virginia, to set up another think tank. Now known as


the Mercatus Center, it promotes itself as "the world's premier university.


 source for market-oriented ideas—bridging the gap betWeen. academic ideas and


 teal-world problems." Financial records show that the Koch family foundations


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




have contributed more than thirty million dollars to George Mason, much of which


has gone to the Mercatus Center, a nonprofit organization. "It's ground zero for


deregulation.policy in Washington," Rob Stein, the Demodratic strategist, said.


It is an unusual arrangement. "George Mason is a public university, and receives


public funds," Stein noted. "Virginia is hosting an institution• that the Kochs


practically control."


The founder of the Mercatus Center is Richard Fink, formerly an economist. Fink


heads Koch Industries' lobbying operation in Washington. In addition, he is the


president of the Charles G. Koch Charitable Foundation, the president of the


Claude R. Lambe Charitable Foundation, a director of the Fred C. and Mary R.


Koch Foundation, and a director and co-founder, with David Koch, of the


Americans for Prosperity Foundation.


Fink, with his many titles, has become the central nervous system of the


Kochtopus. He appears to have supplanted Ed Crane, the 'head or the Cato


Institute, as the brothers' main political lieutenant. Though David remains on


the board at Cato, Charles Koch has fallen out with Crane. Associates suggested


to me that Crane had been insufficiently respectful of Charles's management


philosophy, which he distilled into a book called "The Science of Success," and


trademarked under the name Market-Based Management, or M.B.M. In the book,


Charles recommends instilling a company's corporate culture with the


competitiveness of the marketplace. Koch describes M.B.M. as a "holistic system"


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




containing "five dimensions: vision, virtue and talents, knowledge.processes,


decision rights and incentives." A top Cato Institute official told me that


Charles "thinks he's a genius. He's the emperor, and he's convinced he's wearing


clothes." Fink, by contrast, has been .far more embracing of Charles's ideas.


(Fink, like the Kochs, declined to be interviewed.)


At a 1995 conference for philanthropists, Fink adopted the language of economics


when speaking about the Mercatus Center's purpose. He said that grant-makers


should use think tanks and political-action groups to convert intellectual raw


materials into policy "products."


The Wall Street Journal has called the Mercatus Center "the mos.t important think


tank you've never heard of," and noted that fourteen of the twenty-three


regulations that President George W. Bush placed on a "hit list" had been


suggested first by Mercatus scholars. Fink told the paper that the Kochs have


"other means of fighting [their] battles," and that the Mercatus Center does not


actively promote the company's private interests. But Thomas McGarity, a law


professor at the University of Texas, who specializes in environmental issues,.


told me that "Koch has been constantly in trouble with the E.P.A., and Mercatus


has constantly hammered on the agency." An environmental lawyer who has clashed


with the Mercatus Center called it "a means of laundering economic aims." The


lawyer explained the strategy: "You take corporate money and give it to a


neutral-sounding think tank," which "hires people with pedigrees and academic


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




degrees who put out credible-seeming studies. But they all coincide perfectly


with the economic interests of their funders."


In 1997, for instance, the E.P.A. moved to reduce surface ozone, a form of


pollution caused, in part, by emissions from oil refineries. Susan Dudley, an


economist. who became a top official at the Mercatus Center, criticized the


proposed. rule. The E.P.A., she argued, had not taken into account that smog-free


skies would result in more cases of skin cancer. She projected that if pollution


were controlled it would cause up to eleven thousand additional cases of skin


cancer each year.


In 1999, the District of Columbia Circuit Court took up Dudley's smog argument.


Evaluating the E.P.A.rule, the court found that the E.P.A. had "explicitly


disregarded" the "possible health benefits of ozone." In another part of the


opinion, the court ruled, 2-1, that the E.P.A. had overstepped its authority in


calibrating standards for ozone emissions. As the Constitutional Accountability


Center, a think tank, revealed, the judges in the majority had previously


attended legal junkets, on a Montana ranch, that were arranged by the Foundation


for Research on Economics and the Environment—a group funded by Koch family


foundations. The judges have claimed that the ruling was unaffected by their


attendance.


deas don't happen on their own," Matt Kibbe, the president of FreedomWorks, a


Tea Party advocacy group, told me. "Throughout history, ideas need patrons." The


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




Koch brothers, after helping to create Cato and Mercatus, concluded that think


tanks alone were not enough to effect change. They needed a mechanism to deliver


those ideas to the street, and•to attract the public's support. In 1984, David


Koch and Richard Fink created yet another organization, and Kibbe joined them.


The group, Citizens for a Sound Economy, seemed like a grassroots movement, but


according to the Center for Public Integrity it was sponsored principally by the


Kochs, who provided $7.9 million between 1986 and 1993. Its mission, Kibbe said,


"was to take these heavy ideas and translate them for mass America. . . . We


read the same literature Obama did about nonviolent revolutions—Saul Alinsky,


Gandhi, Martin Luther King. We studied the idea of the Boston Tea Party as an


example of nonviolent, social change. We learned we needed boots on the ground to


sell ideas, not candidates." Within a few years, the group had mobilized fifty


paid field workers, in twenty-six states, to rally voters behind the Kochs'


agenda. David and Charles, according to one participant, were "very controlling,


very top down. You can't build an organization with them. They run it."


Around this time, the brothers faced a political crisis. In 1989, the Senate


Select Committee on Indian Affairs investigated their business and released a


scathing report accusing Koch Oil of "a widespread and sophisticated scheme to


steal crude oil from Indians and others through fraudulent mismeasuring." The


Kochs admitted that they had improperly taken thirty-one million dollars' worth


of crude oil, but said that it had been accidental. Charles Koch told committee              •


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




investigators that oil measurement is "a very uncertain art."


To defend its reputation, Koch Industries hired Robert Strauss, then a premier


Washington lobbyist; the company soon opened an office in the city. A grand jury


was convened to investigate the allegations, but it eventually disbanded,


without issuing criminal charges. According to the Senate report, after the


committee hearings Koch operatives delved into the personal lives of committee


staffers, even questioning an ex-wife. Senate investigators were upset by the


Kochs' tactics. Kenneth Ballen, the counsel to the Senate committee, said,


"These people have amassed such unaccountable power!"


By 1993, when Bill Clinton became President, Citizens for a Sound Economy had


become a prototype for the kind of corporate-backed opposition campaign a that


have proliferated during the Obama era. The group waged a successful assault on


Clinton's proposed B.T.U. tax on energy, for instance, running- advertisements,


staging media events, and targeting opponents. And it mobilized anti-tax rallies


outside the Capitol-rallies that NPR described as "designed to strike fear into


the hearts of wavering Democrats." ban Glickman, a former Democratic congressman


from Wichita, who supported the B.T.U. tax, recalled, "I'd been in Congress


eighteen years. The Kochs actually engaged against me and funded my opponent.


They used a lot of resources and effort-their employees, too." Glickman suffered


a surprise defeat. "I can't prove it, but I think I was probably their victim,"


he said.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




The Kochs continued to disperse their money, creating slippery organizations


with generic-sounding names, and this made it difficult to ascertain the extent


of their influence in Washington. In 1990, Citizens for a Sound Economy created


a spinoff group, Citizens for the Environment, which called acid rain and other


environmental problems "myths." When the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette investigated


the matter, it discovered that the spinoff group had "no citizen membership of


its own."


In 1997, another Senate investigation began looking into what a minority report


called "an audacious plan to pour millions of dollars in contributions into -


Republican campaigns nationwide without disclosing the amount or source," in


order to evade .campaign-finance laws. A shell corporation, Triad Management, had


paid more than three million dollars for attack ads in twenty-six House races


and three Senate races. More than half of the advertising money came from an


obscure nonprofit group, the Economic Education Trust. The Senate committee's


minority report suggested that "the trust was financed in whole or in part by


Charles and David Koch of Wichita, Kansas." The brothers were suspected of


having secretly paid for the attack ads, most of which aired in states where


Koch Industries did business. In Kansas, where Triad Management was especially


active, the funds may have played a decisive role in four of six federal races.


The Kochs, when asked by reporters if they had given the money, refused to


comment. In 1998, however, the Wall Street Journal confirmed that a consultant


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




on the Kochs' payroll had been involved in the scheme. Charles Lewis, of the


Center for Public Integrity, described the scandal as "historic. Triad was the


first time a major corporation used a cutout"—a front operation—"in a


threatening way. Koch Industries was the poster child of a company run amok."


uring the Clinton Administration, the energy industry faced increased scrutiny


and regulation. In the mid-nineties, the Justice Department filed two lawsuits


against Koch Industries, claiming that it was responsible for more than three


hundred oil spills, which had released an estimated three million gallons of oil


into lakes and rivers. The penalty was potentially as high as two hundred and


fourteen million dollars. In a settlement, Koch Industries paid a record


thirty-million-dollar civil fine, and agreed to spend five million dollars on


environmental projects.


In 1999, a jury found Koch Industries guilty of negligence and malice in the


deaths of two Texas teen-agers in an explosion that resulted from a leaky


underground butane pipeline. (In 2001, the company paid an undisclosed


settlement.) And in the final months of the Clinton Presidency the Justice


Department levelled a ninety-seven-count indictment against the company, for


covering up the discharge of ninety-one tons of benzene, a carcinogen, from its


refinery in Corpus Christi, Texas. The company was liable for three hundred and


fifty million dollars in fines, and four Koch employees faced up to thirty-five


years in prison. The Koch Petroleum Group eventually pleaded guilty to one


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




criminal charge of covering up environmental violations, including the


falsification of documents, and paid a twenty-million-dollar fine. David


Uhlmann, a career prosecutor who, at the time, headed the environmental-crimes


section at the Justice Department, described the suit as "one of the most


significant cases ever brought under the Clean Air Act." He added,


"Environmental crimes are almost always motivated by economics and arrogance,


and in the Koch case there was a healthy dose of both."


During the 2000 election campaign, Koch Industries spent some nine hundred


thousand dollars to support the candidacies of George N. Bush and other


Republicans. During the Bush years, Koch Industries and other fossil-fuel


companies enjoyed remarkable prosperity. The 2005 energy bill, which Hillary


Clinton dubbed the Dick Cheney Lobbyist Energy Bill, offered enormous subsidies


and tax breaks for energy companies. The Kochs have cast themselves as deficit


hawks, but, according to a study by Media Matters, their companies have


benefitted from nearly a hundred million dollars in government contracts since


2000.


In 2004, Citizens for a Sound Economy was accused of illegitimately throwing its


weight behind Bush's reelection. The group's Oregon branch had attempted to get


Ralph Nader on the Presidential ballot, in order to dilute Democratic support


for John Kerry, Critics argued that it was illegal for a tax-exempt nonprofit


organization to donate its services for partisan political purposes. (A


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




 complaint was filed with the Federal Election Commission; it was dismissed.)


 That year, internal rivalries at Citizens for a Sound Economy caused the


 organization to split apart. David Koch and Fink started a new group, Americans


 for Prosperity, and they hired Tim Phillips to run it. Phillips was a political


 veteran who had worked with Ralph Reed, the evangelical leader and Republican


 activist, co-founding Century Strategies, a campaign-consulting company that


 became notorious for its ties to the disgraced lobbyist Jack Abramoff.


 Phillips's online biography describes him as an expert in "grasstops" and


 "grassroots" political organizing. The Kochs' choice of Phillips signalled an


 even greater toughness. The conservative operative Grover Norquist, who is known


 for praising "throat slitters" in politics, called Phillips "a grownup who can


 make things happen."


 Last year, Phillips told the Financial Times that Americans for Prosperity had


 only eight thousand registered members. Currently, its Web site claims that the


 group has "1.2 million activists." Whatever its size, the Kochs' political


 involvement has been intense; a former employee of the Cato Institute told me


 that Americans for Prosperity "was micromanaged by the Kochs." And the brothers'


 investment may well have paid off: Americans for Prosperity, in concert with the


•family's other organizations, has been instrumental in disrupting the Obama


 Presidency.


 In January, 2008, Charles Koch wrote in his company newsletter that America


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




could be on the verge of "the greatest loss of liberty and prosperity since the


1930s." That October, Americans for Prosperity held a conference of conservative


operatives at a Marriott hotel outside Washington. Erick Erickson, the


editor-in-chief of the conservative blog RedState.com, took the lectern, thanked


David Koch, and vowed to "unite and fight . . . the armies of the left!" Soon


after Obama assumed office, Americans for Prosperity launched "Porkulus" rallies


against Obama's stimulus-spending measures. Then the Mercatus Center released a


report claiming that stimulus funds had been directed disproportionately toward


Democratic districts; eventually, the author was forced to correct the report,


but not before Rush Limbaugh, citing the paper, had labelled Obama's program "a


slush fund," and Fox News and other conserVative outlets had echoed the


sentiment. (Phil Kerpen, the vice-president for policy at Americans for


Prosperity, is a contributor to the Fox News Web site. Another officer at


Americans for Prosperity, Walter Williams, often guest-hosts for Limbaugh.)


Americans for Prosperity also created an offshoot, Patients United Now, which


organized what Phillips has estimated to be more than three hundred rallies


against health-care reform. At one rally, an effigy of a Democratic congressman


was hung; at another, protesters unfurled a banner depicting corpses from


Dachau. The group also helped organize the "Kill the Bill" protests outside the


Capitol, in March, where Democratic supporters of health-care reform alleged


that they were spat on and cursed at. Phillips was a featured speaker.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




Americans for Prosperity has held at least eighty events targeting cap-and-trade


legislation, which is aimed at making industries pay for the air pollution that


they create. Speakers for -the group claimed,, with exaggeration, that even


back-yard barbecues and kitchen stoves would be taxed. The group was also


involved in the attacks on Obama's "green jobs" czar, Van Jones, and waged a


crusade against international climate talks. Casting his group as a champion of


ordinary workers who would be hurt by environmentalists, Phillips went to


Copenhagen last year and staged a protest outside the United Nations conference


on climate change, declaring, "We're a grasaroots organization. . . . I think


it's unfortunate when wealthy children of wealthy. families .           . want to send


unemployment rates in the United States up to twenty per cent."


Grover Norquist, who holds a weekly meeting for conservative leaders in


Washington, .including representatives from Americans for Prosperity, told me


that last summer's raucous rallies were pivotal in undermining Obama's agenda


The Republican leadership in Congress, he said, "couldn't have done it without


August, when people went out on the streets. It discouraged deal-makers"—Republicans


who might otherwise have worked constructively with Obama. Moreover, the


appearance of growing public opposition to Obama affected corporate donors on K


Street. "K Street is a three-billion-dollar weathervane," Norquist said. "When


Obama was 'strong, the Chamber of Commerce said, 'We can work with the Obama


Administration.' But that changed when thousands of people went into the street


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




and 'terrorized' congressmen. August is what changed it. Now that Obama is weak,


people are getting tough."


As the first anniversary of Obama's election approached, David Koch came to the


Washington area to attend a triumphant Americans for Prosperity gathering.


Obama's poll numbers were falling fast. Not a single Republican senator was


working with the Administration on health care, or much else. Pundits were


writing about Obama's political ineptitude, and Tea Party groups were accusing


the President of initiating "a government takeover." In a speech, Koch said,


"Days like today bring to reality the vision of our board of directors when we


started this organization, five years ago." He went on, "We envisioned a mass


movement, a state-based one, but national in scope, of hundreds of thousands of


American citizens from all walks of life standing up and fighting for the


economic freedoms that made our nation the most prosperous society in history. .


. . Thankfully, the stirrings from California to Virginia, and from Texas to


Michigan, show that more and more of our fellow-citizens are beginning to see


the same truths as we do."


While Koch didn't explicitly embrace the Tea Party movement that day, more


recently he has come close to doing so, praising it for demonstrating the


"powerful visceral hostility in the body politic against the massive increase in


government power, the massive efforts to socialize this country." Charles Koch,


in a newsletter sent to his seventy thousand employees, compared the Obama


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




Administration to the regime of the Venezuelan strongman Hugo Chavez. The Kochs'


sense of imperilment is somewhat puzzling. Income inequality in America is


greater than it has been since the nineteen-twenties, and since the seventies


the tax rates of the wealthiest have fallen more than thoseof the middle class.


Yet the brothers' message has evidently resonated with-voters: a recent poll


found that fifty-five per cent of Americans agreed that Obama is a socialist.


Americans for Prosperity, meanwhile, has announced that it will spend an


additional forty-five million dollars before the midterm elections, in November.


Although the group is legally prohibited from directly .endorsing candidates, it


nonetheless plans to target some fifty House races and half a dozen Senate


races, staging rallies, organizing door-to-door canvassing, and running ads


aimed at "educating voters about where candidates stand."


Though the Kochs have slowed Obama's momentum, their larger political battle is


far from won. Richard Fink, interviewed by FrumForum.com this spring, said, "If


you look at where we've gone from the year 2000 to now, with the expansion of


government spending and a debt burden that threatens to bankrupt the country,


doesn't look very good at all." He went on, "It looks like the infrastructure


that was built and nurtured has not carried the. day." He suggested that the


Kochs needed "to get more into the practical, day-to-day issues of governing."


n 1991, David Koch was badly injured in a plane crash in Los Angeles. He was the


sole passenger in first class to survive. As he was recovering, a routine


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




physical exam led to the discovery of prostate cancer. Koch received treatment,


settled down, started a family, and reconsidered his life. As he told Portfolio,


"When you're the only one who survived in the front of the plane and everyone


else died—yeah, you think, 'My God, the good Lord soared me for some greater


purpose.' My joke is that I've been busy ever since, doing all the good work I


can think of, so He can have confidence in me."


Koch began giving spectacularly large donations to the arts and sciences. And he


became a patron of cancer research, focussing on prostate cancer. In addition to


his gifts to Sloan-Kettering, he gave fifteen million dollars to New


York-Presbyterian Hospital, a hundred and twenty-five million to M.I.T. for


cancer research, twenty million to Johns Hopkins University, and twenty-five


millior. to the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, in Houston. In response to his


generosity, Sloan-Kettering gave Koch its Excellence in Corporate Leadership


Award. In 2004, President Bush named him to the National Cancer Advisory Board,


which guides the National Cancer Institute.


Koch's corporate and political roles, however, may pose conflicts of interest.


For example, at the same time that David Koch has been casting himself as a


champion in the fight against cancer, Koch Industries has been lobbying to


prevent the E.P.A. from classifying formaldehyde, which the company produces in


great quantities, as a "known carcinogen" in humans.


Scientists have long known that formaldehyde causes cancer in rats, and several


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




major scientific studies have concluded that formaldehyde causes cancer in human


beings—including one published last year by the National Cancer Institute, on


whose advisory board Koch. sits. The study tracked twenty-five thousand patients


for an average of forty years; subjects exposed to higher amounts of


formaldehyde had significantly higher rates of leukemia. These results helped


lead an expert panel within the National Institutes of Health to conclude that


formaldehyde should be categorized as a known carcinogen, and be strictly


controlled by the government. Corporations have resisted regulations on


formaldehyde for decades, however, and Koch Industries has been a large funder


of members of Congress who have stymied the E.P.A., requiring it to defer new


regulations until more studies are completed.


Koch Industries became a major producer of the chemical in 2005, after it bought


Georgia-Pacific, the paper and wood-products company, for twenty-one billion


dollars. Georgia-Pacific manufactures formaldehyde in its chemical division, and


uses it to produce various wood products, such as plywood and laminates. Its


annual production capacity for formaldehyde is 2.2 billion pounds. Last


December, Traylor Champion, Georgia-Pacific's vice-president of environmental


affairs, sent a formal letter of protest to federal health authorities. He wrote


that the company ",strongly disagrees" with the N.I.H. panel's conclusion that


formaldehyde should be treated as a known human carcinogen. David Koch did not


recuse himself from the National Cancer Advisory Board, or divest himself of


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




company stock, while his company was directly lobbying the government to keep


formaldehyde on the market. (A board spokesperson said that the issue of


formaldehyde had not come up.)


James Huff, an associate director at the National institute for Environmental


Health Sciences, a division of the N.I.H., told me that it was "disgusting" for


Koch to be serving on the National Cancer Advisory Board: "It's just not good


for public health. Vested interests should not be on the board." He went on,


"Those boards are very important. They're very influential as to Whether N.C.I.


goes into formaldehyde or not. Billions of dollars are involved in


formaldehyde."


Harold Varmus, the director of the National Cancer Institute, knows David Koch


from Memorial Sloan-Kettering, which he used to run. He said that, at


Sloan-Kettering, "a lot of people who gave to us had large business interests.


The one thing we wouldn't tolerate in our board members is tobacco." When told


of Koch Industries' stance on formaldehyde, Varmus said that he was "surprised."


he David H. Koch Hall of Human Origins, at the Smithsonian's National Museum of


Natural History, is a multimedia exploration of the theory that mankind evolved


in response to climate change. At the main entrance, viewers are confronted with


a giant graph charting the Earth's temperature over the past ten million years,


which notes that it is far cooler now than it.was ten thousand years ago.


Overhead, the text reads, "HUMANS EVOLVED IN RESPONSE TO A CHANGING WORLD." The


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




message, as amplified by the exhibit's Web site, is that "key human adaptations


evolved in response to environmental instability." Only at the end of the


exhibit, under the headline "OUR SURVIVAL CHALLENGE," is it noted that levels of


carbon dioxide are higher now than they have ever been, and that they are


projected to increase dramatically in the next century. No cause is given for


this development; no mention is made of any possible role played by fossil


fuels. The exhibit makes it seem part of a natural continuum. The accompanying


text says, "During the period in which humans evolved, Earth's temperature and


the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere fluctuated together." An


interactive game in the exhibit suggests that humans will continue to adapt to


climate change in the future. People may build "underground citieS," developing


"short, compact bodies" or "curved spines," so that "moving around in tight


spaces will be no problem."


Such ideas uncannily echo the Koch message. The company's January newsletter to


employees, for instance, argues that "fluctuations in the earth's climate


predate humanity," and concludes, "Since we can't control Mother Nature, let's


figure out how to get along with her changes." Joseph Romm, a physicist who runs


the Web site ClimateProgressorg, is infuriated by the Smithsonian's


presentation. "The whole exhibit whitewashes the modern climate issue," he said.


"I think the Kochs wanted to be seen as some sort of high-minded company,


associated with the greatest natural-history and science museum in the country.


    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015




But the truth is, the exhibit is underwritten by big-time polluters, who are


underground funders of action to stop efforts to deal with this threat to


humanity. I think the Smithsonian should have drawn the line."


Cristian Samper, the museum's director, said that.the exhibit is not about


climate change, and described Koch as "one of the best donors we've had, in my


tenure here, because he's very interested in the content, but completely hands


off." He noted, "I don't know all the details of his involvement in other


issues."


The Kochs have long depended on the public's not knowing all the details about


them. They have been content to operate what David Koch has called "the largest


company that you've never heard of." But with the growing prominence of the Tea


 Party, and with increased awareness of the Kochs' ties to the movement, the


 brothers may find it harder to deflect scrutiny. Recently, President Obama took


 aim at the Kochs' political network. Speaking at a Democratic National Committee


 fund-raiser, in Austin, he warned supporters that the Supreme Court's recent


 ruling in the Citizens United case--which struck down laws prohibiting direct


 corporate spending on campaigns—had made it even easier for big companies to


 hide behind "groups with harmless-sounding names like Americans for Prosperity."


. 0bama said, "They don't have to say who, exactly, Americans for Prosperity are.


 You don't know if it's a foreign-controlled corporation"—or even, he added, "a


 big oil compan y


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770951 Date: 08/31/2015
