UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766082 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL
                                  Sensitive But Unclassified



   To:             The Honorable Hillary Rodham Clinton, Secretary of State

   Thru:           Cheryl Mills, Counselor and Chief of Staff

   From:           Reta Jo Lewis, Special Representative, Global Intergovernmental Affairs

   Date:           December 31, 2009

   Subject:        The Next Six Months - Work Plan

         I.     Introduction

          The next six months will be a critical time for establishing the Department's leadership in
   bridging relationships for U.S. intergovernmental officials and their foreign counterparts,
   defining the mission and role of the Office of the Special Representative for Global
   Intergovernmental Affairs ("S/SRGIA"), and outlining an agenda that serves the needs of the
   Department and these officials. Our approach will be strategic and integrated, working in
   collaboration with Department bureaus and USAID offices to strengthen and deliver on the
   Secretary's and Administration's priorities.

         II.    Key Objectives

           The Special Representative for Global Intergovernmental Affairs will serve the global
   needs of the U.S. intergovernmental officials and the entities they represent. The S/SRGIA will
   also connect U.S. state and local officials with intergovernmental officials around the world,
   promote local capacity building investments and programs to enhance country-led processes, and
   facilitate the needs and goals of intergovernmental officials here and abroad consistent with
   Department priorities.

         III.   Next Steps

         This work plan describes activities that the S/SRGIA plans to initiate, grow and
   implement in the next six months. To place the Work Plan in context, we describe below
   S/SRGIA' s work-planning process.

         A. Establish S/SRGIA Mission and Role in the Department.

           Currently, no one and no office in the State Department has accountability to serve the
   needs of intergovernmental officials, (e.g., Governors, Mayors, local elected leaders, the entities
   that represent them) with respect to their global affairs portfolios. State and local officials'
   concerns are typically routed on an individual basis through bureaus with the results reflecting ,
   the priority of the person in the bureau's estimation or the nature of the request. Priority
   activities will be as follows:

                                                    1

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766082 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766082 Date: 08/31/2015




                                 Sensitive But Unclassified

      • Confirm the Secretary's support to focus on priority issues and countries;
      • Join Department's meetings and conversations with visiting foreign state and local
        representatives and dignitaries to establish S/SRGIA's role;
      • Strengthen support on global intergovernmental affairs issues internally in the State
        Department, by explaining the value of these stakeholders;
      • Track deployment of resources assisting intergovernmental officials and leverage the
        State Department's collective U.S. and global intergovernmental relationships;
      • Follow and interpret international issues (e.g., food security, global health, climate
        change, trade and economic development, energy) of importance to state governments;
      • Promote dialogue between the Department (e.g., USAID, EEB, ECA, Public Private
        Partnerships, Global Women's Issues, Consular Affairs, MCC and targeted Regional
        Bureaus) and external constituents (e.g., Governors, Mayors, local elected officials, and
        the entities that they represent) for more effective partnerships and relationships; and
      • Collaborate with the Public Diplomacy and INR to create a survey of foreign
        intergovernmental affairs officials to determine their needs and engage U.S.
        intergovernmental officials to learn how the Department should help to further their
        global goals.

      B. Conduct Stakeholder Outreach: Obtain first-hand understanding of the needs of
         U.S. intergovernmental officials.

           State economies are increasingly globalized, and more and more U.S. companies are
   competing in international markets and against firms worldwide. As the principal stewards of
   their states' economic success, Governors recognize that the global marketplace presents both
   challenges and opportunities and that states must address both to ensure their continued
   competitiveness. Thus, S/SRGIA will develop its global intergovernmental affairs outreach
   activities in partnership with its participating US and other intergovernmental and international
   organizations. U.S. national organizations who serve governmental authorities include but are
   not limited to the following:

      •   National Governors Association;
      •   National Lt. Governors Association;
      •   U.S. Conference of Mayors;
      •   National League of Cities;
      •   National Association of Counties/Large Urban County Caucus;
      •   National Association of States Attorney Generals;
      •   National State Legislatures; and
      •   Councils of State Governments.

            Outreach is essential to many aspects of the Department's activities. S/SRGIA's outreach
   objective is to promote and increase the general awareness of the benefits of the State
   Department efforts in global intergovernmental affairs, especially among decision makers and
   policy makers, educational entities, non-governmental organizations, public-interest groups and
   public agencies. S/SRGIA will provide international outreach services to state and local elected
   officials in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and all other inhabited U.S.
   territories. Specific objectives are to:
                                                   2

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766082 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766082 Date: 08/31/2015




                                  Sensitive But Unclassified

      •   Build state by state profiles, thus creating a set of priorities and identifying opportunities
          for collaboration with state and local officials on their global projects and Department
          priorities;
      •   Establish our target list of public officials to assist and nurture relationships with
          principals and the organizations that represent them and their global needs;
      •   Create dialogue with the Governors and Mayors in preparation for the NGA and Mayors
          Washington conferences in the fall;
      •   Travel to conferences and meetings within the United States and countries abroad
          required to implement the Department's global intergovernmental affairs agenda;
      •   Develop a network of leaders, to collaborate and create partnerships;
      •   Coordinate meetings between Department of State experts and state and local officials;
      •   Support targeted elected officials trade missions and other official trips abroad;
      •   Develop a strategy for deliverables such as multilateral pacts and Memorandum of
          Understandings on key State Department priorities that we will sign with responsible
          parties; and
      •   Collaboration with EEB, to partner with them to engage state and local government
          leaders in the bureaus enhanced commercial diplomacy efforts (e.g. the Administration's
          National Export Initiative and EEB/Consular Affairs Business Visa Facilitation initiative,
          etc.).

      C. Conduct Stakeholder Outreach: Obtain first-hand understanding of the needs of
         middle and senior foreign intergovernmental affairs officials.

                  Currently, ECA conducts a significant number of exchanges with foreign and
          domestic government officials. None of ECA's programs target regions with the
          objective of enhancing another country's government systems because the bureau's
          authorities do not permit any type of training since everything must be done under the
          auspices of enhancing mutual understanding. The most visible ECA program is the
          International Visitor Leadership Program which in FY09 brought in 1,390 foreign
          government officials at the state, city and national levels to gain knowledge around the
          US political system and culture. To date, the bureau estimates the same number of
          government visitors in FY10.

          Thus, S/SRGIA will develop its global intergovernmental affairs outreach activities in
   partnership with international organizations. International organizations who serve local
   governmental authorities include but are not limited to the following:

      •   United Cities and Local Governments;
      •   Metropolis;
      •   The World Urban Forum;
      •   UN-HABITAT;
      •   Latin American and Caribbean Ministers of Housing and Urbanization;
      •   UN Advisory Committee of Local Authorities;
      •   The World Mayors Council on Climate Change;

                                                    3

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766082 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766082 Date: 08/31/2015




                                   Sensitive But Unclassified

      •    Sister Cities International;
      •    Local Governments for Sustainability; and
      •    Municipal Development Partnerships which targets governments in Africa.

           Priority activities will be as follows:

               • S/SRGIA will collaborate with Public Diplomacy to conduct stakeholder outreach
                 with strategic countries — e.g. Af, Pak, Iraq — and key emerging powers (Brazil,
                 India, Indonesia, South Africa, Nigeria) and developing countries (Rwanda,
                 Ethiopia, Kenya, etc.) to obtain first-hand understanding of the needs of middle
                 and senior foreign intergovernmental affairs officials;
               • Collaborate with [NR to assist us in gaining a better understanding of what
                 foreign intergovernmental affairs officials want to engage with their US
                 counterparts ranging from engagement on a host of common policy concerns,
                 opportunities, programs and connections.

      D. Provide Leadership for Department Intergovernmental Capacity Building.

          One of our largest challenges in most developing countries is the lack of capacity in the
   government below the President and Prime Minister level. As the Department seeks to
   implement development programs or conduct diplomacy, there is often limited local counterpart
   capacity to do so with or to empower. S/SRGIA will work with USAID and State bureaus and
   offices to provide connections and leadership development to build the capacity of
   intergovernmental officials in countries around the world. Currently, millions of dollars of
   USAID and ECA grants that support capacity building are typically carried out by contractors
   and have results that are not transparent in their reporting or impact. S/SRGIA will partner with
   existing offices to provide leadership for the investment in this space, accountability for the
   outcomes and programming, and foster relationships between intergovernmental officials here in
   the US with foreign partners to mentor and model what is needed.

           S/SRGIA capacity building strategies will primarily be based on best practices derived
   from studying successful and less-successful approaches. Within the next six months, S/SRGIA
   will work in partnership with Department and USAID bureaus and resources. Priority activities
   will be as follows:

       •   Identify State Department investments, canvass additional State Department dedicated
           resources other than grant-making and assess the strength of the current environment
           needed to advance the S/SRGIA's Secretary capacity building agenda for state and local
           leaders; participate in QDDR process regarding this agenda;
       •   Develop an agenda for a high-level retreat on the formulation of a National Capacity
           Development Strategy to present achievements to date, lessons learned and proposals for
           institutional capacity development going forward;
       •   Work with the Chiefs of Missions and other diplomats in countries where capacity
           building is critical to the success of our diplomacy and development efforts;



                                                     4

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766082 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766082 Date: 08/31/2015




                                     Sensitive But Unclassified

      •      Amplify and sustain high quality and results driven support to institutional capacity
             development by assisting in advocating for increased funding and building public-private
             partnerships;
      •      Prioritize discrete initiatives to "fast track", based on importance, regional priorities (e.g.,
             Asia, Africa and Latin America), assessment of readiness, impact and feasibility and
             translate priorities into actionable interventions;
      •      Develop a network of experts involved in existing capacity-building initiatives related to
             global intergovernmental affairs and build partnerships;
      •      Define a coordinated approach and institutional responsibilities for supporting the GIA
             capacity building initiative; and
      •      Identify opportunities for further collaboration with state and local officials on their
             projects and Department priorities.

      IV.        Administrative Activities

      •      Standardize requests for assistance with projects related to policy, business, trade,
             consular affairs, etc.; and
       •     Link the Department website to states websites and trade and development office
             websites.

       V.        Budget and Staffing

             S/SRGIA will require a budget and staffing to fulfill its mission.

       VI.       Assessment of Progress

           The short term goal will be to engage U.S. intergovernmental officials about their global
   concerns. The S/SRGIA office will become a significant resource for high-level State
   Department engagement for U.S. state and local elected officials. The benefits of this new office
   will be immediate and grow over time as our engagement deepens. Assisting US states and local
   governments to expand their exports, promote locations for foreign investment and for
   participation in State Department priorities are some of the short term benefits we hope to
   achieve with respect to U.S. intergovernmental officials.

           With respect to the global intergovernmental officials, in the short term, we expect to
   work with our Regional Bureaus and Offices, (e.g., USAID, ECA, EEB, etc.) to assess the
   current state of play and assist us with how we better target and leverage our assistance to this
   constituency.

           In the longer term, institutionally, we need to sustain relationships with our embassies
   and missions overseas, so that they can assist state and local officials and their constituencies to
   expand their global business base. As related to our national capacity building strategy, in the
   long term, we seek to empower and educate and build relationships with state and local officials
   abroad. We also seek accountability for the outcomes of the programming and will provide
   leadership for future investments. Going forward, we will tailor these investments to address
   regional State Department priorities.

                                                         5

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766082 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766082 Date: 08/31/2015




                                 Sensitive But Unclassified

         In addition, since there is a lack of USG harmonization of all of the relevant USG
  programs, having S/SRGIA be the designated coordinator will allow DOS to take the lead in
  synchronizing government wide programs that engage foreign government officials. This will be
  another long term goal for the office.

      VII. Potential Events

      A. Potential Events and Activities for S

      1. Private Dinner or Luncheon with the Governors and Urban Mayors;
      2. Roundtable or Speech at USCMNGA Winter Meetings; and
      3. Recommendations of Governors and Mayors for S to extend possible invitations for
         occasional international travel with S.

      B. Potential Events and Activities SRGIA

      1. Host "Day with State" with U.S. intergovernmental officials and conduct joint meetings
         with various State Department Bureaus and Offices giving stakeholders the ability to
         connect and partner with State;
      2. Focus Groups with Diplomats from key regions of interest representing Latin America,
         Africa, Asia in our development of our capacity building strategy;
      3. Meetings with other elected officials and representative organizations;
      4. Meetings with NG0s, thinktanks, etc.; and
      5. Recommend US intergovernmental officials for appointments to US delegations to State
         Department international meetings and conferences.

      VIII. Possible Travel for SRGIA

      A. Domestic

      1. TX, NY, VA, MD, PA, Delaware, D.C. Illinois, Florida, California, Ohio, NJ, Michigan.
          States are targeted based on foreign direct investment, export data and states of interest.

      B. International

       1. Travel to targeted international meetings that focus on engaging state and local leaders;
         (e.g. World Urban Forum, Brazil; World Cities Summit 2010, Singapore; World Alliance
                 of Cities Against Poverty, Rotterdam; 3' Meeting of United Cities and Local
            Governments-ASPAC Congress 2010, Japan; Global Mayors Forum, Hong Kong and
                                                Shenzhen, China;
      2. Emphasis and travel to Asia, Latin America and Africa countries where capacity building
         is critical to the success of our diplomacy and development effort.




                                                   6
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766082 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766082 Date: 08/31/2015




                               Sensitive But Unclassified

      IX. Key Dates - 2010

      1. Jan, 13 - 14, 2010, Western Hemisphere Economic Officers Conference, Puerto Rico
      2. Jan. 20— Jan. 22, USCM Winter Meeting and June 2010 Annual Meeting
      3. Jan. 29 — Feb. 1, National Association of Secretaries of State
      4. Jan. 30 — Jan. 31, National Conference of State Legislatures, Savannah, GA
      5. Feb. 8 — Feb. 10, National Association of Attorneys General, Ft. Lauderdale, FL
      6. Feb. 20 — Feb. 22, National Governors Association Winter Meeting and July 2010
         Annual Meeting
      7. Mar. 6 — Mar. 7, National Association of Counties
      8. Mar. 10 — Mar. 12, National Lieutenant Governors Association
      9. International Conference of Mayors Summits
      10. Strategic and Economic Dialogue — Chaired by S and Treasury
      11.2010 - Gov. Linda Lingle, APEC Conference — Hawaii
      12. World Conference of Mayors for Peace
      13.United Nations Day
      14.Mayors Hemisphere Forum




                                                 7

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766082 Date: 08/31/2015
