UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771816 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                               RELEASE IN PART
                                                                               B6



           Trip to North Korea, August 24-27, 2010
           On July 21 I was informed that North Korea wanted me and my wife
     to come to Pyongyang and secure the release of Aijalon Gomes, who had
     been arrested in January for entering the country illegally. He had
     been tried and sentenced to eight years of hard labor and fined about
     US$700,000. Gomes was transferred to a hospital on July 4 and was being
     given intensive medical care. They made it clear that I was the only
     one whose request for Gomes's release would be honored, and stated that
     I would be meeting with Chairman Kim Jong Il and other leaders in hope
     of resurrecting the U.S.-DPRK agreements on denuclearization and peace
     that were the last official act of President Kim Il Sung when Rosalynn
     and I were invited there in June, 1994. Apparently, the N. Koreans at-
     tach extraordinary importance to the legacy of their "Great Leader and
     President for all time."
           After reconfirming these proposals with the North Koreans, I no-
     tified the White House, but the requested mission was not approved un-
     til Mid-August, when we were informed by N. Korea that, because of the
     delays, Gomes would be transferred from the hospital back to prison. I
     was told that Kim Jong Il would no longer be available. At that time
     our trip was approved, with the understanding that I would be acting in
     a personal and unofficial status, not representing or sponsored by our
     government, with minimal publicity for the trip. I accepted all these
     restraints with pleasure. In the meantime, an assessment team was sent
     from the State Department to ascertain the medical condition of the
     prisoner and to seek his freedom. Although I did not receive any brief-
     ing on U.S. Korean policy, The Carter Center has monitored developments
     in the region as thoroughly as possible, and I was familiar with most
     issues.

      Rosalynn was unable to make the delayed trip, but I was accompanied by
      Dr. John Hardman, CEO of The Carter Center, my son Jeffrey, who has
      made a special study of Korean peninsula issues, my assistant Nancy Ko-
      nigsmark, and John Moores, who provided the chartered plane that made
      the trip possible. On August 21, I notified Gomes's mother that we
      would be bringing her son home to Boston, and would call her from An-
      chorage, Alaska, to give her a more exact time for our arrival.
            With intermediate stops in Alaska and Japan, we then flew direct-
      ly to Pyongyang. On the way I prepared a hand-written note expressing
      regret that Mr. Gomes had violated the laws of N. Korea and requesting
      that he be pardoned for humanitarian reasons.
            I was met by Vice Foreign Minister Kim Kye Kwan, who had partici-
      pated in my previous negotiations with Kim Il Sung in 1994 and has been
      the chief negotiator for N. Korea in the 6-power talks. He understood
      that I had no official status and would never speak on behalf of the
      U.S. government. We then went to meet with Kim Yong Nam, who is Presi-
      dent of the Supreme People's Assembly Presidium and titular head of
      state - whom I also knew from my earlier visit. He was clearly in
      charge. After receiving my written request for the pardon of Gomes,
      President Kim emphasized the seriousness of three recent American vio-
      lations of N. Korean sovereignty (including two women journalists) and
      said it would be at least 24 hours before a final decision could be
      made. In the meantime, he wanted to explore with me the possibilities
      and procedures that might be followed to honor the final commitments of
      Kim Il Sung, the subsequent N. Korea-USA framework agreement adopted by
      the Clinton administration, and to implement fully the comprehensive
      agreements made in 6-power talks in September 2005. (He referred to the
      talks as "sentenced to death but not yet executed.")




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771816 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771816 Date: 08/31/2015




           He and I then spent about four hours in discussion of the key is-
     sues, with him giving me a broad outline of N. Korean proposals on how
     the existing impasse might be resolved. He requested that I meet with
     Kim Kye Kwan the next morning to go into specifics.
           After almost 20 hours of travel and the long discussions, we en-
     joyed some rest in the lovely guest house, and then continued the next
     morning our more detailed talks about denuclearization, U.N. sanctions,
     peace agreements, trade and commerce. After lunch I concluded my dis-
     cussions, this time with Foreign Minister Pak Ui-chun, and was then
     permitted to visit Mr. Gomes. There followed an elaborate ceremony, in-
     volving top officials from the army, the National Defense Commission
     (chaired by Kim Jong Il), and the Justice Department. Gomes publicly
     confessed his crime and read a beautiful letter of apology to the peo-
     ple of North Korea and thanked them for his good treatment. After a
     brief consultation, the officials gave final approval to his pardon,
     but said he would have to stay in the hospital until the next morning,
     at which time he would be delivered to us for his journey home.
           That night we attended a remarkable concert by the National Sym-
     phony Orchestra, which had played host to the New York Symphony Orches-
     tra during its visit to Pyongyang in 2008. The orchestra leaders and
     all political officials emphasized the importance of a return visit by
     their National Symphony to the United States. This seems to be very im-
     portant to them.
           The next morning Dr. Hardman picked up Aijalon Gomes at the hos-
     pital and they met us at the airport for our flight home. At the time
     of our departure, a brief press statement was released from The Carter
     Center in Atlanta.
           From Anchorage, I called Gomes's mother, Mrs. Jackie McCarthy,
     and she and Aijalon enjoyed a long conversation before we departed for
     Boston. We were met there by about twenty members of the Gomes family,
     and there was an emotional reunion. After a photograph of us all to-
     gether, we returned home to Plains.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771816 Date: 08/31/2015
