      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766251 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL



From:                             Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ©state.gov >
Sent:                             Thursday, December 17, 2009 6:14 PM
To:
Subject                           More on AV



Here is the news summary:

A/S Valenzuela's Trip to South America: Valenzuela in Argentina Chile's El Mercurio reports that the visit of A/S
Valenzuela resulted last night in another misunderstanding between Washington and Buenos Aires because of
statements by the US official regarding the management of the Argentine economy. Controversy arose over statement
by Valenzuela during a restricted meeting with the local press in which he echoes the concerns of American
businessmen in that country regarding "judicial insecurity" and the management of the economy. Valenzuela, also
indicated that has been noted "change" in the investment climate for US businesses and reminded those present that
"in 1996 there was a great deal of enthusiasm regarding investment" in Argentina. The Argentine Foreign Ministry
responded in a communiqué that the government "has not received complaints from US business with interests and
investments in the country." Interior Minister Florencia Randazzo lamented that "some officials revert to old practices"
when there is the expectation of a new period in US foreign policy." Argentina's Clarin carries the same story titled
"Official Anger with Obama's Envoy Because He Spoke about Judicial Insecurity" with the Interior Minister's riposte
"Argentina is living in a period of complete judicial and institutional guarantees" and the nation "has left behind the
period in which an official of another country can tell ours what guarantees should exist to benefit its own
interests." INFOBAE.com adds that Minister of Justice Julio Alak described Valenzuela's statements as "unprecedented
and unjustified."




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766251 Date: 08/31/2015
