      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771276 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                            RELEASE IN PART B6


From:                              sbwhoeop
Sent:                              Friday, September 3, 2010 10:57 PM
To:
Subject:                           H: New poll underscores need to elevate Boehner. Sid


H: 58 days left. Whether the Democrats have the ability and will to execute is a separate subject: "If it were done, when
'tis done, then 'twere well it were done quickly..." Making Boehner the GOP poster child should be systematic and
relentless. Tick, tock, another day gone. Sid

September 3, 2010


Americans Most Likely to Favor GOP
Newcomers for Congress
Three in four believe influx of new members would improve
Congress
by Jeffrey M. Jones
PRINCETON, NJ -- It appears that the best type of candidate to be this fall is a Republican challenger. Given a choice of
four hypothetical candidates of differing party affiliations and experience, Americans are most likely to prefer "a
Republican who has not served in Congress." Those who would prefer a Democratic candidate opt for an incumbent over
a newcomer.




These results, based on an Aug. 27-30 USA Today/Gallup poll, underscore the advantageous political environment for
Republicans and non-incumbents this midterm election season. Overall, a majority of Americans prefer a Republican
candidate (regardless of experience) to a Democrat, 53% to 40%. And a majority also prefer a non-incumbent (regardless
of party affiliation) to an incumbent, 54% to 39%.
The fact that Americans who prefer a Republican candidate want one who is new to Congress suggests that these voters
want both GOP control of Congress and the new perspectives that come from members with no prior Washington
experience. Americans who favor Democratic candidates, on the other hand, apparently are more satisfied with the type
of experienced representatives now in Congress.
One would naturally expect Democrats to prefer Democratic candidates, and Republicans to prefer Republican
candidates, and that is the case when looking at the data by party. But partisans' preferences for incumbents versus
challengers seem to be influenced by their knowledge that the Democrats currently have a majority in Congress, and thus,
more Democrats will be defending House seats this fall. Democrats are more likely to prefer a Democrat who is in
Congress to a Democrat who is not, and Republicans are more likely to prefer a Republican outside of Congress to one
who is currently serving there. Independents also show a strong preference for Republican non-incumbents.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771276 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771276 Date: 08/31/2015




The data do not necessarily indicate how Americans would vote in the fall when presented with a choice of two specific
candidates for Congress. This fall, voters will generally be asked to choose between one Republican and one Democratic
candidate, one of whom may be an incumbent. When asked in the same poll whether they are more likely to vote for the
Republican or the Democratic congressional candidate in their district if the elections were held today, 48% of Americans
say the Republican and 43% the Democrat.
The appeal of non-incumbents is apparent in another question in the poll that finds 75% of Americans saying Congress
would be changed for the better if "most of the present members of Congress are replaced with new members." Only 14%
think that would make Congress worse. This is consistent with Gallup's findings from earlier this year suggesting strong
anti-incumbent sentiment.
Americans across key demographic subgroups widely share the belief that Congress would be improved if most members
were turned out of office. However, there is a significant gap by political party, with 89% of Republicans versus 63% of
Democrats saying that replacing most members of Congress would be beneficial. Again, the difference likely stems from
Democrats' current status as the majority party in Congress.
Implications
In a year when Americans are dissatisfied with the state of the nation and give relatively low ratings to the president and
Congress, it is not politically beneficial to be either an incumbent or a member of the ruling party. That is reflected in
Americans' preference for a Republican newcomer over other types of candidates they may have a chance to vote for in
this fall's midterm congressional elections. It is also reflected in prior analysis of historical Gallup data showing greater
seat turnover in Congress when the president and Congress are unpopular.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771276 Date: 08/31/2015
