        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769503 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART B5,B6



From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.goy>
Sent:                              Sunday, January 24, 2010 9:40 PM
To:
Subject:                           FW: Doctors report from Haiti



Depressing




See not only Mike's email — really see the incoming one.


cdm


From: Posner, Michael H
Sent: Sunday, January 24, 2010 6:21 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Doctors report from Haiti

Cheryl

This came to me through a doctor friend of Harold's and mine. It is a pretty grim snapshot from a group of doctors ( I
think from Mt Sinai hospital in NY) who returned from Haiti late last week .Our friend, Michael Hausman, is a terrific
hand surgeon who was trying to get down there to help. I was reluctant to send this to you because I know how hard
you and many other people have been working to relieve suffering and that you and others are working round the
clock. Nonetheless I thought you might be interested in their impressions so I am sending it to you as a data point.




Please feel free to share this with others.


Best

Mike


From: Hausman, Michael [mailto:
Sent: Friday, January 22, 2010 8:1/ Hifi
To: mrhausman
Subject: Fw: OR Report - Worth the Read!




                 From: "Dean Lorich" <
                 Date: Thu, 21 Jan 2010 00:11:38
                 To: Christopher Born<
                 Cc: Helfet<                >

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769503 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769503 Date: 08/31/2015




        Subject: Re: Haiti

        Chris
        Thanks much appreciated.

        I believe we went in with a reasonably comprehensive service we wanted to
        provide acute trauma care in an orthopedic disaster. Our plan was to be at a
        hospital where we could utilize our abilities as trauma surgeons treat the acute
        injuries involved in an orthopaedic disaster. We expected many amputations
        however came with a philosophy that would reasonably start limb salvage in what
        we thought was a salvageable limb.

        David Helfet put a team together which included:
        2 orthopaedic trauma surgeons
        3 orthopaedic trauma fellows
        2 highly skilled anesthiologists
        1 general surgery trauma surgeon
        2 synthes reps who were also scrub techs
        1 trauma nurse practioner to do triage
        2 OR nurses

        Our equipment including a huge amount of anesth medications and equipment,
        ability to construct 150 ex fix both small and large, OR equipment including
        scalpels etc, OR soft goods, splint material, OR prep material.

        We also had a plan of physician and equipment replacemnt that was dynamic
        where w/i 24hrs we could bring in what was necessary on the Synthes private jet.

        We thought the plan was a good one.

        We were incredibly naïve.

        Disaster management on the ground was nonexistent. The difficulties in getting
        in despite the intelligence we had from people on the ground and david helfet's
        high political connections with Partner's in Health as well as the Clintons only
        portended the difficulties we would have once we arrived.

        We started out friday morning, got a slot to get in friday that was eventually
        cancelled when we were on the runway to be rescheduled the next day. We
        diverted to the DR and planned on arriving in P OP saturday.

        Once on the ground the hospital we had intelligence that was up and running with
        2 OR's General Hospital was included severely in the earthquake and not capable
        of running functioning OR's as there was no running water and only a limited
        electrical supply on generator.

        We quickly took our second option
        Community Hospital of Haiti. We found approx 750 pt in the hospital upon our
        initial eval, the hospital had running water, electricity and 2 functional OR's
        Our naivette did not expect that the 2 anesth machines would not work, there
        would be 1 cautery for the hospital, autoclave that fit instruments the size of a
        cigar box, no sterile saline, no functioning fluoro and no local staff only a ragtag
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769503 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769503 Date: 08/31/2015




        group of voluntary health providers who like us had made it there on there own,

        To summarize we had no clue the medical infrastructure of the country was so
        poor.

        As we got up and running in the OR and organized the patients for surgery we
        communicated our new needs back to Synthes and more supplies were loaded for
        a second trip - these included battery operated pulse lavage, a huge supply of
        saline, soft goods in the OR. This plane landed as planned sunday pm, equipment
        was loaded on a truck and subsequent hijacked between the airport and the
        hospital.

        At the hospital we had zero security despite promises form NYPD and NYFD to
        provide that to us.

        Our philosophy was to work like this was a marathon run the OR's around the
        clock with the idea that we would have a defined extraction time of llpm
        tues. The plane that extracted us would come in with a new medical staff
        compliment to replace us. Equipment included urgent things to maximize issues
        that were nonexistent in the hospital that would enable us to provide better and
        more efficient care:
        2 portable anesth machines
        2electrocautery
        2 portable monitors for the pacu
        2autoclaves
        Replacement exfix
        Things that didn't arive with the previous flight

        That planes slot was cancelled by the military at 6am tues.
        We also previously had seen daylight in the remaining patients monday night
        haviving completed approx 100 surgeries. However on tues morning we found a
        huge # of new patients. The hospital was forced to undergo lockdown closing its
        gates to the outside and outside crowd becoming angry.

        We also noted tues morning that many of the patients we were operating on were
        becoming septic.
        We finished operating at noon tues, the last surgery our group assisting an
        obstetrician on a caesarian and resuscitating a baby that was not breathing.

        We decided as a group the situation for us at the hospital was untenable supplies
        were running out, team was exhauted, safety a huge concern, and no extraction
        plan with resupply. We decided to make our way to airport thru the help of a
        hospital benefactor. Jamaican soldiers with M-16 were necessary to escort us out
        with our luggage as the crowd outside saw us abandoning the hospital.

        We made it to airport on back of a pickup track, got onto the tarmac, hailed a
        commercial plane that carried cargo to montreal and had private jet pick us up
        there.

        The issues we were unprepared for and witnessed were
        1. The amount of human devastation
        2. The complete lack of a medical infrastructure in the country
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769503 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769503 Date: 08/31/2015




        3. The lack of support of the haitian medical community
        4. The complete lack of any organization on the ground. Noone was in charge,
        we had the first functional up and running hospital in the P OP area yet noone and
        I me NOONE came to the hospital to assess what we were doing, what we were
        capable of doing and what we would need, to be more efficient. The fact that the
        military could not or would not protect the resupply equipment on sunday or let
        the tues flight come in says it all.
        5. Lack of any security at all at the hospital

        I would take away that disasters like this need organization on a much higher
        level than we had with the clear involvement and approval of the military from
        the beginning.

        Currently there is Noone obviously running the show and care is in chaotic at
        best. MD's are coming in country with no plan of what the are going to
        do. Surgeons that expect to just show up and operate are delusional as to what
        there role would be as without a complement of support staff and supplies they
        would be of limited or no value.

        'I hope this helps. We all felt as though we abandoned these patients and that
        country and feel terrible. Our role now being back in NY is to expose the
        inadequacies of the system to the media in the hopes of effecting a change in this
        system immediatly. We feel that the only way to really help now is an urgent
        programtic change and organization in the support of the medical staff on the
        ground and what is critically needed to expeditiosly bring in.

        Cherrios on the tarmac are not getting it done on these patients which clearly
        would be savable if good care could urgently be provided.

        Please share this email with everyone and anyone you find might help.

        Good luck
        Dean




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769503 Date: 08/31/2015
