     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770409 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivanil@state.gov>
Sent:                              Monday, August 9, 2010 8:17 PM
To:
Cc:                                Reines, Philippe I
Subject:                           Iran human rights statement



One thing I forgot to mention - Bill B and Mike Posner recommend that you release the below statement. Apparently
Hamidi's execution is imminent. With your approval we'll put out.



DRAFT STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON
Urging Iran to Respect the Fundamental Freedoms of its Citizens

The United States is deeply concerned that Iran continues to deny its citizens their civil rights, as well as to intimidate
and detain those Iranians who seek to hold their government accountable and who stand up for the rights of their
fellow citizens. We remain troubled by the case of Sakineh Mohammadi Ashtiani, who garnered international attention
for her verdict of death by stoning. While the Iranian government later stated she would not face execution by stoning,
her fate has been left unclear. We are also troubled by reports that Ebrahim Hamidi, an 18-year old charged with
homosexuality, faces imminent execution despite the fact that he is currently without legal representation. Neither of
their cases have proceeded with the transparency or due process enshrined in Iran's own constitution and their lawyer,
Mohammad Mostafaei, felt that he had no other choice than to flee Iran after he had been questioned by authorities
and his family members had been detained.

We are also concerned about the fate of Iranians who are in danger of imminent execution for exercising their right to
free expression after the June 2009 elections, including Jafar Kazemi, Mohammad Haj Aghaei, and Javad Lan.

The United States urges the Iranian government to halt these executions in accordance with its international obligations
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and calls for the immediate release of all political prisoners
and imprisoned human rights defenders. The United States will continue to stand with people all around the world who
seek to exercise their universal rights and to speak out in defense of human liberties.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770409 Date: 08/31/2015
