       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774593 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                                          RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Monday, March 8, 2010 10:28 AM
To:                                'JilotyLC@state.gov'
Subject:                           Fw: From the FT: U.S. civilians battle to help Afghanistan
Attachments:                       image001jpg; image002jpg; image003jpg; image004.jpg; image005jpg; image006jpg;
                                   image007jpg; image001jpg; image002.jpg; image003jpg; image004jpg; image005jpg;
                                   image006jpg; image007jpg



Pls print.

    Original Message
From: Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
To: H
Sent: Mon Mar 08 10:05:39 2010
Subject: FW: From the FT: U.S. civilians battle to help Afghanistan

FYI




From: Jones, Paul W
Sent: Monday, March 08, 2010 6:11 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob
Subject: Fw: From the FT: U.S. civilians battle to help Afghanistan




Jake
Very worthwhile article from a couple of days, ago. If S hasn't already seen, she might appreciate it. Karl and folks in
Kabul are quite pleased with it. Paul




From: Simon, Jessica L
To: SSRAP_Expanded; Philadelphia, Carlton A; Campbell, Piper; Crowley, Philip 1; Chitre, Nanda 5; (U) Toner, Mark C;
Duguid, Gordon K; USAID Press Officers
Sent: Sun Mar 07 21:55:50 2010
Subject: FW: From the FT: U.S. civilians battle to help. Afghanistan

From Emb Kabul:




Hey, guys! Just wanted to flag this story that includes some good work by our civilians in the Arghandab. Thanks! -CH




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774593 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774593 Date: 08/31/2015




http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/894535f4-272c-11df-b84e-00144feabdc0.html




US civilians battle to help Afghanistan



By Matthew Green

Published: March 5 2010 22:43 I Last updated: March 5 2010 22:43




US State Department representative Christopher Harich (top left) and Kevin Melton flank Haji Abdul Jabar as they
discuss the restoration of a religious monument




Each morning this winter, Haji Abdul Jabar has packed a flask of home-brewed green tea for work. It's not frugality; he's
trying to avoid being poisoned. You can't be too careful: before leaving the house, he also straps a Smith & Wesson 9mm
handgun into a holster secreted in the depths of his robes. Seized with occasional fits of passion, Jabar has been known
to whip out the gun during meetings. He may be jumpy, but tactics like this are not entirely out of place in his line of
work: as district governor, the 65-year-old has an unenviable task — of wresting the Arghandab River Valley, one of the
most dangerous places in Afghanistan <http://www.ft.com/world/asiapacific/afghanistan>, from the Taliban.

Viewed from the roof of Jabar's district headquarters, the sweep of the valley is at once beautiful — bleakly majestic -
and charged with menace. A distant range of low, dun-coloured hills defines the valley's opposite flank. Orchards of
pomegranate trees, their branches stripped bare by the cold, line the banks of a river meandering across the valley floor,
dividing the east side of Arghandab from the west.




The district governor's office




The east is where Jabar's office is perched, and where US troops feel safer — it's the west side they call "bad juju land".
Insurgents use a strip of desert there to infiltrate Kandahar, the birthplace of the Taliban in the mid-1990s, and the pivot
on which previous Afghan wars have turned. Roadside bombs hidden in the lush vineyards last year turned Arghandab
into a killing field. A battalion of the 82nd Airborne Division deployed here in mid-December is hoping for better luck,
but a new showdown is coming. Stanley McChrystal <http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/30b0c4d8-091f-11df-ba88-
00144feabdc0.html> , the Nato commander in Afghanistan, has vowed to secure Kandahar. The Taliban want it back.

One night, one of the insurgents called the governor's mobile. "He said, `I'm going to kill you, you're working for the
Americans," says Jabar, sitting on the carpet in his office. "I said, 'Do whatever you can do.' Then I abused him and hung
up." Jabar normally cuts a rather solemn figure. At this -recollection, he laughed.

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774593 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774593 Date: 08/31/2015




Jabar is not alone in his mission. Aside from the 2-508 battalion of the 82nd Airborne, two Americans have arrived
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/6f824828-183b-11df-9256-00144feab49a.html> in Arghandab to help out: 27-year-old
Kevin Melton and 35-year-old Christopher Harich. They're part of the Obama administration's "civilian surge
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/ee3ee108-d60f-11de-b8Of-00144feabdc0.html> ", announced alongside a fresh build-up
of US troops.

Working out of the whitewashed, two-storey district office, this unlikely trio aims to turn the tide of opinion in the
district. They must do it before spring, when the valley will come into leaf and the Taliban fighters return from Pakistan
in time for the fighting season.

"Arghandab is the gate to Kandahar city," Jabar says. "If Arghandab is lost, Kandahar is also lost. It's the most important
valley in Afghanistan."




Haji Abdul Jabar and Kevin Melton of US Aid above the Arghandab Valley




Jabar, Harich and Melton have little in common but their beards. Melton, who grew up in the suburbs of Washington, is
working for USAid, the US government's development agency <http://www.usaid.gov/> . Hard-driving and -anxious to
get results, Melton juggles a raft of plans for projects from solar-powered lamps for villages, to schemes for
hydroelectricity and renovating a shrine clinging to a nearby mountainside. His past experience includes work in Sudan,
but the challenge in Arghandab trumps anything he has previously attempted. "It feels like there's no end to the day,"
he said. "It's physically, mentally, emotionally and intellectually exhausting."

Harich is a lawyer and a former marine from Louisiana who until recently worked as a policy adviser to the governor of
West Virginia. He now represents the US State Department in Arghandab. "I've no doubt in my mind that we're going to
have a fight this summer," he says. "When the Taliban come back in May, are they welcomed with open arms?"

Strapping on their khaki-coloured helmets and flak jackets and donning wraparound protective sunglasses whenever
they leave the base, Melton and Harich bear a distinct resemblance to the US soldiers who protect them.

Jabar, meanwhile, sports neck and wrist pouches containing Koranic charms to ward off the health risks caused by his
high blood pressure. (He takes advantage of the medic in the US military base adjacent to his office for regular check-
ups.)

Both the Americans were lured by the challenge of participating in the US adventure in Afghanistan for a year. Sleeping
in vacant rooms in the district office and equipped with a V-Sat Internet link to keep in touch with superiors in Kandahar
city — but no shower — they must figure out how to work with Jabar to build local government more or less from scratch.
Harich aims to act as a "mentor", helping Jabar as he works with the -provincial government in Kandahar to assemble an
administrative team to govern the district of more than 55,000 people.

There are few tougher places than Arghandab, a valley where a procession of armies have been bloodied. First came the
British in the 19th -century, then the Russians in the 1980s, and then last year, the 1-17 -battalion of the 5th Stryker
Brigade lost 21 soldiers in five months of -fighting — one of the highest casualty rates any US unit has suffered in
Afghanistan since 2001.

Conscious of the rapid approach of the fighting season, Melton is drawing up plans for projects — such as rehabilitating
schools and clinics — that could quickly demonstrate to the locals the benefits of siding with the government of Hamid



     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774593 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774593 Date: 08/31/2015



Karzai, Afghanistan's president. He works closely with army officers to ensure the military's own plans to implement
projects fit in with the wider, albeit still embryonic, attempts to bolster Jabar.

The trio's schemes can seem like pin-pricks set against the implacable valley below. So far, progress has been largely
confined to Jabar's office. Since arriving late last year, Melton and Harris have renovated the district centre, installing air
conditioners, curtains and carpets.

Jabar, who rarely ventured to his office from his home in Kandahar before these changes, now turns up almost every
day, driving the 30-minute commute in his battered white Toyota Corolla saloon with three police bodyguards,
-constantly wary of the risk of ambush. "Getting the building is easy," says Harich. "Getting a governor to come in and do
some work is a little harder."

A trickle of men with beards and turbans arrive each morning and sit along the wall of the building waiting for Jabar to
arrive, shielding their eyes from the sun as it crests the crags. They come to apply for government identity cards or
attend a weekly council — or shura — to discuss projects planned by Melton. "The fact that they're even discussing this
stuff is mind-boggling," he says. "They're saying, 'I can come to somebody to do something. This is what government is
about: I can air my grievances to somebody other than the Taliban.'"

And yet Jabar is the first to admit that his writ does not run much -further than the building. "I don't trust the people, so
I don't go out much," he says. "They may try to shoot me."




Vehicles out on night patrol




It can be tempting to measure progress in the west's war in Afghanistan in terms of damage to the Taliban — whether in
capturing the movement's leaders or driving back their fighters on the battlefield. Last month, headlines were
dominated by the arrest of Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar <http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/f4f14de4-1b09-11df-88fa-
00144feab49a.html> , the Taliban's second-in-command, and by the big Nato offensive in the town of Marjah
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/c8d82998:1411-11df-8847-00144feab49a.html> . But even if more Mullah Baradars are
arrested, more military pushes launched, the Taliban may simply bide their time before once more exploiting alienation
from the corrupt or absent government. The only way to stop that is to undertake the painstaking work of stitching
together a government capable of providing more security and services than the "shadow governments" set up by the
insurgents.

Western countries have been talking for years, of course, about building governance in Afghanistan, but men such as
Melton and Harich represent a renewed commitment. US officials say more than 900 US civilian officers are active in
Afghanistan, compared with just 300 at the start of 2009, with more than 50 destined for Kandahar province. The hope
is that this team can deliver a one-two punch that long seemed elusive by exploiting military victories to nurture
functioning local government. "We have to fix governance in some nominal way or this victory won't stick," says a senior
US official. But the sheer scale of the task in Arghandab alone reveals the enormity of the challenge.

One afternoon, Harich sat with the governor on the office carpet for a lunch of stone-baked bread and spinach. As they
talked, Jabar raised repeated requests: for bars of Dove soap, for boots for his bodyguards. The demands seemed
reasonable enough but Harich did not immediately acquiesce. Part of his job is using the Americans' ability to open and
close the aid taps to get Jabar to live up to their vision of an impartial, honest governor. But Jabar, like Afghan leaders at
all levels of government, relies on a patronage system in which his friends expect to be rewarded and where the barrier
between public and private money is porous.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774593 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774593 Date: 08/31/2015




Like much of Afghanistan's political class, Jabar's "legitimacy" comes from his role as a Mujahideen fighter in the 1980s,
battling Soviet -invaders. (Arghandab witnessed heavy fighting: the Russians mounted a month-long siege but never
took the valley.) Although governors in Afghanistan's 34 provinces have the power — in theory — to nominate district
governors, US intelligence officers say Jabar owes his pre-eminence to the backing of Karimullah, the young leader of the
Alakozai, an ethnic Pashtun sub-tribe dominant in the valley.




Said Amir Mohammad Agha, whose refusal to recognise Jabar's authority keeps the valley divided




Divisions between clans mean that Jabar is by no means a consensus candidate. In particular, Said Amir Mohammad
Agha <http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/54cf9eca-10e5-11df-9a9e-00144feab49a.html > , the single-most influential man on
the west side of the river, resents him. US officers say Agha was once detained in Guantanamo Bay as a suspected
Taliban commander. As long as Agha refuses to recognise Jabar's authority, the valley will remain divided.

Even on the east side, to the frustration of Melton and Harich, Jabar has yet to prove he can garner much legitimacy.
Locals milling around his office mutter accusations that he skims off salaries for the few district officials who turn up to
work and steers US reconstruction contracts towards his friends. "He's not a good man, he wants money and bribes,"
said one, reflecting comments from several visitors.

Jabar vigorously denies such allegations — indeed, they were linked to one pistol-waving incident in a meeting with the
Americans. Yet such behaviour would not be unusual in Afghanistan, where bribery lubricates the patronage-based
system that Karzai and past leaders have used to hold the ethnically diverse country together. The dilemma runs
through the entire project in Afghanistan. Western officials want to impose a template of efficient administration, but to
do this they have little choice but to work with leaders who rely on the traditional system to survive.

In Kandahar, the dilemma is acute. Afghanistan's centralised system means that Jabar is dependent on the provincial
government based in the city to send officers to fill his largely empty building, but only a few have materialised. Indeed,
Alakozai elders believe rivals from Karzai's Popalzai tribe are exploiting official positions in Kandahar to accumulate
political and economic influence at their expense.

There is a deeper tension. US officials often speak of putting an "Afghan face" on their work. They want to make it seem
as if local leaders are behind improvements to bolster their standing in the eyes of their people. Yet the talk of
appearances is a tacit recognition that the enterprise is, to some extent, founded on creating an illusion of an Afghan
government at work, in the hope that a real administration will rapidly follow. Can such an approach succeed? Assessing
this is hard when even venturing into the valley is a potentially life-threatening undertaking.




The risk of attack in Arghandab is so high that during a recent week in January, Melton and Harich barely ventured from
the base — apart from a brief trip in an armoured convoy to catch up with superiors in Kandahar city. Soldiers of the
82nd Airborne tend to get closer to the locals. Even a short trip out into the east side of the valley shows how close at
hand the Taliban are, and how hard it will be to persuade people that they are safe enough to side with Jabar.

The soldiers leave the base in high-wheeled armoured vehicles called Cougar M-Raps — designed to resist roadside
bombs. Lieutenant Ryan Christmas, a reassuringly experienced veteran of the 82nd, gives a briefing on where the convoy
should go if it gets hit by an IED. "Call out what you see, gunners stay vigilant in what you're doing," he yells at his men,
-clustered around him before departure. "If it looks wrong and smells wrong, it -probably is wrong."




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774593 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774593 Date: 08/31/2015




From the bullet-proof window, a procession of mud homes that seem to grow organically from the valley floor rolled
past. A few weeks before, a man had pulled out a pistol and shot and wounded two Afghan policemen near the road.
These days, insurgents are targeting foot patrols to make it more dangerous to try to build up a rapport with locals.




Sgt Donny Kuehner takes tea with Haji Jhapour




At a US outpost at a village called Sakari Bagh, Sergeant Donny -Kuehner, a 23-year-old from southern California, led a
patrol through a bazaar of ramshackle stalls selling blotchy bunches of bananas dangling from strings and stacked cans
of Power Stag — "World's Finest Quality Motor Oil". Removing his helmet, Kuehner entered a petrol station owned by
Haji Jhapour—the unofficial king of the bazaar whose assistant served green tea. An Afghan policeman wearing
mascara and a yellow bandana round his neck joined the circle as the two men talked, via an interpreter.

"How do people in the bazaar feel about us being here?" Kuehner asked.

"The people in the bazaar are good people, they're busy doing business," Jhapour replied.

"You heard anything lately about any kind of Taliban anywhere, or anything?" Kuehner asked.

"I'm so busy with my business, I don't have time to follow the Taliban — this is the job of the police," Jhapour said,
gesturing to the man with the mascara. "When people come here and buy petrol I sometimes hear news. If I hear
anything, I'll let you know."

As he walked back into the base, Kuehner confessed it was hard to know where local loyalties lay. Some of the labourers
busy filling barriers with earth to build up the outpost's defences had been beaten by Taliban fighters. "The locals are
the key to all this," Kuehner said. "Getting them on our side — if we could do that — it would be leaps and bounds from
where we are now."

Such ambiguous encounters are the stuff of the daily grind of counter-insurgency, where building relationships is critical.
After gradually -adopting such an approach to fight the insurgency in Iraq, the US military is honing its skills in
Afghanistan. But it is clear that soldiers can only do so much: unless a viable government emerges, their presence will
have scant lasting impact. As the US faces the risk of increasingly messy conflicts in parts of Asia, Africa and the Middle
East, building governance just after the fighting will be increasingly decisive.

Critics of the approach believe the US is being sucked into an open-ended "nation-building" exercise in Afghanistan.
Barack Obama has been careful to downplay such suggestions <http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/5f6ce026-df6d-11de-98ca-
00144feab49a.html> , though in Arghandab, the -distinction is blurry.




Locals at work on a US combat outpost




On the mountainside near the governor's office, women climb winding steps to a shrine set high above the valley. They
whisper wishes into stones, wrap them in shimmering cloth and hang them from a pole planted in the tomb of the saint.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774593 Date: 08/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774593 Date: 08/31/2015



The site feels forlorn. Fountains cascading down the rocks have run dry. A restaurant with a panoramic view, film-set
staircases and ornamental trees lies abandoned. Turquoise tiles on the mausoleum dome are cracked.

Clad in their body armour, Melton and Harich take a tour with the -governor one afternoon. Melton wants to see the
restaurant reopen — if a new owner can be found. There is talk of installing a pump to make the fountains flow. In the
valley, a pair of US helicopters pirouette, scanning for insurgents. As the trio ambles about, an explosion sounds far off
on the valley floor. It sends up a puff of grey smoke. Talk of renovation jars with the reality that the fighting season will
soon resume — and the window to get anything done is closing fast.

There is one surprise. One morning, Agha, the retired Taliban commander from the west side, decided to pay a visit. An
enigmatic figure, he clutched prayer beads and produced a certificate from US forces saying he had been imprisoned for
four months in 2004 but no longer posed a threat. He seemed to want Jabar and his crowd to know this. Should he
decide to work with them, US officers hope for an easier year.

Perhaps the influx of troops and resources committed by Washington may encourage men like Agha to reconsider their
loyalties. But after 30 years of war, building institutions will be harder. Both the US civilians and military in Arghandab
were doing their best to help Jabar establish a -government. But all participants seemed conscious that even their best
efforts might not be enough. When Melton and Harich leave, there are no guarantees that Jabar will prosper.

In his waistcoat pocket, the governor keeps a tin of green chewing tobacco, a medallion for "excellence" given to him by
the soldiers of the ill-fated 1-17, and a hand-written letter from Afghanistan's intelligence service warning of a Taliban
death threat. "Every day they are killing someone," he said. Then he climbed once more into his Toyota to brave the
road back to -Kandahar once more, taking his empty tea flask and his gun.

Matthew Green covers Afghanistan and Pakistan for the FT. His last story for the magazine was about the governor of
Lagos State. Read it at ft.com/lagos <http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/3d3209aa-8225-11de-9c5e-00144feabdc0.html>

Copyright <http://www.ft.com/servicestools/help/copyright> The Financial Times Limited 2010. Print a single copy of
this article for personal use. Contact us <http://ftcorporate.ft.com/contact-us.html> if you wish to print more to
distribute to others.

"FT" and "Financial Times" are trademarks of the Financial Times. Privacy policy
<http://www.ft.com/servicestools/help/privacy> I Terms <http://www.ft.com/servicestools/help/terms>
© Copyright The Financial Times <http://www.ft.com/servicestools/help/copyright> Ltd 2010.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774593 Date: 08/31/2015
