UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772600 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                        RELEASE IN
                                                                                                        FULL



                       FOOD INDUSTRY CODEX COALITION
                   Advancing Sound International Policy Through Science


      October 18, 2010

      Secretary Hilary Clinton
      US Department of State
      2201 C Street NW
      Washington, DC 20520

      Secretary Tom Vilsack
      US Department of Agriculture
      Whitten Building .
      1400 Independence Avenue NW
      Washington, DC 20250

      Dear Secretary Clinton and Secretary Vilsack:

      On behalf of the members of the Food Industry Codex Coalition (FICC)1 we applaud the
      Administration's global commitment to food security, through its Feed the Future
      initiative, and urge your strong and continuing support for the US government's role in
      Codex2 to further this objective. We address this appeal to both of you, as it relates both
      to your individual and joint responsibilities on Codex Alimentarius. We are much
      encouraged by the Administration's view that "the private sector is particularly important
      for combating food insecurity and increasing the sustainability of our efforts," and we
      enthusiastically welcome this partnership with the Administration.

      We draw your attention especially to the critical relationship between Codex and Feed
      the Future. A vibrant science-based global food safety regulatory system which Codex
      fosters is among the most tangible and valuable components in the strategy to further our
      shared goal to achieve global food security. Safe food is a prerequisite for a sufficient

        The FICC represents the interests of over 70 food companies and trade associations keenly interested in
      the international standard setting activities of the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC). FICC
      recognizes the critical role Codex serves to facilitate trade and protect consumer health. The coalition,
      which represents the entire food chain from production to retail, works to influence international food
      policy based on science. FICC members actively engage with U.S. delegates and Codex staff in an effort to
      support and strengthen U.S. leadership in Codex.

      2The Codex Alimentarius was created in 1963 under the joint umbrellas of the United Nations' World
      Health Organization (WHO) and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) with a dual mandate:
      protection of the health of consumers and the facilitation of fair practices in food trade.




                                                                                                  FICC Letter
                                                                                              October 19, 2010
                                                                                                   Page 1 of 3
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772600 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772600 Date: 08/31/2015




     supply. For our developing country partners, Codex standards serve a vital role in
     protecting the health of their people, and in facilitating market opportunities for their
     agricultural commodities. For the US food and agriculture industry, these science-based
     Codex rules help protect our $100 billion agricultural export market by setting global
     standards for safe and fair food trade. Moreover, they lay the foundation for achieving
     the President's National Export Initiative goal of doubling exports in the next five years.

     For all these reasons the US should increase its presence and influence in Codex.
     Specifically, we urge your close attention, high priority, and full funding support in these
     areas:

           • US Codex Office, USDA, and international outreach programs;
           • Office of the Codex Chairperson, currently held by an American at USDA;
           • Codex-related positions at both FAO and WHO, the two Codex UN oversight
             institutions:
           • Committed and focused senior policy level participation in the US Codex
             Policy Committee;
           • High-level participation in US delegations to Codex Commission and
             committee meetings;
           • Consistent policy positions for Codex meetings; and
           • Enhanced collaboration between the US Mission and the Codex Secretariat at
             FAO in Rome.

        FICC acknowledges with appreciation our government's responsiveness to previous
        petitions to the Administration to give strong support to Codex issues, and notes
        particularly USDA's earlier action to strengthen the leadership of the US Codex Office.

        At this time we respectfully urge your renewed attention to these other critical areas of
        Codex activity. Ensuring the full potential of Codex is an essential component to
        improve global food safety and achieving America's priority goal of global food
        security.

        Thank you for your consideration of these views.

        Sincerely,

        American Beverage Association
        American Frozen Food Institute
        Animal Health Institute
        Association of Dressings and Sauces
        Biotechnology Industry Organization
        Calorie Control Council
        Campbell Soup Company
        Corn Refiners Association
        CropLife America

                                                                                 FICC Letter
                                                                             October 19, 2010
                                                                                  Page 2 of 3
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772600 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772600 Date: 08/31/2015




       Enzyme Technical Association
       Flavor and Extract Manufacturers Association of the United States
       Global Agritrends
       Grocery Manufacturers Association
       Institute of Shortening and Edible Oils
       International Association of Color Manufacturers
       International Dairy Foods Association
       International Food Additives Council
       International Formula Council
       Juice Products Association
       National Cattleman's Beef Association
       National Confectioners Association
       National Fisheries Institute
       National Oilseed Processors Association
       National Pork Producers Council
       National Renderers Association
       Nestle USA
       Pet Food Institute
       US Meat Export Federation
       ViaGen, Inc.
       Vinegar Institute

        cc:
        Ron Kirk, USTR
        Islam Siddiqui, USTR Agriculture Negotiator
        Margaret Hamberg, Commissioner FDA
        Ertharin Cousin, Ambassador to the US Mission to UN Agencies Rome
        Jim Miller, Undersecretary of State USDA FFAS
        Elizabeth Hagen, Undersecretary of Food Safety USDA
        Catherine Woteki, Undersecretary of State USDA REE
        Robert Hormats, Undersecretary of State Economic, Energy and Agriculture
        Francisco Sanchez, Undersecretary for International Trade, DOC
        Rajiv Shah, Administrator USAID
        Jose Fernandez, Assistant Secretary of State, Economic Energy and Business
        Ester Brimmer, Assistant Secretary of State, International Organizations
        Cheryl Mills, Chief of Staff to Secretary of State
        Ann Tutwiler, Global Food Security Coordinator USDA
        Michael Taylor, Deputy Commissioner for Foods, FDA
        Gayle Smith, White House National Security Council
        Karen Hulebak, Codex Chairperson
        Karen Stuck, US Codex Manager




                                                                                  FICC Letter
                                                                              October 19, 2010
                                                                                   Pace 3 of 3
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772600 Date: 08/31/2015
