UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770207 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                             RELEASE IN FULL




                                         MISSION GERMANY

                    PUBLIC DIPLOMACY STRATEGY FOR THE FUTURE



      PA Germany is losing one-third of its budget and almost one-third of its LES staff.
      That's tough — especially last month when we handed out the RIF notices — but it is also a
      tremendous opportunity. It has given us a chance to rethink, redefine and restructure our
      entire operation.

      In moving ahead, we are not taking a "same as before but less" approach. Rather than
      taking off slices here and there, we are fundamentally reshaping PA Germany. At the
      heart of this process there are three basic questions: What are our goals? What are the
      audiences we need to connect with to achieve those goals? Which PD tools are most
      effective in reaching those audiences? The answers to those questions tell us what we
      need to be doing and how we should deploy our money and staff. And we are deploying
      accordingly, determined to make ourselves even stronger than we were before in the
      activity sectors that are crucial.

      Our goals are clearly defined in Mission Germany's MSRP. At a June 2-3 offsite in
      Hamburg chaired by the DCM, a Mission Germany PD team that included the Consuls
      General focused intensively on identifying the key audiences we need to reach in order to
      achieve those goals and the PD tools that have the greatest impact on those audiences.
      Yes, that is something that all Public Affairs sections around the world do on an ongoing
      basis, but — knowing that our resources are shrinking by a third — our analysis of what is
      essential and what is not is particularly hard-edged and rigorous.

      A central aspect of this process is identifying the activities that need to be pared down or
      eliminated. Justifications such as "we've always done that" or "audiences like it" are not
      sufficient. It's not about what we have always done, it's about what we need to be doing
      now and in the coming years. And, while it is always nice when people respond
      positively to our efforts, the reality is this: if it is not an audience that is closely linked to
      one of our goals, there is no justification for the expenditure of staff time and money.

      As we go about reinventing PA Germany, we need to strike the right balance between our
      highly focused work in support of specific U.S. policy goals and our longer term efforts
      to strengthen understanding for U.S. culture and values, recognizing that those two areas
      of emphasis often flow into each other (the get-together with high school students that
      turns into a discussion of Afghanistan; the key staffer who is accessible to us because she
      is a Fulbright alumna, etc.).




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770207 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770207 Date: 08/31/2015




      It is essential that we get this right because Germany matters for the U.S. Germany is
      one of our strongest, most capable partners and is crucial to achieving successful
      outcomes on the most significant foreign policy issues our country faces. Afghanistan,
      Iran, Middle East peace, financial regulation, economic growth, climate change, non-
      proliferation, counterterrorism — with each one of these issues, positive German
      engagement is vitally important. And, in addition to its value as a bilateral partner,
      Germany is the engine that drives core institutions of European policy, not only in the
      traditional councils of Brussels, NATO, and the UN, but also now in the newly
      empowered European Parliament. It is the indispensable power behind European
      economic, security, and political affairs. Germany's relationship with the United States
      sets the tone and outlines the scope for how the United States interacts with Europe.

      The restructuring of PA Germany is all about prioritization and the tough choices that it
      involves. In thinking about our priorities, it is clear that engaging youth is very high on
      the list. That is true worldwide, but there are specific circumstances in Germany that
      make it essential that we connect with young people and help them see that a close
      relationship between the U.S. and Germany has relevance for their lives. In the 20 years
      since the end of the Cold War and the fall of the Wall and against the background of eight
      years during which the image of America was severely tarnished, millions of young
      Germans have drifted away from us. We have a chance now to reverse that trend and we
      must make the most of it, but we can only do that if we systematically focus our efforts.

      Key subsets of the German youth audience are immigrant youth and youth in eastern
      Germany. It is essential that we reach both those subgroups; if we fail to engage
      successfully with them it is very likely that as they enter adulthood negative attitudes
      toward the U.S. will harden into unchangeable convictions. (Among immigrant youth,
      which in Germany is largely synonymous with Muslim youth: the belief that the U.S. is
      hostile toward Islam; among young eastern Germans: the distorted image of America that
      they have inherited from their parents who grew up in a communist environment.)

      As we work to focus our efforts for maximum impact, a central challenge is how much
      time to devote to fundamentally friendly audiences with which we have a long-
      established relationship, audiences that often tend to be older, non-immigrant and
      predominately male. We would be foolish to cut our ties to those people, many of whom
      are influential and have been with us for a long time. We cannot rebuff old friends, but
      neither can we overinvest in preaching to the choir. Youth, immigrants, women, eastern
      Germans — audiences that often greet us with deep skepticism — need to occupy a central
      place in our work.

      The restructuring plan that we are implementing aims to:




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770207 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770207 Date: 08/31/2015




         •    Eliminate stove piping. We are getting rid of the organizational and mental walls
              that separate (a) the three PD areas of activity (Press, Culture, Information
              Services) and (b) the six PD platforms in Germany (Embassy, five Consulates).

         •    Create the capacity to form issue-focused "campaign teams" closely integrating
              all areas of activity (Press, Culture, Information Services) and linking staff
              resources Mission-wide.

         •    Make optimum use of Social Media, recognizing that it has tremendous potential
              as a program enhancer and as a bridge to youth audiences, but it is not a silver
              bullet that can accomplish everything. Make sure American and local staff get
              substantial training in using Social Media.

          •   Identify thematic areas and/or support functions in which individual Consulates
              can play a lead role, leveraging the specific profiles of their districts and the
              specific talents of their staff Learn from what the Mission's Management section
              has accomplished in this area.

          •   Eliminate duplication of effort and create efficient mechanisms for sharing
              information and products. Our Mission-wide SharePoint site will play a key role
              in this.

          •   Identify products/activities that can be outsourced. Just because something is
              definitely worth doing does not mean it has to be done in-house.

          •   Bring the Information Resource function into the 21' century. Connect it to
              today's key audiences and institutions; focus it on cutting-edge technology and
              media.

          •   Look for opportunities to build a LES team that reflects the diversity and youth of
              the audiences with whom we are engaging.

          •   Make the most of the ten German American Institutes (GAIs). With significantly
              less discretionary funding, we will have to make tough funding choices, but we
              need to keep supporting the GAIs and find low-cost (in terms of time and money)
              ways to maximize their impact.

      We are well into the process of transforming ourselves. What is the endpoint we are
      heading toward? On one level, there is no endpoint. The environment in which we
      operate and the tools at our disposal are evolving rapidly and therefore the act of
      redefining and restructuring ourselves needs to be ongoing and open-ended. If we do not
      make continual revitalization of how we do business a key part of doing business, we will
      always be playing a hopeless game of catch-up.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770207 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770207 Date: 08/31/2015




      What we do have now is a clear sense of (a) the focal points we will have for the
      foreseeable future and (b) the country-wide structure that will enable us to concentrate
      our resources on those focal points and achieve maximum impact. That structure,
      presented in the attached diagram, is based on the organizational goals and principles
      listed above. Above all, it embodies our commitment to prioritizing our efforts
      rigorously and working as a single unified team unencumbered by rigid organizational
      walls. We want to be quick, flexible and focused exclusively on what is most important.

      A few notes about the diagram and the strategy it embodies:

          •   As indicated by the center element of the diagram, our strategy includes a robust
              capacity to participate in global or regional campaigns focused on specific issues.

          •   The general public, while not explicitly highlighted by the diagram, is an
              important audience and one which we reach with many of our PD tools such as
              media interviews and our website.

          •   As emphasized above, two important subsets of the youth audience are immigrant
              youth (which in Germany is primarily Muslim) and youth in eastern Germany.

          •   "Outreach to Schools, etc." on the "Engage Youth" side of the diagram is
              shorthand for "Outreach to Schools and Other Institutions (including Libraries)."
              The specific importance attached to libraries as partner institutions ranges from
              high (Leipzig) to minimal (Munich) — one specific example of the significant
              regional differences in the PD landscape in Germany.

          • "Content Development," listed under "Research," is shorthand for the
            conceptualizing, researching and drafting of material delivered to our key
            audiences in a variety of ways, above all via our website and various new media
            (Embassy Facebook page, blogs, webchats, videos posted on YouTube).

          • "Professional relationships, the building and maintaining of contacts that are
            essential for PD work, is listed under "Influence Key Thinkers," but in fact that
            activity also benefits our efforts to engage youth.

      The diagram divides the totality of the work we do into 31 tasks. The PD LES staffing
      we will devote to each of those tasks is listed on the attached document (that information
      is also built into the electronic version of the diagram). Also attached is a document
      showing how our LES staff will be distributed (a) among the goals and functions listed
      on the diagram, and (b) among Mission Germany's six public diplomacy platforms
      (Berlin and the five Consulates).




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770207 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770207 Date: 08/31/2015




      Attachments:

         •   Diagram: Mission Germany Public Diplomacy Strategy

         •   Mission Germany PD LES staffing: task-by-task

         •   Mission Germany PD LES staffing: by goal and geographically




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770207 Date: 08/31/2015
