      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771181 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                             RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                             B6


From:                               Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                               Monday, November 1, 2010 12:08 PM
To:
Subject:                            FW: Mitchell, Ross and Indyk...



FYI


From: Jonathan Prince
                                                                                                        B6
Sent: Monday, November 01, 2010 10:03 AM
To: Jacob Sullivan; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Subject: Fwd: Mitchell, Ross and Indyk...

        Translated from Ma'ariv



        MITCHELL LIKELY TO PAY THE PRICE

        Ma 'arty (11/1/2010, p. 6) by Eli Bardenstein -- The US administration intends to replace its
        special envoy to the Middle East, George Mitchell, said sources in Washington. A number of
        additional top officials are expected to be replaced at the same opportunity.

          The reasons for Mitchell's replacement are the failure he and his team have had at renewing
        the talks between Israel and the Palestinians, the Administration's desire to bring new blood into
        the efforts, and pressures to resume the peace process in the region.

          One of the names that has already begun to circulate as a potential successor is the former US
        ambassador to Israel, Martin Indyk. Another possible course of action suggested by the blog
        "Politico" is to divide Mitchell's job into two: Indyk will deal with the Palestinians, while
        Obama's senior aide, Dennis Ross, will deal with the Israelis.

          Mitchell's spokesman, Jonathan Prince, has already left his post under unclear circumstances
        and has turned to the world of private business. The State Department denied allegations that
        Prince left because of criticism that he had aired about Ross maintaining positions that were
        closer to the Israeli positions than to those of the White House.

             Another top official in Mitchell's team, Mara Rudman, was supposed to have left her post as
           the director of Mitchell's staff for a senior position in the State Department, but decided to
           remain after she was not given the job.

             Reports have repeatedly been received in Jerusalem about mounting tension between Mitchell
           and his team, on the one hand, and Dennis Ross, who works directly for the White House, on the
           other. The two parties were said to be divided over the way in which it would be possible to
           persuade Netanyahu to renew the direct talks. Ross, who served in the past in Mitchell's current
           capacity and headed an Israeli research center—the Jewish People Policy Planning Institute—is
           believed to have been opposed to the intense pressure that the US administration applied on
           Israel, arguing that that pressure would not yield the desired results. Ross believed that the
           administration would be better served by "working with the Israelis and understanding them
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771181 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771181 Date: 08/31/2015




  better," said one source in Jerusalem. An alternate position was maintained by Mitchell and
  Rudman, who believed that it would be advisable to pressure Netanyahu. It now appears that
  Ross's approach has prevailed, and that the administration is going to replace the people who
  guided the negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians.

    As Ma 'any reported, Netanyahu is scheduled to fly to New Orleans next week to attend the
  general assembly of the Jewish communities, where he will meet Vice President Joe Biden. From
  there, Netanyahu will make a short visit to New York, where he will meet other Jewish leaders
  and will give interviews to the American media.

     Netanyahu is not going to meet President Obama this time, despite intense efforts that were
   made by his office to arrange such a meeting. The reason the two men are not going to meet is
   that President Obama is scheduled to leave for long trip to India, Indonesia and South Korea on
   the day that Netanyahu arrives. One observer in Washington said: "Obama ran as far away from
   Bibi as possible in order to avoid a meeting with him. If he could, Obama would take a space
   ship to Mars."

    Netanyahu decided to defy protocol and to go to the United States in any event, Obama's
   absence notwithstanding.




   This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




   This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771181 Date: 08/31/2015
