        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766559 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                              RELEASE IN PART B4



From:                            Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                            Tuesday, December 22, 2009 6:35 PM
To:
Subject:                         Fw: Notes for S on Landler Chat




From: Balderston, Kris M
To: Reines, Philippe I
Cc: Bagley, Elizabeth F; Abedin, Huma
Sent: Tue Dec 22 17:36:13 2009
Subject: Notes for S on Landler Chat

Mark Landler spoke to Jose Villarreal (the Commissioner General), Elizabeth and me in the last two
days. Mark seems to be going down the same road with all three of us. At first he knew very little about the
actual Expo but now he seems focused on the Secretary's role in bringing the USA Pavilion back to life. We all
agreed that he seems to be writing a favorable story.

He specifically wanted to know about her role and whether her "political" background helped her get there (
as opposed to a more traditional foreign affairs "career" Secretary). We thought that her political side helped
her immediately recognize that she had a real problem with the Chinese that needed to be fixed
immediately. As a problem-solving politico, she immediately went to work to fix it.

He also wanted to know if she used the WJC/HRC rolodex to raise money. We said no and noted that all of the
money is being raised in the business community and not by individuals. She did not go to her political fund-
raising base. We did not mention it but it is interesting that many of the early big sponsors were NY based
companies like GE (1—), Pepsi (      ), Corning, Cummins, Deloitte, NYSE, and Pfizer.

He asked if S made individual calls to CEO's and we noted (as recd by L), the only general "asks" were done on
conference calls or in large groups. We also noted that she never really "asked" for sponsorships, instead she
stressed the importance of getting a formidable USA presence at the Shanghai Expo that is so important to the
Chinese and will attract 70 million people. This could be the largest event in human history and will go from
May 1 to October 31, 2010.

Talking Points

When S arrived at State, the USA and Andorra were the only two countries that did not sign a participation
agreement with the Chinese. We had less than $250,000 in the bank.

In just ten months, S assigned the Global Partnership Initiative office to lead the project, sent a signal to the
State Department bureaucracy that this was a priority and that we would participate, named a Commissioner
General, signed the participation agreement, asked Secretary Locke to break ground, raised $54.3 M to build
and operate it, and visited the actual construction site in November. The Pavilion is on target to be opened in
mid-April.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766559 Date: 08/31/2015
