       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767454 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                        RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Verma, Richard R <VermaRR©state.gov>
Sent:                              Friday, February 5, 2010 9:46 AM
To:                                H; Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:                           FW: Confirmations Update



FYI --
Reid: Shelby Has Hold On All Nominees
Friday, Feb. 5, 2010




Sen. Richard Shelby, R-Ala., has placed a blanket hold on all executive nominations on the Senate calendar in an effort
to win concessions from the Obama administration and Pentagon on a variety of fronts affecting his home state, according
to aides to Senate Majority Leader Reid.

Reid spokeswoman Regan Lachapelle said Shelby is blocking more than 70 pending nominations. Reid can force a vote
on any nomination by filing cloture.

Because of the time required to vote on multiple nominations, the Senate processes most nominations by unanimous
consent. Any one senator can block any of those nominations by objecting to a unanimous consent request to take it up.
The nominations will remain stalled unless Reid files cloture.

While holds are frequent, Senate aides said a blanket hold represents a far more aggressive use of the power than is
normal.

"He should not be holding up 70-plus nominees for a parochial issue," a Democratic aide said. "They're qualified and they
should be moving forward."

Disclosure of the blanket hold came after two days in which top Democrats voiced mounting frustration with Republican
holds on executive nominees.

'We've got a huge backlog of folks who are unanimously viewed as well qualified -- nobody has a specific objection to
them -- but end up having a hold on them because of some completely unrelated piece of business," President Obama
said Wednesday in a televised meeting with Senate Democrats.

On the Senate floor Thursday, Reid, Senate Majority Whip Durbin, Senate Judiciary Chairman Patrick Leahy and
Senate Armed Services Chairman Carl Levin ripped Republicans for holds on national security nominees and judges.

Reid, who kept the Senate in pro forma session over recent holidays to prevent former President George W. Bush from
making recess appointments, said he has grown so frustrated he might advocate such appointments, which the president
can make when the Senate is out of session.

'What alternatives do we have?" Reid said on the floor Thursday. "What alternative do we have?"

Earlier in the day, a spokesman for Shelby said the senator has placed holds on "several pending nominees due to
unaddressed national security concerns," including frustrations with the Air Force's handling of the competition for an
aerial refueling tanker. The spokesman did not respond to later requests for comment about the blanket hold.

Northrop Grumman Corp. and EADS, the European consortium behind Airbus, and Boeing Co. are vying for the high-
stakes contract, potentially worth $40 billion. The Northrop/EADS team would build the planes in Mobile, Ala., but has
threatened to pull out of the competition unless the Air Force makes changes to a draft request for proposals.

       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767454 Date: 08/31/2015
       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767454 Date: 08/31/2015




"Nearly 10 years after the U.S. Air Force announced plans to replace the aging tanker fleet, we still do not have a
transparent and fair acquisition process to move forward," the spokesman said. "The Department of Defense must
recognize that the draft request for proposal needs to be significantly and substantively changed."

Defense Secretary Gates Wednesday told House lawmakers the Pentagon plans to issue the final request for proposals
soon, and will proceed with the program whether or not there is a competition.

"Obviously we would like to have a competition for it, and we hope that both companies will agree to participate, but we
will move forward," Gates said. "We have to have new tankers."

In addition to the tanker issue, Shelby's spokesman said he is frustrated that the Obama administration won't build an
Alabama-based FBI center to analyze improvised explosive devices.

Shelby secured a $45 million earmark in the FY08 omnibus appropriations bill for a Terrorist Explosive Device Analytical
Center to be set up at the Army's Redstone Arsenal.

"Sen. Shelby will continue to work with the FBI to give them the capability to coordinate intelligence as well as forensic
and technical exploitation related to IEDs, but this administration's coddling of terrorists makes this an uphill effort," the
spokesman said. "He has made the administration aware of these concerns and is willing to discuss them at any time."

Also Thursday, Vice President Biden said he was so frustrated by Republican foot-dragging that he was considering
whether Senate rules should be changed.

"There's a little disappointment in that it seems like the only way to do business up here anymore is with a supermajority
on almost everything," Biden said moments after swearing in Sen. Scott Brown, R-Mass., who gives Republicans 41
votes, enough to filibuster on any issue.

'What I have been doing is spending a lot of time having my staff go back and scrub this, you know, the use of the
filibuster and how it's worked," Biden said. "This is not a constitutional requirement."

Biden defended the 60-vote requirement, calling it "a useful tool. It's legitimate, but from my perspective having served
here, having been elected seven times, I've never seen a time when it's become sort of standard operating procedure. ...
Requiring a supermajority is just not a good way to do business."

by Dan Friedman and Megan Scully




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767454 Date: 08/31/2015
