UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                           RELEASE IN FULL




         Office of Public Diplomacy & Public Affairs
                   Bureau of African Affairs
                          (AF/PDPA)



                             2010-2014
                  Organizational Development Plan



                                          June 2010




                                                                              Prepared by
                                                                           Marianne Scott
                                                     Senior Advisor for Strategic Planning
                                                                                 AF/PDPA
                                                                      Department of State
                                                    PRO-telligent, LLC Support Contractor




                         UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014    June 18, 2010    1

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




                 AF/PDPA Organizational Development Plan



                                           Table of Contents



                Executive Summary

           I.   About the Organizational Development Process

          II.   21' Century Africa Public Diplomacy & Public Affairs - Context & Mandates

         III.   Making Better Policy & More of a Public Impact

         IV.    Strategic Plan for Africa Bureau Office of Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs
                        Philosophy
                        Mission Statement
                        Role
                        Audiences
                        Core Functions
                        Goals
                        Strategies
                        Actions


         Annexes
                       Acronyms
                II     Approach & Methodology
                III    AF/PDPA Staffing
                IV     AF/PDPA Core Functions
                V      Action Progress Summary




                          UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014       June 18, 2010      2

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




 Executive Summary

         To address concerns raised by the OIG in its August 2009 inspection report of the Africa
 Bureau, the Office of Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs (AF/PDPA) has engaged in an
 organizational development process. Over the past few months AF/PDPA has defined the
 philosophy, role, mission, audiences, core functions, and value added of public diplomacy and
 public affairs in the Africa Bureau and set goals and strategies for the AF/PDPA office to excel.

         The Department of State's expertise on public diplomacy programs and activities in
 Africa, on the regional African public and media context, and on the Department's engagement
 with the media and American audiences on African issues should reside in AF/PDPA.

         The mission of Africa Bureau (AF) public diplomacy and public affairs is to support the
 achievement of U.S. foreign policy goals and objectives, advance national interests, and enhance
 national security by understanding, engaging, informing and influencing the people of Africa and
 informing the people of the United States of America in order to create an enabling environment
 and strong relationships for a healthy, mutually-beneficial U.S.-African partnership.

         This four-year organizational development plan lays down specific goals, strategies and
 actions/changes that will facilitate the highest level of performance of the office's core functions,
 address the office's performance challenges, and take advantage of opportunities. Throughout
 this plan is an ongoing commitment by AF/PDPA personnel to a renewed approach to their
 work. The commitment is to increased initiative, more strategic thinking, more frequent and
 earlier engagement in policy-making processes, and a fuller understanding by every staff
 member of how his/her work contributes to the larger whole. Over the course of the next few
 months, the approach of each AF/PDPA staff member will change as will a number of roles and
 portfolios. This plan assumes that the rest of the AF Bureau not only will be receptive to these
 changes but also will pro-actively seek AF/PDPA expertise and collaboration as appropriate.

          The most visible outcome of this organizational development process will be the physical
  reorganization in the Africa Bureau. As soon as space is available, AF/PDPA will embed public
  diplomacy desk officers in the AF geographic offices. In order to make space available and to
  increase coordination among the bureau's functional offices, all of which do some engaging of
  civil society and private-sector audiences in the United States and in Africa, Assistant Secretary
  Carson has asked the bureau's executive office to conduct a full-bureau analysis of office space
  based on function, size and resource available. This analysis will inform the ultimate decisions
  as to who sits where.

          However, the most significant outcome of this process will not be the shuffling of office
  space, but the results. The current AF/PDPA team is constantly short-staffed but at its core is an
  innovative, talented team of Civil and Foreign Service
                                                               "The U.S. must recognize the
  experts in engaging publics and the media and building
  long-term relationships for the United States. With added    necessity of orchestrating
  expertise, further integration with the rest of the Bureau    networks of public, private and
  and a 21' century focus on networking, AF/PDPA will           civic actors to address global
  produce results: more effective public diplomacy in           problems"

                            UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic P                   -- Anne-Marie Slaughter

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




  Africa and public affairs in the United States and better informed policy-making in Washington.

         AF/PDPA is adopting five major goals and will use seven cross-cutting strategies to
  achieve the goals by taking dozens of specific steps and actions.


  AF/PDPA Goals

  By 2014:

    I.       AF/PDPA is valued for public diplomacy leadership in Africa and for public affairs
             leadership on Africa policy in the U.S.

   II.       Policy-making on Africa is informed by an understanding of public perspectives. State
             depends on AF/PDPA for expertise and advice on understanding, informing, engaging,
             and persuading publics in Africa and informing the U.S. public.

   III.      The conduct of public diplomacy in Africa and AF's public affairs in the U.S. is
             strengthened and enhanced via the achievement of specific, measurable public diplomacy
             and public affairs program objectives.

   IV.       AF attracts and retains a diverse, high-caliber public diplomacy and public affairs
             workforce.

   V.        Resources to engage publics in Africa and in America are sufficient and deployed in line
             with policy priorities.

  Strategies

          A. Address location and restructure to close access and communications gaps with AF,
             better support and guide the field, facilitate AF engagement with target domestic
             audiences, support expanding PD portfolios, make positions more desirable, and facilitate
             AF inter-office teamwork.

          B. Engage fully in AF policy-making processes, especially the paper process.

          C. Raise visibility of PD and PA work in AF.

          D. Build and retain expertise in the field and in AF/PDPA.

          E. Increase AF/PDPA networking and coalition building.

          F. Empower the field and AF/PDPA




                                UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014        June 18, 2010      4

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




     G. Align resources with policy priorities and stretch resources via partnerships with other
        USG, private, and non-profit organizations to maximize resource coordination on shared
        policy and program goals.

  Actions to Achieve Both Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs Goals

     1. Engage more in the formal paper process (report more to the Front Office via DARs, Info
        Memos etc.)
     2. Increase administrative support to public affairs staff and cultural coordinator
     3. Retain special projects/assistant cultural affairs position
     4. AF Bureau BSRP includes public diplomacy and public affairs goal paper
     5. Increase coordination and clarify PDPA roles to AF functional offices
     6. Establish all-AF/PDPA electronic filing and contact systems
     7. Reconfigure media officer position to non-traditional media and outreach position
     8. New deputy PACO/special projects civil service position
     9. Pilot if appropriate: "Public Environment" issue paper for A/S and higher trips

  Public Diplomacy Actions

     1. PD desk officers develop PD, educational, cultural, media, and social networking
        expertise in portfolio countries
     2. Embed desk officer positions in geographic offices
     3. Improve support for first-time PAOs
     4. Meet Specific Public Diplomacy Program Objectives (Listed on page 25 and in Annex V)
     5. Streamline and improve results/impact and public environment reporting from the field
         (Embrace MAT)
     6. Annual AF PAO Conference in Washington, DC.
     7. MSRPs PD included in all goal papers and specific PD goal paper
     8. Increase interagency coordination with an emphasis on Afficom and USAID
     9. AF/PDPA makes better use of public opinion polling/academic analysis and data on
         Africa
     10. Annual Franklin and/or Science & Technology Fellow in AF/PDPA
     11. Improve links to public-private partnerships
     12. Chief of Mission EERs include public affairs achievements

  Public Affairs Actions

      1.   Increase strategic value of outreach to the Africa Bureau
      2.   Enhance Diaspora Relations Coordination
      3.   Restructure morning media clips
      4.   Biweekly calendar of domestic outreach and media interviews
      5.   PD-DAS takes on principal AF Bureau spokesperson role
      6.   Internal marketing - update AF/PDPA information on State's internal websites




                            UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014      June 18, 2010       5

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




      I.         ABOUT THE ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PROCESS

         Since mid-January, the Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs Office of the Africa Bureau
  (AF/PDPA) has been engaged in a practical, structured organizational development process that
  seeks:

      •      To enhance the effectiveness of public diplomacy in Africa and the Africa Bureau's
             public affairs in the United States;

      •      To improve AF/PDPA's ability to meet its mandates and fulfill its mission, and

      •      To directly address concerns raised by the OIG in its August 2009 inspection report of
             the Africa Bureau - ISP-I-09-63 — about the need "to better integrate AF/PDPA into the
             Africa Bureau" and to "address the philosophy and role of public diplomacy and public
             affairs in forming and contributing to the policy of the Africa Bureau in the medium and
             longer term."

           This process is not a performance evaluation for any person, an inspection, or a judgment
  on the relative value of any position. Through interviews, document reviews, and group
  discussions the contractor led a volunteer organizational development team of PDPA staff and
  leadership in analyzing office performance challenges, opportunities, strengths and weaknesses',
  in clarifying what the public diplomacy and public affairs functions are needed to do in the
  Africa Bureau (AF) — their philosophy, role, mission and value added - and in setting goals and
  strategies for AF/PDPA to excel.

          During this process AF/PDPA often took a zero-based approach to consideration of its
  own existence, organization, location, and function. Over the first four months of this year the
  majority of the staff in AF/PDPA continuously pressed themselves to define not only what they
  do, but also the value of the tasks and activities they perform. Questions and options for
  discussion during weekly brown bag sessions, meetings of senior leadership, as well as at a half-
  day all-office meeting, challenged traditions and assumptions and defined primary audiences.

          For example, from "what if" type questioning as to whether a public diplomacy (PD)
  office is needed at all in a regional bureau came clarity about the role of AF/PDPA and its core
  functions. The analysis of over a half dozen configurations for the public diplomacy country
  affairs officer (PD desk) position, including eliminating it entirely, became the decision not only
  to keep the geographic portfolios but to proceed as quickly as possible to embed the PD desks
  into their corresponding geographic offices. This analysis has concluded that State Department
  public engagement on Africa policy is best coordinated and led by an active joint public
  diplomacy and public affairs office in the Africa Bureau - AF/PDPA.




  1The     "Where You Are" interim report was produced by the contractor in March 2010 with the input of AF/PDPA
  staff.


                                  UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014              June 18, 2010         6

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




           This process has followed the PD-version of the medical code "primum non nocere" —
  first, do no harm to the field. However, just as in medicine this does not mean the changes to
  which AF/PDPA is committing itself and those it is expecting from the AF Bureau, R, posts, and
  other stakeholders will be easy or painless.

         Additional information on the methodology of the process is found in Annex II.



  II 21st CENTURY AFRICA PUBLIC DIPLOMACY & PUBLIC AFFAIRS — CONTEXT
  AND MANDATES
                                                                   "I do not see the countries and
           The African public comprises eight hundred million      peoples of Africa as a world apart;
  people who speak thousands of languages in forty-seven
                                                                   I see Africa as a fundamental part
  countries spread across an area larger than China, the United
  States and Western Europe combined. Most Africans have           of our interconnected world -- as
  no direct contact with America or Americans.                     partners with America on behalf of
                                                                   the future we want for all of our
          Africa has the world's fastest population growth rate.
                                                                   children. That partnership must be
  Forty-four percent of the population is under 15 and African
  youth are hungry for opportunity, education, and relevance.      grounded in mutual responsibility
  Education is a top priority for families across the continent.   and mutual respect."
  Traditional American educational and cultural diplomacy —
  academic exchanges, English teaching, student advising,                      -- President Barack Obama
  libraries, and performing arts — provide what people want
  and, as such, an important opportunity for U.S. Missions to reinforce priority messages and
  themes. They also provide a two-way window that gives Africans a view of a more diverse,
  complex, value-based America than is available on most flat screens, and US officials, access to,
  and greater understanding of, local societies and emerging leaders in particular.

         With estimates of no more than a fifth to a third of Africa's population having electricity
  at home and historically centralized and inadequate national telecommunications infrastructure,
  the web-based information revolution of the last twenty years largely bypassed Africa. Africa is
  well on its way to leapfrogging right over it. Cell phone and other mobile handheld technologies
  are connecting, informing and empowering urban and rural dwellers like never before.

          The U.S. is generally well-regarded in Africa. The U.S.-Global Leadership Project found
  in 2009 that 83% of sub-Saharan Africans approved of U.S. leadership. BBC World Service
  polling found that 85% of Kenyans and 72% of Nigerians view U.S. influence as mainly
  positive. Americans' interest in Africa is growing. For example, IIE's Open Doors report on
  international educational exchange indicates that although still small, the percentage of American
  students studying in Africa has increased steadily for the past fifteen years. The bonds that have
  joined America's and Africa's history have created durable, complicated ties, strong opinions,
  and sometimes unrealistic public expectations. This history, these trends, and the personal
  popularity of President Obama create tremendous opportunity for public diplomacy in Africa.


                            UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014        June 18, 2010      7

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




         As African nations become stronger international players, as global networks — reputable
 and nefarious — increasingly include Africans, as African diasporas are involved more regularly
 back home, the number of priority themes and issues on which to engage a greater number of
 audiences grows every year. The Africa Bureau places a priority on expanding public
 programming outside of chancery compounds to reach more youth, women, and Muslim
 communities as well as African diaspora and users of social media. Yet, Department of State
 public engagement resources on and in Africa have been in short supply for years.

          The Department of State's public diplomacy and public affairs Africa resources (human
  and programmatic) are currently dwarfed by those in budgets in other U.S. government agencies
  marked for specific angles of this purpose. For example, in Africa it is not unusual for a
  Department of Defense (DOD) Military Information Support Team (MIST) to have three times
  the number of American officers and budget of the Embassy's Public Affairs section. Peace
  Corps can deliver a dozen American volunteer English teachers directly to rural schools in a
  single country while State may be able to fund only one English teaching fellow to work on
  Mission-theme-based curriculum development (i.e. English language instruction that uses good
  governance, accountability, tolerance, respect for diversity and other themes.) USAID is able to
  invest millions of dollars in media training via non-profit organizations while a single $100,000
  journalism grant is a major program for most public affairs sections in Africa.

          Private charitable foundations, American businesses and non-profits also invest more on
  communications, education and media in Africa than does the Department of State. Carnegie
  and other foundations are investing tens of millions of dollars annually in specific African
  universities over the course of a decade while the Fulbright program provides at most a few
  scholars per year to these institutions. American
  civil society groups spend more than AF's annual           "Africa is cutting-edge cool at this point"
  domestic public affairs budget on informing and
                                                                  -- Mark Anthony Neal, professor of black
  engaging the American people on a single issue -
  Darfur.                                                            culture at Duke University (May 2010)


          The resource imbalance is a reality, but in the 21' century it need not be the only factor
  that defines effectiveness or even relative impact. As Anne-Marie Slaughter has noted
  "networked power flows from the ability to make the maximum number of valuable
  connections...In a networked world, the issue is no longer relative power but centrality in an
  increasingly dense global web."2

          In Africa, where experience has taught citizens not to expect that centralized goverment
  will do what is best for society when it means going against the personal interests of those in
  power, smaller identity networks (ethnic, religious, school, clan etc.) are critically important.
  Adapting to a networked style will make U.S. government public affairs more effective in
  Africa. Indeed, for years the GAO has recommended "campaign style" approaches to public
  diplomacy thematic communications and messaging. Coalition building and pooling resources
  with others' to achieve mutual goals can be much more effective than trying to do it all alone.

  2 Slaughter, Anne-Marie "America's Edge: Power in the Networked Century" Foreign Affairs, January/February

  2009


                               UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014              June 18, 2010        8

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




         The practices of public diplomacy in Africa and of public affairs on Africa policy are
 bound by mandates that come from several sources. Legal mandates such as Smith-Mundt and
 the Fulbright-Hayes regulations are explicit.
                                                      "We also will reach out beyond
 They restrict resources for certain kinds of
 activities. "Understood mandates" are those that     governments, because we believe
 are widely assumed to be part of the job and         partnerships with people play a critical role
 stem from State's ingrained practices and            in our 21st century statecraft."
 corridor channels, not necessarily regulations.
 Mandates all along this spectrum are strong              -- Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton
 enough to dictate when, and for what, public
 diplomacy and public affairs are used as well as when they are left out of the policy process.

         The priorities, mandates and principal resources of public diplomacy flow from the
 Africa Bureau (AF) and from the Office of the Undersecretary for Public Diplomacy and Public
 Affairs (R). At posts, public affairs sections adhere to Mission priorities first and foremost.
 Public diplomacy programs and tools are most often run out of the bureau of Educational and
 Cultural Exchanges (ECA) or International Information Programs (IIP). The AF Bureau's and
 Missions' public diplomacy and public affairs staff must collegially tap into, and show results
 for, other bureaus and occasionally agencies.

         The Africa Bureau has five policy pillars and AF public diplomacy and public affairs
 further and support all five — strengthen democratic institutions; mitigate and prevent conflict;
 foster broad-based economic growth; enhance access to education and combat disease, and
 combat transnational threats — as well as global themes such as climate change, food security,
 and outreach to Muslim populations in particular.

        In addition, R's "Strategic Imperatives for 21st Century Public Diplomacy" certainly will
 guide public diplomacy in Africa: shape the narrative: develop proactive outreach strategies to
 inform, inspire, and persuade; expand and strengthen people-to-people relationships to build
 mutual trust and respect; better inform policy-making; ensure foreign policy is informed up front
 by an understanding of attitudes and opinions of foreign publics; combat violent extremism:
 counter violent extremist voices, discredit and delegitimize violent extremism and empower
 credible local voices; and deploy resources in line with current priorities - strengthen structures
 and processes to ensure coordinated and effective public diplomacy

     III. MAKING BETTER POLICY AND MORE OF A PUBLIC IMPACT

          Over the past four months AF/PDPA has defined the philosophy, role, audiences,
 mission, and core functions of AF/PDPA. This organizational development plan was developed
 by AF/PDPA through a consultative and collaborative process. It does not seek to catalogue the
 full panoply of activities that the office engages in every day. It seeks to provide a strategic
 direction for the many daily activities — from responding to taskers, to recruiting officers for field
 positions, to producing daily press clips, to informing PAOs about Washington's latest policy
 initiative — so that the each AF/PDPA staff member can make smart decisions about how to
 increase the value, impact and results of his/her work. It also seeks, to the extent feasible, to

                            UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014          June 18, 2010      9

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




 evaluate and measure these to be able to align human and financial resources with strategic
 priorities.

         This plan seeks to build on the office's considerable strengths which include, but are by
 no means limited to the outstanding teamwork displayed by most staff members on projects
 ranging from innovative training for LES, to trip paper; the leadership by example of the office
 director, deputy, PACO and public affairs officer in providing policy-makers and PAOs with
 regular, valued updates and input; the "go to" responsiveness to posts' needs of the cultural
 coordinator and ARS Paris; the extensive networking for the Bureau of the outreach coordinator
 across the United States; the close, collaborative working relationship with IIP in particular; the
 transparency and inclusiveness within AF/PDPA as to how funding decisions are made, and, the
 media interview clearance and press guidance processes. The latter works so well that PAOs and
 AF office directors repeatedly told the contractor "whatever you do, don't change it."

          Throughout this plan is an ongoing commitment by AF/PDPA personnel to a new
 approach to their work. The commitment is to increased initiative, more strategic thinking,
 more frequent engagement in policy-making processes, and a fuller understanding by every
 staff member of how his/her work contributes to the larger whole. This may sound obvious,
 but it is not a minor shift and is a day-to-day challenge in the State culture that tasks down,
 values procedure over creativity, and expects quick responses and turn-around from lower levels
 but does not place priority on keeping them informed.

         The new Public Diplomacy Deputy Assistant Secretary (PD-DAS) will play a major
  leadership role in implementing this plan. AF/PDPA's leadership team (Director, Deputy,
  PACO, Chief of Public Affairs, and Cultural Coordinator) is responsible for the pace of
  implementation, but actually achieving the goals will require all staff members to reshape their
  approach to their own jobs. It is generally not a matter of just doing more. Most AF/PDPA
  personnel are already juggling large work loads. It is a matter of working more strategically, in
  some cases more in depth, and focusing more on impact and purpose.

                                   AF/PDPA GOALS - 2010-2014

     I.   AF/PDPA is valued for public diplomacy leadership in Africa and for public affairs
          leadership on Africa policy in the U.S.

    II.   Policy-making on Africa is informed by an understanding of public perspectives.
          State depends on AF/PDPA for expertise and advice on understanding, informing,
          engaging, and persuading publics in Africa and informing the U.S. public.

   III.   The conduct of public diplomacy in Africa and AF's public affairs in the U.S. is
          strengthened and enhanced via the achievement of specific, measurable public
          diplomacy and public affairs program objectives.

   IV.    AF attracts and retains a diverse, high-caliber public diplomacy and public affairs
          workforce.

    V.    Resources to engage publics in Africa and in America are sufficient and deployed in
          line with policy priorities.

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




           During this organizational development process AF/PDPA staff and stakeholders
  proposed many more thoughtful ideas and specific strategies, steps, and actions to achieve these
  five goals than there are time or resources available. Seven cross-cutting strategies arose out of
  the list of over a hundred specific actions that the contractor compiled from interviews and
  discussions with the field and in Washington.

                                           STRATEGIES

      A. Address location and restructure to close access and communications gaps with AF,
         better support and guide the field, facilitate AF engagement with target domestic
         audiences, support expanding PD portfolios, make positions more desirable, and
         facilitate AF inter-office teamwork.

       B. Engage fully in AF policy-making processes, especially the paper process.

       C. Raise visibility of PD and PA work in AF.

       D. Build and retain expertise in the field and in AF/PDPA.

       E. Increase AF/PDPA networking and coalition building.

       F. Empower the field and AF/PDPA

       G. Align resources with policy priorities and stretch resources via partnerships with
          other USG, private, and non-profit organizations to maximize resource coordination on
          shared policy and program goals.

         In early May 2010, as a result of this organizational development process, Assistant
  Secretary Carson approved major physical restructuring of AF/PDPA. AF/PDPA will embed PD
  desk officers in the geographic offices using a model similar to that currently used by WHA and
  EUR. As soon as space is available, PD desks will be relocated to the corresponding AF
  geographic office (AF/C, AF/W, AF/E and AF/S) in the Harry S. Truman main State building
  (HST). The PD desk officers will be an integral part of the geographic offices' day-to-day work
  as public diplomacy experts. These officers will be rated by AF/PDPA and reviewed by the
  geographic office director, serving as members of both office teams.

           Embedding will help close the existing chasm between AF/PDPA and the rest of the
  bureau, but it is far from a perfect solution and certainly not a cure-all. Shifting of physical
  office space will jumpstart changes to the "out of sight, out of mind" mentality which has
  affected AF/PDPA for many years. It will directly address the OIG reports concerns that "the
  current situation, with AF/PDPA offices across the street from the main Department building,
  exacerbates the alienation between AF and AF/PDPA." It will open other gaps. The distance
  between the AF/PDPA "home office" in SA-3 and the AF geographic offices on the fourth and
  fifth floors of HST will make supervision of and communication with the desks more
  challenging than EUR's or WHA's experience. Included in this plan are actions to mitigate
  anticipated new gaps and to address proactively potential thorny areas. The AF/PDPA leadership
                           UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014         June 18, 2010     11

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




 team has discussed potential pitfalls. They are ready to take on the added management
 challenges that embedding creates.

         In addition, on AF/PDPA's recommendation, Assistant Secretary Carson asked AF/EX to
 conduct in FY 2010 a zero-based reconsideration of physical space based on office function,
 size, and resources available. This was a result of AF/PDPA's organizational development
 analysis that pointed to the need to improve coordination between the domestic outreach side of
 AF/PDPA and other AF offices' cultivation and engagement of domestic audiences (such as
 NGO, Diaspora, and other constituency briefings) as well as between the public diplomacy
 program side of AF/PDPA and the work of other AF offices on engaging priority public
 audiences in Africa (such as women, civil society, entrepreneurs, and Muslim communities). It
 is expected that consultation and collaboration among the various public engagement activities of
 the bureau's functional offices — RSA, EPS, and PDPA — will be enhanced by locating AF's
 regional government-to-people portfolios in closer proximity, and that as a result AF/PDPA will
 be more engaged in the Bureau's policy-making processes.

         As physical reorganization is not sufficient on its own to fully integrate AF/PDPA, this
 plan contains the steps AF/PDPA has agreed to take to redefine responsibilities, portfolios and
 expectations to enable the PD desks to build expertise in their geographic portfolios, the PA
 section to build expertise in the U.S.-based African diaspora and in new and social media, and
 the PACO, cultural coordinator, deputy and office director to continue to focus region-wide with
 improved administrative support. This plan includes a commitment from the new Public
 Diplomacy Deputy Assistant Secretary as to the role he will play in encouraging the rest of the
 Africa Bureau to improve its attitude toward, and raise its expectations of, AF/PDPA. Ensuring
 foreign policy-making is informed by an understanding of public perspectives is a two-way
 street. AF's geographic and functional offices must collaborate more fully with AF/PDPA.

          Early in FY2011, Diplomacy 3.0 will provide two new country affairs (desk) officer
  positions enabling the West Africa portfolio of 16 posts to be split into two. The program and
  project specialist position will be reconfigured to support additional programs. The media officer
  position will be refocused with an emphasis on social/online media and additional diaspora
  outreach. AF/PDPA seeks to add two new positions in FY 2013 — a deputy planning and
  coordinating officer and another media officer. All of AF/PDPA will work to better inform
  policy-making.

          Better input into policy also means doing a better job of reporting on public sentiment
  and on the media, academic and civil society perspectives and environments in country as well as
  capturing the impact and results of public diplomacy activities. AF has asked officers in the field
  to do more strategic reporting. This is also expected of officers at public affairs sections. In
  Washington, AF/PDPA officers will do more to inform themselves and policymakers by reading
  INR, Open Source, and non-governmental public opinion polls and analysis as well as
  networking with the academic communities that study Africa. In order to improve reporting on
  the results of public diplomacy programs, assessment and reporting tools must be improved.
  Measuring the impact of public diplomacy programming is expensive and, if not done using
  longitudinal methods, imprecise. AF/PDPA is committed to working with R to improve



                           UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014        June 18, 2010     12

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




 reporting and measurement of public diplomacy results and to setting expectations for this office
 and the field to move beyond counting activities to counting impact.

          Carrying out the core function of oversight of, and support for, the field means more than
 emails and phone calls to posts from Washington (although the value of the weekly phone call
 between PD desk and PAO should not be underestimated). Africa does not have many senior
 PAO positions. Thirty-one out of 44 AF PAO positions are graded for mid- or entry-level
 officers (FS-02 and below). Many PAOs are the sole public diplomacy officer at post and on
 their first PAO tour. As AF/PDPA desk officers have not always had field PD experience, this
 plan contains actions to build expertise in Washington and the field including adding more
 regional and Washington training opportunities, coaching/mentoring less-experienced PAOs by
 more experienced officers, manuals and written guides, as well as academic and scientific
 fellows who bring specialized expertise into AF/PDPA. These will help the field be more
 effective, but will not solve the need for additional LES and FSO positions in public affairs
 sections across the continent.

         While AF/PDPA can and must recruit and build public diplomacy officers for service in
 Africa, there are few, very limited actions the office can take on its own that will make an
 appreciable difference in retaining good public diplomacy officers at posts. This is not just a
 problem for public diplomacy in Africa. The Department's assignments priority on Iraq,
 Afghanistan and Pakistan, including the promise of "linked assignments" and the financial
 incentives that come with service in these countries has had the unintended effect of creating a
 disincentive to serving in Africa. As many posts in Africa are two year tours, the already
 systematic every-other-year assignment gaps are multiplied by curtailments of officers to serve
 in those countries the Department considers a higher priority.

          Several of the specific actions in this plan are designed to raise the visibility of AF public
  diplomacy and public affairs work in order to garner a regular seat at the policy table, better
  represent PAOs in Washington, attract more FSO bidders, and increase interagency and public-
  private networking. Coalition building and public-private partnerships are a critical part of
  stretching public diplomacy and public affairs resources.

           Separating AF/PDPA by embedding and taking on more work — new audiences,
  partners, and drafting and reporting responsibilities — will mean working more time, working
  more efficiently, or letting go of some duties. Some actions in this plan (such as restructuring
  one of AF/PDPAs most highly visible products - the morning clips) will evaluate whether the
  time it takes to perform a task can be reduced.




                            UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014          June 18, 2010      13

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




     IV. STRATEGIC PLAN FOR AFRICA BUREAU PUBLIC DIPLOMACY AND
           PUBLIC AFFAIRS



 Philosophy of AF Public Diplomacy (PD) and Public Affairs (PA)

     •   PD and PA advance foreign policy objectives; they are essential tools for national
         security and require credibility and legitimacy.

     •   PD and PA communicate U.S. government Africa policies to domestic and foreign
         audiences and inform policy-making including, but not limited to, providing
         opportunities for policy-makers to listen to these audiences.

     •   PD creates an enabling environment for U.S. government policies and U.S. national
         interests in Africa through programming that strikes the right balance of short- and long-
         term engagement activities.

     •   PAOs and the public affairs sections of U.S. Missions abroad have the lead on public
         affairs programming and media work in country including, under chief of mission
         authority, coordination of interagency public outreach and messaging in country.

     •   PD works best when the field is trained, trusted and empowered to act and when tools
         and messages are adaptable to local realities and the perspectives of the target audience.

     •   AF/PDPA personnel are expected to be an essential part of the web of America's diverse
         networks of public, private and civic actors on Africa, representing the Department,
         modeling integrity, and learning continuously.

     •   AF/PDPA works as a team of high-caliber experts, each with a specialty supporting and
         backstopping each other, as well as coaching and cultivating entry-level officers and less-
         experienced colleagues in the field and in Washington.

     •   AF/PDPA fosters open communication and encourages creativity and innovation.

     •   Effective PD and PA require personnel who reflect, respect, understand, and positively
         engage the diverse composition of our nation and of Africa. AF/PDPA is committed to a
         diverse workforce.


  Mission Statement - AF/PDPA

          The mission of AF public diplomacy and public affairs is to support the achievement of
  U.S. foreign policy goals and objectives, advance national interests, and enhance national
  security by understanding, engaging, informing and influencing the people of Africa and

                           UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014        June 18, 2010         14

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




 informing the people of the United States of America in order to create an enabling environment
 for a healthy, mutually-beneficial U.S.-African partnership.

        This engagement takes place via daily communications with the media and others,
targeted outreach initiatives to audiences in Africa and in the U.S. related to specific themes, and
longer-term people-to-people relationship building efforts between Africa and the United States.


 Role of AF/PDPA

         State Department's expertise on public diplomacy programs and activities in Africa, on
 the regional African public and media context, and on the Department's engagement with the
 media and American audiences on African issues resides in AF/PDPA.

        AF/PDPA also houses the Africa Bureau's experts on Africa's cultural, educational, and
 media environments, on electronic social networking/social media in Africa, and on crafting
 thematic communications strategies for regional Africa policy.

        Information on AF/PDPA staffing is found in Annex III


 AF/PDPA Priority Audiences

 (Note: these are the priority audiences for the Washington-based AF/PDPA staff. Priority
 audiences for posts and ARS Paris are different.)

     1. AF Posts
     2. AF Bureau
     3.R
     4. PA, ECA, IIP
     5. other State
     6. U.S. and global media
     7. U.S-based public (Americans and Diaspora), and
     8. other USG.




                          UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014         June 18, 2010      15

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




                             AF/PDPA Core Functions

                                              Inform and support policy-
                                              making and USG actions in
           Provide direction,                 Africa — provide expertise on:                    III
       oversight, and support to                 attitudes/opinions of, and
                                                potential interpretations by,         Inform and engage the
       public diplomacy in Africa.                                                 !American and international
                                                African publics; the media's
        Act as the primary nexus                                                     media and the U.S. public
                                                  coverage of Africa; USG
         between the 48 public                 programs, tools and outreach             about Africa policy
        affairs sections in Africa              strategies to inform, inspire
            and Washington                      and persuade those publics,
                                                   and people-to-people
                                                         exchanges.
                                   #
                                                    tt   r


                     Deploy public diplomacy and
                      public affairs resources for -                Coordinate special projects and
                      Africa in line with AF and R                          new initiatives
                                priorities
                    #1.101011#19#40.
                                   1101.410.
                                           01,100,101111.110,6011



         Additional information on these core functions is found in Annex IV.




                                                 AF/PDPA GOALS
                                                             2010-2014



    I. AF/PDPA is valued for public diplomacy leadership in Africa and for public affairs
         leadership on Africa policy in the U.S.

  Public Diplomacy Leadership

          A primary function of the public diplomacy office in a regional bureau must be to guide
  and oversee public diplomacy operations and programming at U.S. Missions. Management of
  public diplomacy resources, support, and training for the field are major parts of AF/PDPA's
  responsibilities. This work is, and will remain, largely invisible to the AF policy process. The
  bureau relies on AF/PDPA to align public diplomacy resources with policy priorities and
  national interest and implement public diplomacy programs that produce tangible results.

                                UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014                         June 18, 2010   16

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




 Longer-term educational and mutual understanding activities in particular are labor and resource
 intensive and results may not be apparent for years. These engagement activities need to be
 shaped by AF/PDPA.

          In order to oversee and support the field more effectively, AF/PDPA will take steps to
 improve interaction between the PD desks, PAOs and AF's geographic offices, and to engage
 more in interagency and intradepartmental networking and coalition building in Washington. AF
 posts will increase reporting of their results and impact, not just activities (outcomes not just
 outputs). AF/PDPA staff will build their own knowledge of, and expertise in, public diplomacy
 activities, staff and environments in Africa.

        By 2014, AF/PD will be D.C.'s experts on the full range of PD activities on the ground at
 AF posts, networked in the U.S. and linked to the field sufficiently to promote and garner
 resources and opportunities for posts.

 Public Affairs Leadership

         The State Department's expertise on engagement with the U.S. domestic and major
 global media and with targeted domestic audiences on Africa policy resides in AF/PDPA. AF/PA
 is responsible for serving as AF's spokespeople and providing the Department and posts with
 press guidance and media relations expertise. AF/PA cultivates the U.S.-based media (traditional
 and social/new) and informs AF and posts about Africa coverage in the U.S. and major global
 media. AF/PA leads coordination of AF's domestic public speaking (non-Congressional) and AF
 Speakers Bureau. AF/PA has the lead in AF on U.S.-based diaspora engagement and on
 interagency communications strategy and messaging related to Africa policy.

        By 2014, AF/PA will be valued equally for its communications strategy, public outreach,
  and media expertise and will be recognized as AF bureau spokespeople, as appropriate.



   II. Policy-making on Africa is informed by an understanding              "The ear of the leader
         of public perspectives. State depends on AF/PDPA for               must ring with the
         expertise and advice on understanding, informing,                  voices of the people."
         engaging, and persuading publics in Africa and informing
         the U.S. public.                                                        -- Woodrow Wilson



          Policy on any topic that affects Africa should be informed by an understanding of how
  the global media as well as public audiences in Africa may receive and then re-broadcast their
  own interpretation of U.S. government actions, and of U.S. government programs,
  communications strategies, tools and outreach strategies to inform, inspire and persuade those
  publics. Africa policy also should be informed by an understanding of the interests of the
  American public.

         By 2014, AF/PD will be:


                          UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014        June 18, 2010       17

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




         •   State's experts on the full range of PD activities on the ground at AF posts, able to
             communicate to Washington's non-PD policy-makers how and when PD programs
             make a difference in the local environment or target audience;
         •   AF's experts on Africa's academic, media, and cultural environments and trends, and
             on electronic social networking/social media in Africa, and
         •   AF's experts in developing "campaign style" communications strategies.

         By 2014, AF/PA will be:
         • AF's experts on outreach to U.S.-based African diaspora and domestic audiences and
         • AF's experts in U.S. domestic media relations including traditional and internet-based
            media.


 III. The conduct of public diplomacy in Africa and AF's public affairs in the U.S. is
        strengthened and enhanced via the achievement of specific, measurable public
        diplomacy and public affairs program objectives.

         Public diplomacy and public affairs support U.S. foreign policy goals, advance national
 interests, and enhance national security through the measurable achievement of program
 objectives aligned with policy priorities and targeted strategically at priority audiences. An
 enabling environment for a healthy, mutually-beneficial U.S.-African partnership is created
 through greater U.S. government engagement of the diaspora, women, youth, faith communities,
 and public opinion leaders in academia, business, media, civil society and the arts.

        By 2014, AF/PDPA will support Africa policy across a range of priorities and also will
 have achieved measurable results in specific areas of expertise.

 AF Public Affairs Program Objectives
       A. Engage U.S. non-traditional and intemet-based media on Africa policy
       B. Understand and engage U.S.-based diaspora groups

 AF Public Diplomacy Program Objectives
       A. An Informed Public                                           "You are not here merely to
       B. Options for Young People — English Teaching and              make a living. You are here in
           Educational Advising
                                                                       order to enable the world to live
       C. Strengthened American Voices
                                                                       more amply, with greater
                                                                       vision, with a finer spirit of hope
 IV.    AF attracts and retains a diverse, high-caliber public         and achievement. You are here
        diplomacy and public affairs workforce.                        to enrich the world, and you
                                                                       impoverish yourself if you forget
         AF/PDPA positions should be of such value, substance
 and visibility that they attract and retain FSOs and civil servants   that errand."
 eager to be part of the Africa policymaking hub with a focus on
 understanding and influencing public opinion and sowing the                           — Woodrow Wilson


                          UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014         June 18, 2010      18

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




 seeds for long-term mutual understanding.

         AF Foreign Service positions in the field should have a reputation as challenging,
 satisfying, and career-enhancing where an officer can make a difference.

        By 2014, AF/PDPA will be fully-staffed by a diverse, highly-qualified team of foreign
 and civil service personnel (entry-level to senior-level) who chose to work in AF/PDPA.


  V. Resources to engage publics in Africa and in America are sufficient and deployed in
       line with policy priorities.

         AF/PDPA administers public diplomacy resources for the field and works closely with R,
 ECA and IIP to ensure public diplomacy tools and resources support policy priorities, as well as
 networks with other bureaus in State, U.S. government agencies, and with the private and non-
 profit sectors to maximize coordination of resources on shared policy and program goals.


                                         STRATEGIES
     A. Address location and restructure to close access and communications gaps with AF,
        better support and guide the field, facilitate AF engagement with target domestic
        audiences, support expanding PD portfolios, make positions more desirable, and facilitate
        AF inter-office teamwork.

     B. Engage fully in AF policy-making processes, especially the paper process.

     C. Raise visibility of PD and PA work in AF.

     D. Build and retain expertise in the field and in AF/PDPA.

     E. Increase AF/PDPA networking and coalition building.

     F. Empower the field and AF/PDPA

     G. Align resources with policy priorities and stretch resources via partnerships with
        other USG, private, and non-profit organizations to maximize resource coordination on
        shared policy and program goals.


                                             ACTIONS
         Following are the priority actions that AF/PDPA has committed to taking over the next
 few years to achieve the goals in this plan. These changes are all designed to address
 performance challenges, take advantage of opportunities, and utilize one or more of the above
 strategies. Implementation has already begun on many of these actions.

                          UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014        June 18, 2010     19

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




 Actions to Achieve Both Public Diplomacy & Public Affairs Goals

    1. Engage more in the formal paper process & report more to the Front Office (submit
       DARs, Action Memos etc.)
             Start Timing:         June 2010
             Lead:                 All Office
             Type:                 Internal
             Needed to begin:      0
             Direct Financial Implications: none
             Goals:                II
             Strategies:           B, C
             Performance Indicator: One DAR or unsolicited info memo weekly from PDPA

    2. Increase admin support to public affairs staff and cultural coordinator
       Plan of Action: OMS and Program/Project Specialist duties reconfigured to include
       support to public affairs and the cultural coordinator.
              Start Timing:            Summer 2010
               Lead:                   PDOD
              Type:                    Internal and HR
              Needed to begin:         0
              Direct Financial Implications: none
              Goals:                    IV ,V
              Strategies:              A
              Performance Indicators: Updated work requirements for Program/Project
              Specialist and OMS; PDOD conducts analysis of workloads and work flow after 6
              months and adjusts accordingly.

    3. Retain special projects/assistant cultural affairs position
       Plan of Action: Current senior advisor for cultural affairs is in AF/PDPA on a Y tour and
       will rotate out summer of 2010. Diplomacy 3.0 country affairs officer position
       established for FY 2011; portfolio for this new position to be configured to handle
       cultural affairs support, cross-cutting theme projects such as Muslim engagement and
       entrepreneurship, and Washington-based major events and summits.
               Start Timing:           January 2011 ELO begins
               Lead:                   Deputy, CC
               Type:                   HR
               Needed to begin:        Desk space
               Direct Financial Implications: none
               Goals:                  I, II, IV
               Strategies:             A
               Performance Indicators: January 2011 ELO begins

    4. AF Bureau BSRP includes public diplomacy and public affairs goal paper
       Plan of Action: BSRP baselines established in FY 2010.
              Start Timing:        May 2010
              Lead:                Advisor & PDOD


                        UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014        June 18, 2010    20

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




               Type:                 internal
               Needed to begin:      0
               Direct Financial Implications: none
               Goals:                II
               Strategies..
               Performance Indicators: FY 2012, FY 2013, and FY 2014 BSRPs include public
               diplomacy and public affairs goal paper and performance indicators met for FY
               2011, FY 2012, and FY 2013

    5. Increase coordination and clarify PDPA roles to AF functional offices
        Plan of Action:
            a. AF/EX conducts a bureau-wide, zero-based analysis of office space. AF/PDPA
                seeks, to the extent feasible, to facilitate increased collaboration between the
                domestic outreach side of AF/PDPA and other AF offices' cultivation and
                engagement of domestic audiences (such as NGO, Diaspora, and other
                constituency briefings) as well as between the public diplomacy program side of
                AF/PDPA and the work of other AF offices on engaging priority public audiences
                in Africa (such as women, civil society, entrepreneurs, and Muslim communities).
                If office space can be reconfigured, collaboration among and between the
                bureau's functional offices will be greatly enhanced by locating AF's functional
                offices in particular in closer proximity to each other.
            b. Orientation session on public diplomacy/public affairs work for Front Office staff
               after 2010 summer rotation cycle. Orientation sessions conducted whenever there
                is a change in front office staff assistants, or as often as needed.

               Start Timing:         May 2010
               Lead:                 PD-DAS
               Type:                 AF
               Needed to begin..     AF/EX space evaluation
               Direct Financial Implications: yes, moving/remodeling
               Goals:                 I, II
               Strategies:            A, C, E
               Performance Indicators: Six months after physical move, the front office, PDPA,
               RSA, and EPS evaluate degree of closer coordination; after orientation sessions -
               decrease in mis-directed taskings.

    6. Establish all-AF/PDPA electronic filing and contact system
        Plan of Action: Enable new officers to get up to speed more quickly in their portfolios
        through a functioning filing system. WAE or contractor hired to clean up and sort
        AF/PDPA classified paper files and electronic files stored on the "T" drive and move to a
        Department of State SharePoint filing system and to set up an AF/PDPA all-office
        contact database for non-State contacts.
                Start Timing:          Summer 2010
                Lead:                  PDOD
                Type:                  Internal
                Needed to begin:       WAE or contractor


                         UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014       June 18, 2010     21

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




                Direct Financial Implications: yes; cost of WAE or contractor
                Goals:                . V
                Strategies:             D, G
                Performance Indicators: By December 2010, filing system and files in line with
                State regulations and contact database established. AF/PDPA utilizes and
                maintains the filing system and contact database.

     7. Reconfigure media officer position to non-traditional media and outreach position
        Plan of Action: With the development of social and new media capabilities in the field a
        high priority, this position will be dedicated half-time to Washington support of
        expanding posts' technical and programming abilities in this area. Officer will liaise with
        resource offices in IIP and elsewhere at State and communicate this expertise to the field.
        The other half of the position will be dedicated to supporting the enhanced diaspora
        relations coordination. In FY 2011 — reconfigure current media officer position. New
        FTE for media officer position submitted in FY 2012 BSRP but not accepted by the AF
        Bureau. Resubmit for FY 2013 BSRP.
                Start Timing:           FY 2011
                Lead:                   PA Chief
                Type:                   internal
                Needed to begin:        0
                Direct Financial Implications: yes, FTE
                Goals:                   I, II, V
                Strategies:             A, E, G
                Performance Indicators: PAO, PDOD and PA Chief satisfaction with social/new
                media coverage and outreach support. Position duties and responsibilities to be
                reviewed after first six months; new FTE established by FY 2014.

     8. New deputy PACO/special projects civil service position
        Plan of Action: AF/PDPA established thematic teams to track and communicate
        developments to PAOs in priority AF policy areas: women's empowerment, Muslim
        engagement, food security, economic development, environment and good governance.
        The PACO is responsible for staffing these teams, from public affairs and public
        diplomacy employees of AF/PDPA. The PACO needs assistance in both managing the
        field supervision and support aspects of the position as well as the thematic team
        responsibilities. Establish a Civil Service FTE in this role to give the office continuity
        and a knowledge base over time. Civil Service position submitted in FY 2012 BSRP but
        not accepted by Bureau. Resubmit for FY 2013 BSRP.
                Start Timing:           FY 2013
                Lead:                   PDOD
                Type:                   AF & HR
                Needed to begin:        FTE & space
                Direct Financial Implications: yes; personnel costs
                Goals:                  I, II, IV
                Strategies:             A, E, G
                Performance Indicators: New position filled by FY 2014



                          UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014        June 18, 2010     22

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




    9. PILOT: "Public Environment" issue paper for A/S & higher trips
        Plan of Action: PD-DAS will assess public diplomacy and public affairs perspectives and
        issues in trip paper and decide whether an additional issue paper is needed. May decide to
        pilot media environment or other as an "optional issues" paper.
                Start Timing:          FY2011
                Lead:                  PD-DAS
                Type:                  AF Front Office decision
                Needed to begin:       AF approval
                Direct Financial Implications: None
                Goals:                 II
                Strategies:
                Performance Indicators: Utility for the traveler. Informal satisfaction/utility
                evaluation conducted after pilot.

 Actions to Achieve Public Diplomacy Goals

    1. PD desk officers develop PD, educational, cultural, media, and social networking
        expertise in portfolio countries
        Plan of Action:
           a. AF/W portfolio of 16 countries too large to expect in-depth expertise in all
                countries. Add an assistant AF/W PD desk officer to this portfolio using a
                Diplomacy 3.0 country affairs position authorized for FY 2010;
           b. FSI training for new PD desk officers as appropriate (AF area studies/Washington
                tradecraft/Intro to PD);
           c. Formal handover notes from departing staff beginning summer 2010;
           d. PD desks travel to every post in portfolio at least once during tour;
           e. PD Desk Officer Manual that will include checklists for PAO consultations,
                information about the portfolio posts, administrative information about AF/PDPA,
                and more;
           f. Beginning in summer FY 2010, PD desks attend geographic offices' internal
                meetings whether or not embedded. PACO speaks with geographic area directors
                to begin "virtual embedding";
           g. PD desks institute weekly conversation with portfolio PAOs

               Start Timing:         summer 2010 cycle
               Leads:                All PD
               Type:                 AF, HR, FSI, Internal
               Needed to begin:      Space for new officer
               Direct Financial Implications: travel funds; moving/remodeling costs
               Goals:                I, II
               Strategies:           A, B, C, D
               Performance Indicators: PD desks travel to every post in portfolio at least once
               during tour beginning FY 2011; Advisor produces manual by July 2010; assistant
               AF/W PD desk officer begins FY 2011; AF/W, PAO, & PDPA satisfaction with
               AF/W PD desks evaluated 3 & 6 months after 2nd AF/W officer arrives; new PD


                         UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014        June 18, 2010     23

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




               desk officers take up portfolios properly trained; FY 2010 - AF/S handover notes.
               FY 2012 AF/W & AF/E handover notes; PAO satisfaction with desk officer
               support evaluated by PACO or Deputy six months into each desk's tour.

    2. Embed desk officer positions in geographic offices
       Plan of Action: The PD desk officers will be supervised by AF/PDPA but will be an
       integral part of the geographic offices' day-to-day work as public diplomacy experts,
       providing direction and support to PAOs in the field, and informing and supporting
       policy-making in AF by providing expertise on attitudes/opinions of target African
       audiences, potential interpretations by African publics of U.S. government policies and
       actions; U.S. government programs, tools and outreach strategies to inform, inspire, and
       persuade those publics, and people-to-people exchanges designed to build long-term ties.
       Officers rated by AF/PDPA PACO and reviewed by appropriate geographic office
       director. AF/PDPA leadership team and advisor set expectations for interaction between
       and among PD desks, AF/PDPA home office, PAOs and geographic offices with first set
       of newly embedded PD desk officers. AF/PDPA leadership team and advisor works on
       internal communications/coordination strategies designed to facilitate PDPA teamwork
       and information flows and bridge HST/SA-3 distance between desks and rest of
       AF/PDPA. For example, instituting very short daily meetings to update PD desks on
       AF/PDPA and to inform AF/PDPA about front office/other bureau thinking and
       priorities.
               Start Timing:            FY2010
                Lead:                   PD-DAS, PDOD, Deputy and PACO
                Type:                   AF
                Needed to Begin:        AF/EX space evaluation & desk space
                Direct Financial Implications:            moving/remodeling
                Goals:                  I, II, IV
                Strategies:             A, B
                Performance Indicators: 6 month evaluation examines stakeholder satisfaction --
                Posts, Front Office, PD desk officers, home office, geographic offices; new PD
                desk officer position description and work requirements reflect expectations and
                core functions; evaluation of communications strategies/coordination meetings for
                participant satisfaction/utility after first two week, then again after three months.

     3. Improve support for first-time PAOs
        Plan of Action: Large post/small post shadow/buddy system established in Africa with
        mentoring of first-time PAOs by experienced PAOs in their sub-region. PAO SharePoint
        or other website or other means to share advice among themselves and continued
        management and program support from ARS. Also pursue with FSI a new Single Officer
        Post PAO training module that includes a formal mentoring for first-time PAOs at small
        posts around the world.
                Start Timing:         FY 2011
                Lead:                 Deputy
                Type:                 internal
                Needed to begin:      New course module — FSI; other travel funds
                Direct Financial Implications:       travel


                          UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014         June 18, 2010      24

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




               Goals:                 I, IV
               Strategies:            D, F
               Performance Indicators: Coaching/mentoring system established for AF
               including strategic decision-making and post/Washington interaction and
               expectations; PAO evaluation of utility after first year of operation; module added
               to PAO training course at FSI specifically on single-officer posts.

    4. Meet Specific Public Diplomacy Program Objectives
        Plan of Action:
           a. Preserve current and establish new American Centers.
                      FY 2010 baseline: Ouagadougou.
                      FY 2011 — Maputo, Kinshasa and Lusaka upgraded;
                      FY 2012 — Kano established;
                      FY 2013 - Mombasa or elsewhere to reach goal of five new/refurbished
                      American Centers by 2014;
           b. Double PD training opportunities in Africa.
                      FY 2009 baseline: 3 courses offered; 75 LES & FSOs trained in strategic
                      planning;
                      FY 2010: new courses piloted. (9 — strategic planning, social media, alumni,
                      grants, MAT & PD transition — for 150 participants in region);
                      FY 2011: previous year experience evaluated and training plan established
                      for FY 2011 & FY 2012;
                      FY 2012 — 150 receive training in PD regionally.
           c. FS0 position at South Africa Media Hub
           d. PAOs at PD transition posts - Add 8 PAO positions.
                      FY 2010 Baseline: 9 posts with no PAO.
                      FY 2011 - 7 new PAO positions filled and support/oversight plan for PD
                      transition posts developed by PDPA;
                      FY 2013 one additional PAO position established
           e. PILOT: Podcasting production and training capabilities at Public Affairs Sections
                in Africa. FY 2010 Pilot: AF/PDPA works with TIP to provide regional training &
                podcasting kits; FY 2010 & FY 2011 evaluation of results; FY 2011 decision on
                pilot project.
           f. Nearly 100% increase in English Access Microscholarship students.
                      Baseline FY 2009: 900 new students in AF plus 900 currently studying
                      under FY08 funding - 1,800 total.
                      FY 2010 funding: 1,000 new students in AF plus 900 from FY09; Total -
                      1,900 students
           g. Educational advisors at every embassy in AF.
                      FY 2010 baseline: local hire advisors added in Khartoum & Brazzaville. No
                      advisors in Central African Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Guinea
                      Bissau, Sao Tome, Seychelles & Somalia. Program moribund in Botswana.
                      FY 2011 - add advising program in Gabon. Revive in Botswana.
           h. Double number of Regional English Language Officers to 4 by FY 2014.
                      FY 2009 baseline: 1 covering southern Africa out of Pretoria; 1 covering
                      West Africa based in Dakar.


                         UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014        June 18, 2010     25

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




                       FY 2010 - new RELO in Dar es Salaam to cover East Africa and the Horn.
                       Position for 4th RELO to cover parts of West and Central Africa submitted
                       for FY 2012 BSRP but not accepted. Try again for FY 2013.
            i. Pilot hand-held mobile devices for engagement/distribution of information.
                 R/PPR completes Electronic Media Outreach Program Evaluation by FY 2011.
                 These results and analysis inform future actions.

               Start Timing: FY 2010
               Leads:          PDOD & Cultural Coordinator
               Type:           Coordination with R, OBO, ECA, and DS
               Needed to begin:         Appropriate approvals and funding
               Direct Financial Implications: Yes, several
               Goals:          III, IV, V
               Strategies:              C, D, E, F, G
               Performance Indicators: 5 new/refurbished American Centers by 2014;
               Evaluation and training plan established by FY 2012; South Africa Media Hub
               position established and filled by FY 2011; 9 new PAO positions established with
               smooth transition from PD-lite to full PAS; successful pilot: 12 AF posts engaged
               in regular podcasting production and distribution; evaluation/assessment of
               podcasting effectiveness carried out in FY 2011; ENGLISH ACCESS
               MICROSCHOLARSHIP students: FY 2011 - 2,200 students total; FY 2012 -
               2,500 students total; FY 2013 - 3000 students total; FY 2014 - 3,500 students
               total; Educational Advising: 25% increase in number of African students in
               American Universities by 2015 academic year; by FY 2014 - 4th RELO to cover
               parts of West and Central Africa; Hand-held mobile devices for engagement
               performance indicator TBD from results of Electronic Media Outreach Program
               Evaluation.

     5. Streamline and improve results/impact and public environment reporting from the field
        Plan of Action: Embrace the Mission Activity Tracker (MAT) and reduce requirements
        for PD activity reporting from the field on other platforms. MAT training for AF/PDPA;
        MAT expectations from PA0s; R/PPR adds MAT update "RSS-type" alert; AF/PDPA
        nominates for Outstanding MAT reporting awards, not posts. MAT training continues in
        the field in FY 2011 & FY 2012. Each PAS to submit at least one major analytical
        reporting cable a year.
                Start Timing:          FY 2010
                 Lead:                 Cultural Coordinator, PACO & PD-DAS
                 Type:                 Internal & Coordination with R/PPR, ECA, IIP
                 Needed to begin:      0
                 Direct Financial Implications:       none
                 Goals:                II
                 Strategies:
                 Performance Indicators: From 12% results reporting in MAT to 50% results
                 reporting in MAT.




                         UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014        June 18, 2010        26

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




    6. Annual AF PAO Conference in Washington, DC.
       Plan of Action: Link to R's global PAO conference. FY 2011 scheduled for October
       2010.
              Start Timing..         FY 2011
              Lead:                  PDOD & R
               Type..                Coordination
              Needed to begin:       Funding
              Direct Financial Implications: travel
              Goals:                 I, IV
              Strategies:            C, D, E, F
              Performance Indicators:       Participant satisfaction

    7. MSRPs — PD included in all goal papers and specific PD goal paper
       Baseline: FY 2012 MSRP posts given the option by R to include PD goal paper or not.
               Start Timing:        FY 2010
              Lead:                 PACO, PD desks, PD-DAS
              Type:                 Internal & R
              Needed to begin:      0
              Direct Financial Implications: none
              Goals:                II, V
              Strategies:           B, F, G
              Performance Indicators: For FY2013 and FY 2014, PD is well incorporated into
              all MSRPs and separate PD goal paper from all posts.

    8. Increase interagency coordination with an emphasis on Africom and USAID
       Plan of Action: PD-DAS to take the lead once position is located in the front office. Will
       work on Washington-based interagency coordination and on ensuring PAOs have the
       lead on coordinating interagency messaging/media at posts. Meanwhile, AF/PDPA to
       identify appropriate public affairs/public engagement personnel in other agencies with a
       focus on Africom and USAID. PD desk officers to arrange and accompany PAOs to
       interagency consultations before heading to post.
               Start Timing:          FY 2011
               Lead:                  PD-DAS & PACO
               Type:                  AF & Coordination
               Needed to begin:       0
               Direct Financial Implications: none
               Goals:                 I, II
               Strategies:            E, F
               Performance Indicators: Interagency contact list for AF/PDPA. # of posts with
               mission-wide integrated communications strategies/media plans. Other
               performance indicators TBD by PD-DAS

     9. AF/PDPA makes better use of public opinion polling/academic analysis and data on
        Africa
        Plan of Action: PACO working with Fellow or intern to pull together guide to Open
        Source Center, INR, DoD, and private sector, public opinion polling. PD Desks and


                         UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014        June 18, 2010     27

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




        PACO to network with academic community in coordination with outreach coordinator.
        Baseline: In FY 2010 public opinion polling not routinely checked, accessed or used by
        AF/PDPA.
               Start Timing:            FY 2010
               Lead:                    PACO
               Type:                    Coordination w/INR and others
               Needed to begin..        0
               Direct Financial Implications: none
               Goals:                   II
               Strategies:             B, D
               Performance Indicators: AF/PDPA has access to and utilizes public opinion
               polling as part of their analysis and information sharing in AF. At least one DAR,
               info memo or trip paper references public opinion polling data per quarter.

    10. Annual Franklin and/or Science & Technology Fellow in AF/PDPA
              Start Timing..        FY 2010
              Lead:                 Deputy, PACO
              Type:                 Done
              Needed to begin:      Completed.
              Direct Financial Implications: travel, space and associated Fellow costs
              Goals:                II
              Strategies:           D, C
              Performance Indicators: Annual fellows beginning in FY 2011; PDPA & Fellow
              satisfaction

    11. Improve links to public-private partnerships
        Plan of Action: New special projects/cultural affairs person will arrive on/about January
        2011. This officer to gather information from other bureaus and offices (ECA, S/GPI,
        EB) on existing State Department public-private partnerships and coordinate with
        outreach coordinator and posts on interest in new partnerships.
               Start Timing:           FY 2011
                Lead:                  Cultural Coordinator, Special Projects/Cultural Affairs
                Type:                  internal & coordination
                Needed to begin:       0
                Direct Financial Implications: perhaps
                Goals..                I, II
               Strategies:
                Performance Indicators: Start after January 2011 When new person in the
                position; Information gathering then find PDPA niche

    12. Chief of Mission EERs include public affairs achievements
        Plan of Action: PD-DAS will decide whether or not to pursue
               Start Timing:        FY 2012
               Lead:                PD-DAS
                Type:               AF Front Office decision
               Needed to begin:     AF approval


                         UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014        June 18, 2010     28

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




               Direct Financial Implications: none
               Goals:                I, II
               Strategies:
               Performance Indicators: 100% of AF FY 2012 Chiefs of Missions performance
               evaluations include public affairs/public diplomacy achievements

 Actions to Achieve Public Affairs Goals

    1. Increase strategic value of outreach to the Africa Bureau
       Plan of Action: In addition to current who, what, where, when and why, Speaker Bureau
       and Front Office speaking request template includes context, and strategic policy goal
       linkages. FY 2011 - establish baselines and measuring tool for assessing the impact of
       outreach. Clarify source for domestic outreach travel budget. Enter new contacts into
       AF/PDPA contact database.
              Start Timing:           June 2010
               Lead:                  PA Chief
               Type:                  Internal
               Needed to begin:       Contact database for contact entering
               Direct Financial Implications: none
               Goals:
               Strategies:            C, G
               Performance Indicators: Context, audience and strategic policy goal linkages
               standard for 100% of speaking requests; BSRP FY 12 Performance Indicator
               includes audience numbers tracked and beginning FY 2012, impact of outreach
               tracked.

    2. Enhance Diaspora Relations Coordination
       Plan of Action: AF/PDPA has the lead for the Africa Bureau on diaspora relations
       coordination. This will entail increasing outreach to engage new audiences. In FY 2010,
       the outreach coordinator with support from an intern or fellow, researches and evaluates
       African diaspora communities, liaises with S/GPI, AF/RSA and AF geographic offices to
       devise strategies for engagement, arranges discussions between diaspora and Bureau
       representatives, and communicates results and possible follow-up activities to relevant
       Bureau offices and to PAOs. FY 2011: Track number of communities reached and use
       outreach measuring tool to assess impact of outreach. Clarify use of AF/PDPA travel
       funds for domestic outreach,
               Start Timing:           FY 2010
               Lead:                   PA Chief
               Type:                   Coordination
               Needed to begin:        0
               Direct Financial Implications: travel funds
               Goals:                  II, III
               Strategies:
               Performance Indicators:         FY 2011 - Establish diaspora outreach baseline.
               Fulfill BSRP indicators: FY 2012 - 15% increase in outreach to African diaspora



                        UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014      June 18, 2010     29

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




               communities over FY 2011baseline. AF has utilizes an up-to-date diaspora
               outreach database. PDPA staff traveling in U.S. for domestic outreach purposes

    3. Restructure morning media clips
    Plan of Action: Analyzing and restructuring the morning news clips (one of the office's
    highest profile products) will either make it more valuable to readers or decrease the time
    that is spent compiling this product if its usefulness cannot be determined. Survey of media
    clip needs of Front Office, PAOs and AF office directors; analysis of major blogs and
    websites that cover Africa. Determine value-added PDPA clips can provide. Summer 2010 -
    survey designed and distributed
                Start Timing:          FY 2010
                Lead:                  Advisor & Program Specialist
                Type:                  internal
                Needed to begin:       0
                Direct Financial Implications: none
                Goals:                 II, V
                Strategies:            C, G
                Performance Indicators: clips have increased utility/importance to readers (reader
                satisfaction,) OR decreased production time (Fewer than 12 hours a week to
                produce)

    4. Biweekly calendar of domestic outreach & media interviews
       Plan of Action: Reinstate weekly coordination meeting with AF Front Office on A/S
       public speaking engagements. Bureau-wide public speaking compiled into a calendar and
       distributed (could be document sent via email, AF Opennet website calendar, Outlook
       calendar, or other.)
               Start Timing:           FY 2010
               Lead:                   PA Chief
               Type..                  Internal
               Needed to begin:        0
               Direct Financial Implications: none
               Goals:                  I, II
               Strategies:             B, C
               Performance Indicators..        Calendar kept up to date. Utility of calendar.
               Participant satisfaction with weekly coordination meetings.

    5. PD-DAS takes on principal AF Bureau spokesperson role
       Plan of Action: PD-DAS will take on public speaking and media interviews; Monthly
       public briefings moderated/given by PD-DAS, some with media some with diaspora and
       other groups.
               Start Timing:         After PD-DAS in place
               Lead:                 PD-DAS
               Type:                 Front Office
               Needed to begin:      PD-DAS in place
               Direct Financial Implications: none
               Goals:                I, II


                         UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014        June 18, 2010     30

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




               Strategies:          C, E
               Performance Indicators: Front office satisfaction

    6. Internal Marketing: Update AF/PDPA information on State's internal websites
        Plan of Action: Update AF Opennet website and Diplopedia to reflect PDPA activities,
        mission and work
                Start Timing:         FY 2010
                Lead:                 PA Chief
                Type:                 internal
                Needed to begin:      0
                Direct Financial Implications: none
                Goals:
                Strategies:
                Performance Indicator: website kept up to date.




                        UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014      June 18, 2010       31

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




 Annex I

 Acronyms

 AF            Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State
 AF/C          Office of Central African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State
 AF/E          Office of East African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State
 AF/EPS        Office of Economic and Policy Staff, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of
               State
 AF/EX         Office of the Executive Director, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State
 AF/PA         Public Affairs side of the Office of Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs,
               Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State
 AF/PD         Public Diplomacy side of the Office of Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs,
               Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State
 AF/PDPA       Office of Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs,
               Department of State
 AF/RSA        Office of Regional Security Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of
                State
 AF/S          Office of Southern African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of
               State
 AF/W          Office of West African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State
 A/S           Assistant Secretary
 BSRP          Bureau Strategic Resource Plan
 DAR           Daily Activity Report
 DoD           Department of Defense
 DS            Diplomatic Security
 ECA           Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs, Department of State
 FO            Front Office (Office of the Assistant Secretary for African Affairs)
 FSI           Foreign Service Institute
 FS0           Foreign Service Officer
 HR            Human Resources
 HST           Harry S. Truman Building (Main State Department Building)
               International Information Programs, Department of State
 INR           Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State
 LES           Locally Employed Staff (at U.S. Missions abroad)
 MAT           Mission Activity Tracker
 MIST          Military Information Support Team
 MSRP          Mission Strategic Resource Plan
 OBO           Overseas Building Operations
 OIG           Office of the Inspector General
 OMS           Office Management Specialist
 PA            Public Affairs
 PACO          Planning and Coordination Officer, Office of Public Diplomacy and Public
               Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State
 PAO           Public Affairs Officer
 PAS           Public Affairs Section of a U.S. Mission abroad


                        UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014       June 18, 2010     32

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




 PD            Public Diplomacy
 PD-DAS        Public Diplomacy Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of African Affairs,
               Department of State
 PD Desks      Public Diplomacy Desks also called Public Diplomacy Country Affairs Officer
 PDOD          Public Diplomacy Office Director (Director of the Office of Public Diplomacy
               and Public Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State)
 R             Under Secretary of State for Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs
 RELO          Regional English Language Officer
 USAID         United States Agency for International Development
 WAE           Term for a retired FS0 who works on temporary duty for the Department




                        UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014      June 18, 2010      33

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




Annex II

Approach & Methodology:

        The contractor is using a classic collaborative strategic planning process for
strengthening and sustaining organizational development and achievement grounded in the work
of John M. Bryson and his book Strategic Planning for Public and Nonprofit Organizations, 3rd
edition (John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 2004). Purpose trumps everything and the purpose must
ultimately be to create public value.

    This structured process included four phases:
    A) The first phase was an assessment of the AF/PDPA office (weeks 1-8).
    B) Phase two was the articulation of a common vision for what AF/PDPA's strategic role,
       function and results should be within the Bureau of African Affairs (Weeks 9-11).
    C) The development and refinement of strategies to get from point A to point B as well as
       identifying performance measurements was phase three (Weeks 11-16) followed by the
       contractor writing up the plan (weeks 17-18). Phase four is then the actual
       implementation of these strategies (Week 16+).

      A quietly, deliberately, disruptive process, inserting the contractor into the daily rhythms of
the office including participation in routine meetings is designed to elicit strategic thinking
during AF/PDPA's daily work. AF/PDPA staff has not hesitated to implement best practices as
they arise.

        The most important techniques utilized were individual thinking and group discussion.
As the guide in this process, during the first phase the contractor is conducting on and off-site
interviews of stakeholders within the Department of State in Washington D.C., in Kampala,
Uganda during an FSI strategic planning course for Africa, and by phone to PAOs across Africa.

       In addition to compiling the results of the interviews, as appropriate, the contractor also
gathered information about trends, challenges and opportunities in Africa, reviewing pertinent
internal and external documents; meeting weekly with the AF/PDPA Office Director and Deputy
Director to review progress, share findings and consult on next steps; meeting weekly with a core
group of AF/PDPA personnel who volunteered to form an internal, collaborative Organizational
Development Team to review information gathered by the consultant and hash out ideas and
concepts, and reviewing the substance of this Phase 1 report and its findings with the AF/PDPA
office and individuals affected by this report.

     The contractor assembled all materials from the questionnaires to the worksheets for
analysis. The contractor has conducted and compiled all interviews. Fifty-three people were
interviewed individually or in pairs.

    During this first phase, "why" has been the most important question. For example: Why do
you do X? Why does it matter? Why A and not B? Followed by "for whom?" (primary
audience) and "what is the value added of that action/effort/paper?"

                         UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014          June 18, 2010      34

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




 STAKEHOLDER INDIVIDUAL INTERVIEWS

 Interview
 Date           Name                                 Office                                             11
 19-Jan         Bruce Wharton                        AF/PDPA                                           1
 19-Jan         Ed Kemp                              AF/PDPA
 20-Jan         Lynn Roche                           AF/PDPA
 20-Jan         Bill Strassberger                    AF/PDPA
 20-Jan         Lydia Ellison                        AF/PDPA
 20-Jan         Lynn Allison                         AF/PDPA
 21-Jan         Patricia Ehrnman                     AF/PDPA
 21-Jan         Terri Rookard                        AF/PDPA
 21-Jan         Karen Coates                         AF/PDPA
 21-Jan         Tijen Aybar                          AF/PDPA
 21-Jan         Molly Sanchez Crowe                  AF/PDPA
 22-Jan         Russell Brooks                       AF/PDPA
 22-Jan         Jon Tollefson                        AF/PDPA
 22-Jan         Chris McShane                        AF/PDPA
 25-Jan         Nicole Peacock                       AF/PDPA
 27-Jan         Meg Keeton                           AF/EX
 27-Jan          Louis Mazel                         AF/RSA
 28-Jan          Tony Newton                         AF/EPS
 29-Jan          Siria Lopez                         AF/C
  29-Jan         Geeta Pasi                          AF/E
  29-Jan         Sue Brown                           AF/S
  29-Jan         Mary Beth Leonard                   AF/W
  1-Feb          Eric SiIla                          AF-FO
  3-Feb          Rhonda Shore                        S/CT
  3-Feb          Mark Zimmer                         PAO Somalia
  4-Feb          Donna Winton                        ARS
  4-Feb          Susan Povenmire                     OES
  8-Feb          Peter Claussen                      PAO Abuja
  9-Feb          Sara Devlin                         PD/Econ/Pol Maseru
  10-Feb         Mary Scholl                         PAO Accra
  10-Feb         Solomon Atayi                       PAO Ndjamena
  11-Feb         Priscilla Hernandez                 PAO Lusaka
  11-Feb         Edwina Sagitto                      PAO Kigali
  12-Feb         Susan Domowitz                      IIP
  17-Feb         Nick Von Mertens                    AF/PDPA
  17-Feb         Alyson Grunder                       PAO Addis
  18-Feb         Richard Johannsen                    PAO Yaounde
  18-Feb         Carl Chan & Gerald McLoughlin        Advisory Commission on PD
  19-Feb         Andrew Cedar & Betsy Whitaker R/PPR

                              UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014       June 18, 2010   35

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




   23-Feb          John Haynes                        PAO Nairobi
   24-Feb          Dennis Gombert                     INR/OPN
   25-Feb          Paul Hinshaw                       FPC
   26-Feb          Carol Kahn                         R/GSEC
   1-Mar           Kelvin Kiyingi                     Info Specialist - Kampala
                                                      Cultural Affairs Specialist -
   2-Mar           Dorothy Ngalombi                   Kampala
   2-Mar           Regina Addo                        PAO Secretary - Accra
   2-Mar           Thais Ruboneka                     Assistant IRC - Kigali
   3-Mar           Joann Lockhart                     PAO Kampala
   3-Mar           Brigitte Pressler                  PD Training Manager - Vienna
   3-Mar           Rogers Cidosa                      Interpreter - Dar es Salaam
   4-Mar           Charles Mugabo                     Public Affairs Specialist - Kigali
   4-Mar           John Dunne                         DPAO Kampala
   4-Mar           Geraldine Seruyange                IRC Assistant - Kampala
   5-Mar           Roger Lyners                       Info Specialist - Windhoek



  Annex III

  AF/PDPA STAFFING

          AF/PDPA's domestic public affairs side has four dedicated positions to handle media,
  press guidance, statements, and outreach to the American public and the African diaspora in the
  United States. The public diplomacy side has seven positions in Washington and two for
  Americans at African Regional Services (ARS) in Paris. (ARS Paris provides programming
  tools and support to all African posts with an emphasis on Francophone countries and engages
  the sizeable Paris-based African media and diaspora communities.) Six people have portfolios
  that include both sides of the office: the office director, deputy director, administrative officer,
  program and project specialist, and OMS.

          There are 48 posts in Africa, 39 of which have Public Affairs Sections headed by an
  American Public Affairs Officer (PAO). By mid-2011 this will be up to 46. About half the
  public affairs sections are single-officer sections, often an officer's first PD tour.

          Other State bureaus have regional support specialists in public affairs sections in Africa
  including information resource officers, regional English language officers, and regional
  Information Resource Officers. In Kampala, an exemplary case, the PAO has opened the door to
  communications specialists from PEPFAR and other USG to sit in the Public Affairs Section. At
  other posts DoD MIST teams sit in the Mission's public affairs section.




                            UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014             June 18, 2010   36


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




  Annex IV

  AF/PDPA Core Functions:

      1. Direction, support, and oversight to public diplomacy in Africa.
              a. Provide oversight, direction, and resources to PA sections in Africa;
              b. Provide support to PA sections in Africa including tailored information and
                 advice and filter requests from Washington;
              c. Report on, and advocate for, the work of PA sections in Africa;
              d. AF lead on interagency strategic communications, media, and messaging;
              e. Recruit and select FSOs for PD positions at posts, and
              f. Develop and/or coordinate (as appropriate) PD programming tools and priorities
                 for Africa with other Bureaus and with the private sector.
      2. Inform and support policy-making
              a. Provide expertise on attitudes and opinions of African publics and on the major
                 cultural, educational, media and communications technology (social networking)
                 trends in Africa;
              b. Provide expertise on the international media's Africa coverage;
              c. Provide expertise on strategic communications and appropriate USG programs,
                  tools and outreach strategies to inform, inspire and persuade African publics;
              d. Provide/organize opportunities for policymakers to interact with African public
                  opinion leaders and civil society leaders, and
              e. Engage fully in drafting paper, responding to taskers, and other leadership support
                  mechanisms from the PD and PA perspectives.

      3. Public Affairs (domestic)
             a. Draft/coordinate press guidance, public statements and policy announcements;
             b. Engage U.S.-based media including, but not limited to, organizing interviews;
             c. Lead coordinator for AF public speaking opportunities and AF Speakers Bureau;
             d. Lead on engagement with the African Diaspora in the U.S., and
             e. Engage U.S. NGOs and other American stakeholders.

      4. Manage and deploy resources in line with AF priorities.

      5. Coordinate special activities/projects and new initiatives.




                           UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014        June 18, 2010     37


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




 Annex V
                                      Actions Summary

                                        As of June 1,2010

 Actions to Achieve Both Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs Goals

  LEAD                                 ACTION                                PROGRESS
 All Office       1. Engage more in paper process/report more to     Starts June 2010
                     the Front Office (weekly DARs etc.)             Target 1 per week

  PDOD            2. Increase administrative support to public
                     affairs staff and cultural coordinator

  Deputy,         3. Retain special projects/assistant cultural      STARTED — ELO position
  CC                 affairs position                                description submitted May
                                                                     2010
  Advisor,        4. BSRP includes public diplomacy/public           COMPLETED - May 2010
  PDOD               affairs goal paper                              for FY 2012 BSRP

  PD-DAS          5. Increase coordination and clarify PDPA roles STARTED — A/S approved
                     to AF functional offices                     space analysis. For AF/EX
                                                                  to complete
  PDOD            6. Establish all-AF/PDPA electronic filing and
                     contact systems

  PA Chief        7. Reconfigure media officer position to non-
                     traditional media and outreach position

  PDOD            8. New deputy PACO/special projects civil          FTE for new position
                     service position                                submitted for FY2012 but
                                                                     not accepted by Bureau.
                                                                     Resubmit for FY 2013.
  PD-DAS          9. Pilot as appropriate: "Public Environment"
                     issue paper for A/S & higher trips


  Public Diplomacy Actions

  LEAD                                  ACTION                                     PROGRESS
  All PD         1. PD desk officers develop PD, educational, cultural, media,
                    and social networking expertise in portfolio countries
                       a. AF/W portfolio of 16 countries too large to expect
                           in-depth expertise in all countries. Add an assistant   APPROVED
                           AF/W PD desk officer to this portfolio using a          for FY 2011
                           Diplomacy 3.0 country affairs position authorized

                          UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014       June 18, 2010     38


UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




                           for FY 2010;
                        b. FSI training for new PD desk officers as appropriate
                           (AF area studies/Washington tradecraft/Intro to
                           PD);
                        c. Formal handover notes from departing staff
                           beginning summer 2010 (AF/S PD);
                        d. PD desks travel to every post in portfolio at least
                           once during tour;
                        e. PD Desk Officer Manual that will include checklists
                           for PAO consultations, information about the
                           portfolio posts, administrative information about
                           AF/PDPA, and more;
                        f. Beginning in summer FY 2010, PD desks attend
                           geographic offices' internal meetings whether or not
                           embedded. PACO speaks with geographic area
                           directors to begin "virtual embedding";
                        g. PD desks institute weekly conversation with
                           portfolio PAOs.

 PDOD,           2. Embed desk officer positions in geographic offices            APPROVED
 Deputy,
 PACO
                 3. Improve support for first-time PAOs
 Deputy                a. Shadow/buddy system                                     STARTED
                       b. Single Officer Post PAO training module at FSI

 CC,             4. Meet Specific Public Diplomacy Program Objectives
 PDOD               a. Preserve current and establish new American Centers.       STARTED
                    b. Double PD training opportunities in Africa.                STARTED
                    c. FSO position at South Africa Media Hub                     APPROVED
                    d. PAOs at PD-transition posts.                               APPROVED
                    e. PILOT: Podcasting production and training capabilities     STARTED
                       at Public Affairs Sections in Africa.
                    f. Nearly 100% increase in ACCESS scholarship students        STARTED
                       by 2014.
                    g. Educational advisors at every embassy in AF.
                    h. Double number of Regional English Language Officers        STARTED
                       to 4 by FY 2014.
                    i. Pilot hand-held mobile devices for
                       engagement/distribution of information.

  CC &           5. Streamline and improve results/impact and public              STARTED
  PACO,             environment reporting from the field (Embrace MAT)
  PD-DAS
  PDOD, R        6. Annual AF PAO Conference in Washington, DC.                   APPROVED
                                                                                  for FY 2010

                         UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014      June 18, 2010    39

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015




 PACO,          7. MSRPs — PD included in all goal papers and specific PD
 PD Desks          goal paper from every Mission with a PAS.
 PD-DAS
 PD-DAS,        8. Increase interagency coordination with emphasis on
 PACO              Afficom and USAID

                9. AF/PDPA makes better use of public opinion
 PACO              polling/academic analysis and data on Africa

 Deputy,        10. Annual Franklin and/or Science & Technology Fellow in        APPROVED
 PACO               AF/PDPA                                                      for FY 2010

 CC, SP         11. Improve link to public-private partnerships

 PD-DAS         12. Chief of Mission EERs include public affairs achievements



 Public Affairs Actions

    LEAD                                        ACTION                            PROGRESS
 PA Chief            1. Increase strategic value of outreach to the Africa Bureau STARTED

 PA Chief            2. Enhance Diaspora Relations Coordination                   STARTED

 Advisor,            3. Restructure morning media clips                           STARTED
 Program
 Specialist
 PA Chief            4. Biweekly calendar of domestic outreach and media
                        interviews

 PD-DAS               5. PD-DAS takes on principal AF Bureau spokesperson
                         role

 PA Chief            6. Internal Marketing: Update AF/PDPA information on
                        State's internal websites


 Key:
 PD-DAS — PD Deputy Assistant Secretary
 PDOD — PD Office Director
 Deputy — Deputy PD Office Director
 PACO — Policy and Coordination Officer
 CC — Cultural Coordinator
 SP — Special Projects/Cultural Affairs Officer
 Advisor — Senior Advisor for Strategic Planning

                          UNCLASSIFIED AF/PDPA Strategic Plan 2010-2014     June 18, 2010   40

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770301 Date: 08/31/2015
