     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772357 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                        RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                        B6


From:                           sbwhoeop
Sent:                           Sunday, September 12, 2010 9:34 AM
To:
Subject:                        Fwd: POLITICO Playbook, presented by Washington's NewsChannel 8: To deprive Dems
                                of an issue, Boehner would compromise on tax-cut extension -- NYT softens Boehner
                                wording after aide complains -- Maureen Dowd's sister, Peggy, may switch from Obama
                                to RO...




       BREAKING — DNC goes up on national cable Tuesday with an ad on "The Boehner plan." A
       DNC official says it'll be up a little less than a week: 'This ad is one product we'll use to
       define Mr. Boehner, his ethics and priorities for the American people - and there will be others."
       You Tube http://bit.ly/dB6Yb1
       ROBERT GIBBS (*PressSec) tweets on the NYT front-pager on House Republican
       Leader John Boehner: "Headline says it all.. .A G.O.P. Leader Tightly Bound to Lobbyists
       http://nyti.ms/bxbF4D ... Don't forget this handy clip & save graphic of 'I( Street Cabinet'
       (black & white photo doesn't do that tan justice!) http://nyti.ms/9n1wVp"
       BOEHNER taped "Face the Nation" yesterday from West Chester, Ohio:
       Bob Schieffer: "I want to make sure I heard what you said correctly: you're saying that you are
       willing to vote for those middle class tax cuts, even though the bill will not include ... extending
       the tax cuts for the upper bracket American."
       Rep. Boehner: "Bob, we don't know what the bill's going to say, alright? If the only option I
       have is to vote for those at 250 and below, of course I'm going to do that. But I'm going to do
       everything I can to fight to make sure that we extend the current tax rates for all Americans."
       A Boehner aide reads between the lines: "Despite what Obama says, Republicans are not
       holding middle-class tax cuts hostage and we're not going to let him get away with those types of
       false claims. Our focus remains on getting bipartisan support for a freeze on all current rates,
       because that is what is best for the economy and small business job creation. Boehner's words
       were calculated to deprive Obama of the ability to continue making those false claims, and as a
       result we are in a better position rhetorically to pressure more Democrats to support a full
       freeze."
       AN INSTANT CLASSIC:
       Schieffer: "Mr. Boehner, I'm going to ask you this question because I'm not objective about this
       - I'm a cancer survivor, I used to be a heavy smoker. Do you still smoke?"
       Boehner: "I do."
       Schieffer: "You have taken $340,000 from the tobacco industry. They've been the largest
       contributor to your political campaigns over the year. How do you square that with the fact that
       cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable deaths in this country, 435,000 people,
       their deaths are linked to cancer, that's 1 in 5. How do you justify that in your own mind?"
       Boehner:i "Bob, tobacco is a legal product in America. The American people have a right to
       decide for themselves whether they want to partake or not. There are lots of things that we deal
       with and come in contact with every day, from alcohol to food to cigarettes, a lot of the things
       that aren't good for our health. But the American people ought to have the right to make those
        decisions on their own." ...
        Schleifer: "If you should become Speaker, you could set a good example for the country by
        saying, 'I'm going to stop smoking.' Maybe you could get the President, I understand he smokes
        too, maybe the two of you could find a way to try to stop smoking. That'd be kind of a good
        thing, wouldn't it?"
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772357 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772357 Date: 08/31/2015



      I Boehner: "Bob, I appreciate your suggestion."




    Original Message
From: Mike Allen
To: Undisclosed recipients:;
Sent: Sun, Sep 12, 2010 8:43 am
Subject: POLITICO Playbook, presented by Washington's NewsChannel 8: To deprive Dems of an issue, Boehner would
compromise on tax-cut extension -- NYT softens Boehner wording after aide complains -- Maureen Dowd's sister, Peggy,
may switch from Obama to ROMNEY

BREAKING — DNC goes up on national cable Tuesday with an ad on "The Boehner plan." A DNC official
says it'll be up a little less than a week: "This ad is one product we'll use to define Mr. Boehner, his ethics
and priorities for the American people - and there will be others." YouTube http://bit.ly/dB6Ybl
ROBERT GIBBS (gPressSec) tweets on the NYT front-pager on House Republican Leader John
Boehner: "Headline says it all.. .A G.O.P. Leader Tightly Bound to Lobbyists http://nyti.ms/bxbF4D ... Don't
forget this handy clip & save graphic of 'I( Street Cabinet' (black & white photo doesn't do that tan justice!)
http://nyti.ms/9n1wVp"
BOEHNER taped "Face the Nation" yesterday from West Chester, Ohio:
Bob Schieffer: "I want to make sure I heard what you said correctly: you're saying that you are willing to vote
for those middle class tax cuts, even though the bill will not include ... extending the tax cuts for the upper
bracket American."
Rep. Boehner: "Bob, we don't know what the bill's going to say, alright? If the only option I have is to vote
for those at 250 and below, of course I'm going to do that. But I'm going to do everything I can to fight to make
sure that we extend the current tax rates for all Americans."
A Boehner aide reads between the lines: "Despite what Obama says, Republicans are not holding middle-
class tax cuts hostage and we're not going to let him get away with those types of false claims. Our focus
remains on getting bipartisan support for a freeze on all current rates, because that is what is best for the
economy and small business job creation. Boehner's words were calculated to deprive Obama of the ability to
continue making those false claims, and as a result we are in a better position rhetorically to pressure more
Democrats to support a full freeze."
AN INSTANT CLASSIC:
Schleifer: "Mr. Boehner, I'm going to ask you this question because I'm not objective about this - I'm a cancer
survivor, I used to be a heavy smoker. Do you still smoke?"
Boehner: "I do."
Schieffer: "You have taken $340,000 from the tobacco industry. They've been the largest contributor to your
political campaigns over the year. How do you square that with the fact that cigarette smoking is the leading
cause of preventable deaths in this country, 435,000 people, their deaths are linked to cancer, that's 1 in 5. How
do you justify that in your own mind?"
Boehner: "Bob, tobacco is a legal product in America. The American people have a right to decide for
themselves whether they want to partake or not. There are lots of things that we deal with and come in contact
with every day, from alcohol to food to cigarettes, a lot of the things that aren't good for our health. But the
American people ought to have the right to make those decisions on their own." ...
Schleifer: "If you should become Speaker, you could set a good example for the country by saying, 'I'm going
to stop smoking.' Maybe you could get the President, I understand he smokes too, maybe the two of you could
find a way to try to stop smoking. That'd be kind of a good thing, wouldn't it?"
Boehner: "Bob, I appreciate your suggestion."
 ** A message from Washington's NewsChannel 8: Comcast has hired a vast army of lobbyists to rush
 through the largest media merger in American history. The Comcast/NBC monopoly would present serious
 problems for local news in communities across our country. Washington's decision makers must resist the


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772357 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772357 Date: 08/31/2015




pressure from Comcast and take the necessary time to carefully review this controversial merger to protect the
public interest. **
SPOTTED -- Saturday joggers: Sunlen Miller spotted at 18th and Columbia. Lizzie O'Leary at Connecticut
and T.
BIRTHDAYS – CBS News' irreplaceable Capitol Hill Producer Jill Jackson (hat tips Kurt Bardella, Joe
Brettell) ... Henry Waxman ... Sam Brownback ... Politics Daily's Matt Lewis ... (hits Patrick Gavin).
TOMORROW: Jim Angle
SLIDE SHOW: The First Lady and Laura Bush embrace yesterday in Shanksville, Pa. Philly Inquirer:
"Michelle Obama and Laura Bush led the ceremony on a windswept mountaintop Saturday commemorating the
ninth anniversary of the 9/11 attacks, which also marked a turning point in the evolution of the Flight 93 crash
site from a scarred landscape to national memorial park." http://yhoo.it/b29QPM
TECH BLOGS: Apple may rush out new iPad version for holidays. http://bit.ly/aBj31P
GAME CHANGE: 2012 OFF TO SLOW START – GOP heavyweights hold back, freezing field
compared to past cycles -- Jonathan Martin and Ben Smith: "[T]he primary is on track to start later, and
more cautiously, than it has in the recent past. In the fall of 2006, Mitt Romney and John McCain were openly
battling over endorsements from Republican operatives, donors and even county sheriffs in the early primary
states. The two men beat a well-worn path to New Hampshire, South Carolina, and especially Iowa, where they
had to watch their step to avoid tripping over Democratic hopefuls like John Edwards and Evan Bayh. But at the
same point four years later, as the 2010 election enters the home stretch, top-tier Republican presidential
contenders are hesitant to set foot in the states that kick off the presidential campaign process, let alone issue
press releases touting their latest gets there.
--"[Thell GOP nominating contest is shaping up ... as a game of chicken ... Romney, Sarah Palin, Haley
Barbour, Mitch Daniels and a few other ambitious figures are largely eyeing each other while publicly holding
back, leaving Tim Pawlenty as the only mainstream Republican trudging down the traditional, early path ...
Together, they're all making a mockery of the conventional wisdom about the longer and longer arcs that
modern White House campaigns demand. ... There are three main reasons for the delay: The intense focus on
the 2010 midterms; the risks of starting too early; and, especially for the best-prepared candidate, Romney, a
paralyzing fear of failure in Iowa. In a sense, the incentives this year are reversed: candidates have better
reasons to publicly hold off on declaring their candidacy than to try to gain an early foothold."
http://bit.ly/an4YWO
STORY DU JOUR – N.Y. Times Al, 1 col. at the fold, "G.O.P. Leader Tightly Bound to Lobbyists," by
Eric Lipton: "Mr. Boehner ... maintains especially tight ties with a circle of lobbyists and former aides
representing some of the nation's biggest businesses ... They have contributed hundreds of thousands of dollars
to his campaigns, provided him with rides on their corporate jets, socialized with him at luxury golf resorts and
waterfront bashes and are now leading fund-raising efforts for his Boehner for Speaker campaign, which is
soliciting checks of up to $37,800 each, the maximum allowed. Some of the lobbyists readily acknowledge
 routinely seeking his office's help — calling the congressman and his aides as often as several times a week."
http://nyti.ms/asBs02
--BOEHNER OFFICE REBUTTAL: "Setting the Record Straight: The New York Times' Misleading Attack
on Boehner": "There is no surer sign that the liberal establishment is threatened by Leader Boehner than the
story that will appear in ... [The] New York Times." http://bit.ly/94TOD
--A BOEHNER AIDE: "Boehner's positions on the issues he cited are longstanding, and are obviously not the
 result of one lobbyist's influence. The fact that any reporter would believe or write that Boehner's opposition to
 a 'cap and trade' national energy tax, for example, is 1) recent, or 2) the result of one lobbyist's influence is
 ridiculous."
 --BEHIND THE CURTAIN: Byron York documents changes the NYT made AFTER the story posted:
"Boehner spokesman Michael Steel says he received a fact-checking email from Times reporter Eric Lipton
 Friday evening asking if Boehner did in fact oppose the cap on greenhouse gases, the tax change for hedge fund
 executives, the debit card fee cap, and increased fees on oil and gas companies. 'Yes, that is correct,' Steel
 responded to Lipton, adding 'I can tell you why, if you care.' Steel says he received no further notes from
 Lipton. Steel says Boehner has long held those positions and does not hold them as a result of lobbying. Hours
 after the email exchange, the Times story was published online, with the statement from the lobbyist that he had
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772357 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772357 Date: 08/31/2015




'won' Boehner's backing on those matters. After Boehner's aides complained, ... [t]he statement that a lobbyist
'won' Boehner's backing was changed to one in which a lobbyist 'sought' Boehner's backing. That's a rather
critical change. The Times also added Boehner's defense that these were long-held positions."
http://bit.ly/dewsnU
--RATES JUST WENT UP -- GRAPHIC WITH LIPTON STORY — "Boehner's K Street Cabinet: Some
of the lobbyists and public affairs consultants with tight links to Representative John A. Boehner:
http://nyti.ms/cHYFOy
"FORMER AIDES: John Fish, Reynolds American (Tobacco); Teresa Fish, Electronic Industries Alliance
(Electronics); Sam Geduldig, Clark Lytle & Geduldig (Financial services, telecommunications); Terry Holt,
HDMK (Health care, energy); Marc Lampkin, Quinn Gillespie & Associates (Financial services, energy,
telecommunications); Kevin Madden*, Jim Dyke & Associates (Public affairs, political consulting); Greg
Maurer, UPS.
"LONGTIME ASSOCIATES AND FRIENDS: Gary Andres, Dutko Worldwide (Manufacturing, health care,
shipping); Sue Andres, Union Pacific; Samuel J. Baptista, The Baptista Group (Financial services); Michael
Boland*, Dome Advisors (Financial services); James Boland, Sundquist Anthony LLC (Waste management,
financial services); Nicholas E. Calio Citigroup (Financial services); Donald Danner, National Federation of
Independent Business; Bruce Gates Altria (Tobacco); Mark Isakowitz, Fierce, Isakowitz and Blalock
(Telecommunications, health care, energy); Drew Maloney, Ogilvy Government Relations (energy,
pharmaceuticals, finance); Bill Paxon, Akin Gump (Manufacturing, gambling); Dirk Van Dongen, National
Association of Wholesaler- Distributors.
"*Not registered as a lobbyist, but works in the political consulting business." http://nyti.ms/cHYFOy
TOP TWEETS:
--Washingtonian editor Garrett M. Graff (@vermontgmg): "At Opening Night for the Opera. Down my row
are Justices Ginsburg and Kagan. Ginsburg has a large piece of anti-Fenty lit in her handbag."
—*LarrySabato: "USA has pop of 300m+. At least 1 million are nuts. All have been encouraged to seek fame
via outrageous actions, thx to FL feeding frenzy."
TOP STORY — NYT col. 1, "Afghan Security Growing Worse, Aid Groups Say," by Rod Nordland, in
Kabul: "Large parts of the country that were once completely safe, like most of the northern provinces, now
have a substantial Taliban presence ... The worsening security comes as the Obama administration is under
increasing pressure to show results to maintain public support for the war, and raises serious concerns about
whether the country can hold legitimate nationwide elections for Parliament next Saturday. Unarmed
government employees can no longer travel safely in 30 percent of the country's 368 districts, according to
published United Nations estimates ... The number of insurgent attacks has increased significantly ... American
military officials say the increased level of violence is related to the rise in the number of its forces here. The
last 2,000 of 30,000 new American troops are expected to arrive in the next week or two, military officials say.
The result is more military operations, they say, and more opportunities for the insurgents to attack coalition
forces." http://nyti.ms/bImb8E
--DOYLE McMANUS, in L.A. Times "Opinion" section, "High-level doubts on Afghanistan: Former
officials who once supported the war are now questioning it's worth the cost": "The doubters include
Richard N. Haass, president of the Council on Foreign Relations, the closest thing the United States has to an
official 'foreign policy establishment'; Leslie H. Gelb, his predecessor; and Robert D. Blackwill, a former aide
to President George W. Bush. 'The current strategy isn't working, and it's costing roughly $100 billion a year,'
Haass, a former aide to then-Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, told me last week. 'It's time for a major
recalibration: not an immediate withdrawal but a significant scaling down of our ambitions.' And last week, a
group of 46 foreign policy experts issued a joint report arguing that the goal of building a unified, stable
Afghanistan is beyond the ability of the United States, and unnecessary to boot. The panel, the Afghanistan
Study Group, included both longtime critics of the war and some who supported U.S. policy until recently. ...
They cite three main reasons for their escalating pessimism. The first: setbacks (including a major offensive in
Kandahar that was scheduled to be in full swing by now but is only getting underway). Next: Afghan President
 Hamid Karzai's failure to support a U.S.-sponsored anti-corruption campaign. And finally, there's that $100-
 billion annual price tag. ... [A]s Obama approaches a December review of his strategy in Afghanistan, the
 debate is noticeably opening up, driven in part by the weight of that $100-billion cost." http://lat.ms/9XfIcyC
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772357 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772357 Date: 08/31/2015




9 YEARS AGO THIS MORNING, the WP lede, by Michael Grunwald: "Terrorists unleashed an
astonishing air assault on America's military and financial power centers yesterday morning, hijacking four
commercial jets and then crashing them into the World Trade Center in New York, the Pentagon and the
Pennsylvania countryside."
TOM BROKAW, 9/11/01, as he watched the second tower fall, live on NBC's air: "Manhattan has been
changed. Terrorists have declared war ... This is war."
WHERE WERE YOU ON 9/11?
--Robert Gibbs (@PressSec) tweets: "Just drove by the Pentagon.. .remember the smoke coming from it nine
yrs ago.. .thinking of all those we lost that day here and in NY and PA."
--Howard Wolfson: "Was on the 7am train from NYC to DC. We were the last train into Union Station before
it was evacuated. Got off the train and was instructed to run out of the building. Discovered hundreds of staffers
streaming out of the Senate office buildings towards us. All of the cabs lined up waiting for fares had their
radios on and their windows open. I heard the buildings collapse that way. I connected with my wife who was in
NYC and prayed for the people I had worked with many years before on the 103rd floor of the WTC."
--Karen Finney: "Saw the first plane from 6th Ave and 11th in NYC - got on what was the last #2 train to stop
at Wall Street headed to the NYC Board of Education (where I worked at the time). Will never forget the black
smoke that flooded the train car as people ran in; then spent the and night working with the schools Chancellor
trying to assess situation in seven schools around ground zero and how to get 1.1 million kids home safely,
knowing that in some cases their parent might not be coming home. Quite a shocker to step out of the subway in
Brooklyn. Like 5 minutes later, the towers come down."
TOP TALKERS:
MAUREEN DOWD, "When Peggy Left Barry: Plus ca change, plus c'est la meme chose": "One of the
independent voters Obama will be trying to charm over the next two years is my sister, Peggy, a formerly ardent
Obamican (a Republican who changed spots to vote for Obama). ... Despite being a Washington native, Peggy
believed that the dazzling young newcomer could change Washington. But she has lost a lot of faith now,
saying she might vote for Mitt Romney over Obama if Romney is the Republican nominee in 2012. (Sarah
Palin shouldn't count on her vote though. In Peggy's words, 'Are you nuts?') Peggy thinks the president has
done fine managing W.'s messes in Iraq and Afghanistan. And she lights up at the mention of his vice president,
Joe Biden. But she thinks Obama has to get 'a backbone' if he wants to lure her back to the fold. ... While
Obama's out in the country trying to save Congressional Democrats, he should also think about how he's going
to save himself. http://nyti.ms/92Dudr
 FRANK RICH, "Time for This Big Dog to Bite Back: The Democrats' obituaries may yet prove
 premature.": "On Labor Day, the fighting Obama abruptly re-emerged, a far cry from the man whose Oval
 Office address on Iraq days earlier was about as persuasive as a hostage video. ... For a guy facing a tidal wave,
 the president was so ebullient, you had to wonder if he knew something we didn't. Maybe he simply read the
 unabridged poll numbers ... Those numbers are hardly as monochromatic as advertised. Obama's approval
 rating, for months a consistent (not imploding) 45-ish percent, still makes him arguably America's most popular
 national politician. The polls also continue to show that, while both political parties are despised, Democrats are
 slightly less despised than Republicans. ... In a second forceful speech last week, delivered outside Cleveland,
 Obama titillated the political press by calling out Boehner by name eight times. But though Boehner is a nice
 soft target ... he's merely a front-man. Obama must also call out the powerful interests who are pulling the
 G.O.P.'s strings (and filling its coffers), whether on Wall Street or in Big Oil or any other sector where special
 interests are aligned against reform in the public interest. If Obama can speak lucidly about a subject as thorny
 as race, he can surely do a far more specific job of telling the story of how we got to this economic impasse."
  http://nyti.ms/bgj S89

WEEK AHEAD — "Pope to warn of dangers of secular society" -- The (London) Sunday Telegraph:
"THE POPE will this week urge the Government to protect religious freedoms to allow Christians to follow
their beliefs [during a British tour and state visit, Thursday to Saturday]. In a speech to political and
religious leaders in Westminster Hall, the Pontiff will deliver a thinly veiled attack on the perceived liberal
direction of the country. ... Senior Roman Catholic sources said his message would be seen as a criticism of the
introduction of equality laws that have impinged on the freedom of religious groups, although he will not
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772357 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772357 Date: 08/31/2015




directly refer to government policy. A number of Christians have lost their jobs or faced disciplinary action for
practising their faith at work by wearing a crucifix or sharing their views on biblical teaching."

MEDIA WATCH – "Bret Baier is the new face of Election Night coverage at Fox News: 40-year-old
reporter part of a new generation of political news anchors," by Baltimore Sun's David Zurawik: "Baier
steps up this fall as lead political news anchor on Election Night replacing Brit Hume, who moved after the
2008 elections to the role of senior political analyst. Given the way Fox News has come to lead in ratings for
coverage of political events since CNN's glory days during the presidential campaign of 2008, Baier's ascension
makes for a significant changing of the guard in broadcast journalism. The seat he now occupies in Fox's
Washington studios is one of the most influential in American political life — a fact not lost on the boyish-
looking anchorman who turned 40 on Aug. 4, which also is President Barack Obama's birthday. ... He has been
invited for the first time in his career to moderate a televised debate — a role more often reserved for the likes
of Jim Lehrer or Bob Schieffer of public and network TV. This one will be held Oct. 4 in Hartford, Conn., in a
hotly contested race between Democrat Richard Blumenthal and Republican Linda McMahon for a U.S. Senate
seat. ...

"As for his hour of news from 6 p.m. to 7 p.m. weeknights ['Special Report], Baier almost doubles the
combined audience of his competitors on CNN and MSNBC. So far this year, 'Special Report' has an
average nightly audience of 2,107,000 in viewers — compared with 604,000 for 'The Ed Show' on MSNBC
and 545,000 for Wolf Blitzer's 'Situation Room' on CNN. ... Michael Clemente, senior vice president at Fox
News, says the foundation laid down by Hume has played a crucial role in Baler's success. 'Brit Hume had the
legacy with the audience — a legacy that went back to his days with ABC News,' Clemente says. `So why has
it worked with Bret? First of all, the transition was handled well; Bret filled in quite a bit as Brit was winding
down. But people make a judgment pretty quickly, and I think they judged Bret as being an honest, fair and
smart reporter. And it wasn't like pulling some guy out of thin air who had just been a news reader on some
local station.' ... [Baier:] 'You know the Fox Atlanta bureau that I joined in 1998 — that started in my
apartment in Atlanta with a fax machine and a cell phone. That was the bureau. And I still have that sense of us
being that startup that is still trying to make it all come together." http://bit.ly/apgxA2

SPORTS BLINK – COLLEGE FOOTBALL – AP: "Ohio State and Oklahoma won their BCS
championship game rematches and showed that a couple of former powerhouses from the Sunshine State are
not quite ready to return to elite status. Behind the running of Terrelle Pryor and a ball-hawking defense, the
second-ranked Buckeyes beat No. 12 Miami 36-24 on Saturday at the Horseshoe in Columbus. ... In Norman,
Okla., Landry Jones bounced back from a sluggish opener and led the 10th-ranked Sooners to an easy 47-17
victory over No. 17 Florida State."

--"USC hangs on for a 17-14 victory over Virginia," by L.A. Times' Gary Klein: "USC's defense is not as
bad as it looked in the opener, the offense not nearly as good. Those were the immediate impressions Trojans
fans came away with Saturday night at the Coliseum after the 16th-ranked Trojans' 17-14 victory over Virginia.
The undisciplined style that resulted in multiple costly penalties? That remained consistent as the Trojans
improved to 2-0 under first-year Coach Lane Kiffin. Quarterback Matt Barkley passed for two touchdowns late
in the first half and, though the defense gave up a last-minute touchdown, the Trojans earned a harder-than-
expected victory over the Cavaliers, a near three-touchdown underdog playing their first game in California.
'I'm extremely disappointed with our performance,' Kiffin said. 'That's the most miserable 2-0 locker room I've
ever been in, which is good. I think our players understand." http://lat.ms/99w6au

 --ESPN TODAY – From release – "ESPN's NFL studio shows return in earnest ... for Kickoff Weekend ...
 Chris Berman, recipient of the Pro Football Hall of Fame's 2010 Pete Rozelle Radio-Television Award, returns
 for his 25th season as host of the Emmy Award-winning Sunday NFL Countdown presented by IBM (11 a.m.),
 where he will be joined by analysts Cris Carter, Mike Ditka, Tom Jackson, Keyshawn Johnson and Chris
 Mortensen, and Insider Adam Schefter for the two-hour weekly NFL preview show. After the games, Berman
 and Jackson will be joined by John Saunders and Trent Dilfer throughout the season during the 7 p.m.
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772357 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772357 Date: 08/31/2015



SportsCenter to review all the day's action. Berman and Jackson will team up again at 11 p.m. for 'The Blitz' on
SportsCenter."

** A message from Washington's NewsChannel 8: If the Comcast and NBC merger is rushed through the
process, our country risks losing a powerful part of our democracy -- locally-owned, independent voices in
markets where Comcast/NBC will control both access to the home and multiple channels of news. Dropping the
independent news voice won't serve the consumer. It will only serve the interests of Comcast which would also
own the other news channels. Please make sure that any merger approval serves the public interest and protects
the local news consumers you represent. Don't let Comcast ram this monopoly merger through the review
process. **




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05772357 Date: 08/31/2015
