       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766522 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                               RELEASE IN FULL



From:                              Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                              Tuesday, December 22, 2009 9:55 AM
To:
Subject                            Fw: (Reuters) Copenhagen accord was a "disaster, says Sweden




From: Polley, Mary E
To: NEWS-Mahogany
Sent: Tue Dec 22 09:39:57 2009
Subject: (Reuters) Copenhagen accord was a "disaster", says Sweden

BRUSSELS - Despite months of preparation and strenuous international diplomacy, the talks boiled down to an inability
of the world's two largest emitters, the United States and China, to agree on headline fixed targets.
The 27 member states of the EU had gone into the talks with a unified position and with a plan for financing emissions
cuts in the developing world, with a commitment to spend around 7 billion euros ($10.01 billion) over the next three
years to aid poorer countries.
But those aims were largely sidelined as the talks failed to produce the breakthrough agreement many had hoped for.
"Europe never lost its aim, never, never came to splits or different positions, but of course this was mainly about other
countries really (being) unwilling, and especially the United States and China," said Carlgren.
Britain on Monday blamed China and a handful of other countries of holding the world to ransom by blocking a legally
binding treaty at Copenhagen, stepping up a blame game that has gathered momentum since the talks ended.
Prime Minister Gordon Brown described the summit as "at best flawed and at worst chaotic" and demanded an urgent
reform of the process to try to reach a legal treaty when talks are expected to resume in Germany next June.
But Danish Climate Minister Connie Hedegaard, who quit as president of the Copenhagen talks midway through after
being criticised by African countries for favouring wealthier nations in negotiations, said it was no time to get depressed
about the process of tackling climate change.
"What we need to do is to secure the step that we took and turn it into a result," she told reporters as she arrived for
the Brussels meeting on Tuesday. Asked whether Copenhagen had been a failure, she replied:
"It would have been a failure if we had achieved nothing. But we achieved something. A first step. It was the first time
we held a process where all the countries were present, including the big emitters."
(Writing by Luke Baker; Editing by Jon Hemming)




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766522 Date: 08/31/2015
