        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771872 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                   RELEASE IN FULL


From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Sunday, November 28, 2010 1:16 PM
To:                                Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:                           FW: Der Spiegel: A Superpower's View of the World




From: Blakeman, Chat - WWG01
Sent: Sunday, November 28, 2010 1:15 PM
To: Mull, Stephen D; Mills, Cheryl D; Kennedy, Patrick F; Thessin, James H
Subject: FVV: Der Spiegel: A Superpower's View of the World

So it begins...mostly on Germany


From: Jackson, Christine P
Sent: Sunday, November 28, 2010 1:10 PM
To: NEWS-WikiLeaks
Subject: Der Spiegel: A Superpower's View of the World

SPiEGEL )N: :NI
SPIEGEL ONLINE

11/28/2010 07:00 PM
The US Diplomatic Leaks

A Superpower's View of the World

By SPIEGEL Staff


251,000 State Department documents, many of them secret embassy reports from around the world,
show how the US seeks to safeguard its influence around the world. It is nothing short of a political
meltdown for US foreign policy.


What does the United States really think of German Chancellor Angela Merkel? Is she a reliable ally? Did she really
make an effort to patch up relations with Washington that had been so damaged by her predecessor? At most, it was
a half-hearted one.


The tone of trans-Atlantic relations may have improved, former US Ambassador to Germany William Timken wrote in
a cable to the State Department at the end of 2006, but the chancellor "has not taken bold steps yet to improve the
substantive content of the relationship." That is not exactly high praise.


And the verdict on German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle? His thoughts "were short on substance," wrote the
current US ambassador in Berlin, Philip Murphy, in a cable. The reason, Murphy suggested, was that "Westerwelle's
command of complex foreign and security policy issues still requires deepening."



        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771872 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771872 Date: 08/31/2015




Such comments are hardly friendly. But in the eyes of the American diplomatic corps, every actor is quickly
categorized as a friend or foe. King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia? A friend: Abdullah can't stand his neighbors in Iran and,
expressing his disdain for the mullah regime, said, "there is no doubt something unstable about them." And his ally,
Sheikh bin Zayed of Abu Dhabi? Also a friend. He believes "a near term conventional war with Iran is clearly
preferable to the long term consequences of a nuclear armed Iran."


Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's emissaries also learn of a special "Iran observer" in the Azerbaijan capital of Baku
who reports on a dispute that played out during a meeting of Iran's Supreme National Security Council. An enraged
Revolutionary Guard Chief of Staff Mohammed Ali Jafari allegedly got into a heated argument with Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad and slapped him in the face because the generally conservative president had, surprisingly, advocated
freedom of the press.


A Political Meltdown


Such surprises from the annals of US diplomacy will dominate the headlines in the coming days when the New York
Times, London's Guardian, Paris' Le Monde, Madrid's El Pais and SPIEGEL begin shedding light on the treasure trove of
secret documents from the State Department. Included are 243,270 diplomatic cables filed by US embassies to the
State Department and 8,017 directives that the State Department sent to its diplomatic outposts around the world. In
the coming days, the participating media will show in a series of investigative stories how America seeks to steer the
world. The development is no less than a political meltdown for American foreign policy.


Never before in history has a superpower lost control of such vast amounts of such sensitive information -- data that
can help paint a picture of the foundation upon which US foreign policy is built. Never before has the trust America's
partners have in the country been as badly shaken. Now, their own personal views and policy recommendations have
been made public -- as have America's true views of them.


For example, one can learn that German Defense Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg, the Germany's most beloved
politician according to public opinion polls, openly criticizes fellow cabinet member Guido Westerwelle in conversations
with US diplomats, and even snitches on him. Or that Secretary of State Clinton wants her ambassadors in Moscow
and Rome to inform her whether there is anything to the rumors that Italian President Silvio Berlusconi and Vladimir
Putin have private business ties in addition to their close friendship -- whispers that both have vehemently denied.


America's ambassadors can be merciless in their assessments of the countries in which they are stationed. That's their
job. Kenya? A swamp of flourishing corruption extending across the country. Fifteen high-ranking Kenyan officials are
already banned from traveling to the United States, and almost every single sentence in the embassy reports speaks
 with disdain of the government of President Mwai Kibaki and Prime Minister Raila Odinga.


 Weighing Public Interest against Confidentiality


 Turkey hardly comes away any less scathed in the cables. Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the cables allege,
 governs with the help of a cabal of incompetent advisors. Ankara Embassy officials depict a country on a path to an
 Islamist future -- a future that likely won't include European Union membership.


 As with the close to 92,000 documents on the war in Afghanistan at the end of July and the almost 400,000
 documents on the Iraq war recently released, the State Department cables have also been leaked to the WikiLeaks


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771872 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771872 Date: 08/31/2015




whistleblower platform -- and they presumably came from the same source. As before, WikiLeaks has provided the
material to media partners to review and analyze them.


With a team of more than 50 reporters and researchers, SPIEGEL has viewed, analyzed and vetted the mass of
documents. In most cases, the magazine has sought to protect the identities of the Americans' informants, unless the
person who served as the informant was senior enough to be politically relevant. In some cases, the US government
expressed security concerns and SPIEGEL accepted a number of such objections. In other cases, however, SPIEGEL
felt the public interest in reporting the news was greater than the threat to security. Throughout our research,
SPIEGEL reporters and editors weighed the public interest against the justified interest of countries in security and
confidentiality.


It is now possible to view many political developments around the world through the lens of those who participated in
those events. As such, our understanding of those events is deeply enriched. That alone is often enough to place
transparency ahead of national regulations regarding confidentiality.


Following the leaks of military secrets from Afghanistan and Iraq, these leaks now put US diplomats on the hot seat. It
is the third coup for WikiLeaks within six months, and it is one that is likely to leave Washington feeling more than a
bit exposed. Around half of the cables that have been obtained aren't classified and slightly less, 40.5 percent, as
classified as "confidential." Six percent of the reports, or 16,652 cables, are labelled as "secret;" and of those, 4,330
are so explosive that they are labelled "NOFORN," meaning access should not be made available to non-US nationals.
Taken together, the cables provide enough raw text to fill 66 years worth of weekly SPIEGEL magazines.


Gossip and the Unvarnished Truth


Much in the material was noted and sent because those compiling the reports or their dialogue partners believed, with
some certainty, that their transcripts would not be made public for the next 25 years. That may also explain why the
ambassadors and emissaries from Washington were so willing to report gossip and hearsay back to State Department
headquarters. One cable from the Moscow Embassy on Russian first lady Svetlana Medvedev, for example, states that
she is "generating tensions between the camps and remains the subject of avid gossip." It then goes on to report that
President Medvedev's wife had already drawn up a list of officials who should be made to "suffer" in their careers
because they had been disloyal to Medvedev. Another reports that the wife of Azerbaijan leader Ilham Aliyev has had
so much plastic surgery that it is possible to confuse her for one of her daughters from a distance, but that she can
barely still move her face.


What makes the documents particularly appealing, though, is that many politicians speak the unvarnished truth,
confident as they are that their musings will never be made public.


What, though, do the thousands of documents prove? Do they really show a US which has the world on a leash? Are
Washington's embassies still self-contained power centers in their host countries?


In sum, probably not. In the major crisis regions, an image emerges of a superpower that can no longer truly be
certain of its allies -- like in Pakistan, where the Americans are consumed by fear that the unstable nuclear power
could become precisely the place where terrorists obtain dangerous nuclear material.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771872 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771872 Date: 08/31/2015




There are similar fears in Yemen, where the US, against its better judgement, allows itself to be instrumentalized by
an unscrupulous leader. With American military aid that was intended for the fight against al-Qaida, Ali Abdullah Saleh
is now able to wage his battle against enemy tribes in the northern part of the country.


Insult to Injury


Even after the fall of Saddam Hussein, it still remained a challenge for the victorious power to assert its will on Iraq.
In Baghdad, which has seen a series of powerful US ambassadors -- men the international press often like to refer to
as American viceroys -- it is now up to Vice President Joe Biden to make repeated visits to allied Iraqi politicians in an
effort to get them to finally establish a respectable democracy. But the embassy cables make it very clear that
Obama's deputy has made little headway.


Instead, the Americans are forced to endure the endless tirades of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarek, who claims to
have always known that the Iraq war was the "biggest mistake ever committed" and who advised the Americans to
"forget about democracy in Iraq." Once the US forces depart, Mubarak said, the best way to ensure a peaceful
transition is for there to be a military coup. They are statements that add insult to injury.


On the whole, the cables from the Middle East expose the superpower's weaknesses. Washington has always viewed it
as vital to its survival to secure its share of energy reserves, but the world power is often quickly reduced to becoming
a plaything of diverse interests. And it is drawn into the animosities between Arabs and Israelis, Shiites and Sunnis,
between Islamists and secularists, between despots and kings. Often enough, the lesson of the documents that have
now been obtained, is that the Arab leaders use their friends in Washington to expand their own positions of power.


Editor's note: DER SPIEGEL's full reporting on the WikiLeaks US diplomatic cables will be published first in
the German-language edition of the magazine, which will be available on Monday to subscribers and at
newsstands in Germany and Europe. SPIEGEL ONLINE International will publish extended excerpts of
SPIEGEL's reporting in English in a series that will launch on Monday.




URL:


    •   htto://www.spiegel.de/international/world/0,1518,731580,00.html


RELATED SPIEGEL ONLINE LINKS:


    •   DER SPIEGEL E-Paper (in German)
         http://www.sviegel.de/spiegel/




@ SPIEGEL ONLINE 2010
All Rights Reserved
Reproduction only allowed with the permission of SPIEGELnet GmbH


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771872 Date: 08/31/2015
