        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767932 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                      RELEASE IN FULL



From:                           Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Sent:                           Thursday, January 14, 2010 11:37 PM
To:
Subject                         FVV: Boehner's Chief of Staff



FYI —


POLITICO
Boehner chief of staff dies at 46
By: Patrick O'Connor
January 10, 2010 01:40 PM EST

Paula Nowakowski, the longtime chief of staff to House Republican Leader John Boehner,
died unexpectedly Saturday night, according to the leader's office. She was 46.

"It is with profound sadness and shock that I announce the passing of Paula Nowakowski,
my longtime chief of staff, trusted aide and friend, who died suddenly last night," Boehner
said in a statement early Sunday afternoon. "Words cannot adequately express the sorrow
and disbelief I and every member of our team are grappling with today in the wake of this
stunning news."

A Boehner aide said the cause was an apparent heart attack.

President Barack Obama and Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) were among those who
called Boehner Sunday to offer their condolences on Nowakoski's death.

"The entire Capitol Hill community is shocked and saddened by the sudden passing of
Paula Nowakowski," Pelosi said in a statement. "As Chief of Staff to Republican Leader
John Boehner, Paula earned the respect not only of her Leadership and Conference, but
all House Members on both sides of the aisle. She served Leader Boehner both in his
current position as well as previously at the Committee on Education and the Workforce
with great distinction.

 "Paula was a thorough professional who loved the House and worked in a constructive
 and bipartisan fashion to implement policies to help the Congress function efficiently. On
 behalf of the entire House, I express our deep sadness to Paula's family, friends and our
 colleague, Leader John Boehner."

 "Paula had some of the finest qualities a public servant can have: she was committed to
 advancing the cause of freedom, she cared deeply about the people she served, and she
 was a patriot," said Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-KY.).

 "On behalf of her senate colleagues, I pass on my condolences to her family, Leader
 Boehner and his staff, and the whole House family for this tragic loss of our friend."

 It would be hard to overstate Nowakowski's role in Boehner's tight-knit office. She has
 worked for the Ohio Republican almost continuously since 1995, when she joined his staff
 as communications director for the Republican Conference.
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767932 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767932 Date: 08/31/2015




In the years since, she has worked as staff director for the Education and Labor
Committee and served as his chief of staff since he returned to the leadership in early
2006. She briefly left Boehner's side in 1998 after he lost the conference post following a
tough election for Republicans but rejoined him in 2001 when he assumed the
chairmanship of the Education and Labor Committee.

Along the way, she counseled Boehner on just about every decision he made and often
served as an enforcer of sorts for the collegial Republican leader. It would be hard to find
any chief of staff on Capitol Hill who maintained a closer relationship with her boss than
the one she shared with Boehner.

Aides said Sunday that Boehner's office and extended network of former colleagues,
known to many as "Boehner-land," were collectively shocked by the news.

"We will remember Paula as she would want to be remembered — as a tireless worker,
faithful friend, rabid Detroit sports fan, whip-smart strategist, warrior for freedom and
devoted Catholic who counted President Ronald Reagan and Pope John Paul II among
her greatest heroes. She will never be replaced or forgotten," Boehner said. "I ask for your
prayers for Paula's family."
 ©2009 Capitol News Company, LLC
FD HIDDEN DIV
Tmt Washington ost
NEWS! POLITICS I OPINIONS! BUSINESS I LOCAL I SPORTS I ARTS & LIVING I GOING OUT GUIDE I JOBS I CARS I REAL ESTATE
'SHOPPING


Paula Nowakowski, Rep. Boehner's chief of staff, dies at 46
By Martin Weil
Washington Post Staff Writer
Monday, January 11, 2010; B04

Paula Nowakowski, 46, chief of staff for House Minority Leader John A. Boehner, was found dead Jan. 10 at
her home in Alexandria.

No official cause of death was available. Antonia Ferrier, a spokeswoman for Boehner (R-Ohio), said it
appeared that Ms. Nowakowski died of a heart attack.

A longtime Hill aide, and Boehner's staff chief since 2006, Ms. Nowakowski was named by the Capitol Hill
publication Roll Call to its 2009 list of the "Fabulous Fifty" staff members. The accolade recognized her savvy,
her clout and her access to the top people in Congress.

Ms. Nowakowski, an avowed conservative, was highly regarded by leaders of both parties.

She was praised by Boehner and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.).

"It is with profound sadness and shock that I announce the passing of Paula Nowakowski, my longtime chief of
staff, trusted aide, and friend, who died suddenly," Boehner said in a statement.

"Words cannot adequately express the sorrow and disbelief I and every member of our team are grappling with
today in the wake of this stunning news," Boehner said.
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767932 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767932 Date: 08/31/2015




Pelosi called Ms. Nowakowski a "thorough professional who loved the House and worked in a constructive and
bipartisan fashion to implement policies to help the Congress function efficiently."

According to WhoRunsGov. corn, a Washington Post Co. Web site, Ms. Nowakowski grew up in St. Clair
Shores, Mich., and studied English at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.

She told Politico of being made more conservative by the campus "rise of the loony left," citing "wacky, wacky
stuff," which shaped her politics.

According to a reference book on congressional aides, she worked for the Republican National Committee in
the late 1980s and early 1990s, then joined the staff of the House Republican Conference. After two years as a
public affairs vice president of the American Insurance Association, she worked from 2001 to 2006 as staff
director of the House Committee on Education & the Workforce. A Boehner aide said she worked for him at
both the Republican Conference and the Education Committee.

Pelosi's staff chief, John Lawrence, who was Ms. Nowakowski's Democratic counterpart on the education
committee, said they transcended political differences to "work in a very collegial way to strengthen the House
itself." He called her "a great professional."

After the GOP lost its House majority in 2006 , Ms. Nowakowski said she experienced "the seven stages of
grief," according to the Almanac of the Unelected 2008, a reference on Hill staffers.

"You don't want to be a compliant minority," she said of the party's new status, "but you have to adjust your
expectations."

In his statement, Boehner called Ms. Nowakowski "a tireless worker, faithful friend and rabid Detroit sports
fan.

Survivors include her longtime companion, Michael Smith, her mother, a brother and a sister.

                                    C 2010 The Washington Post Company




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767932 Date: 08/31/2015
