      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777063 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                          RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                          B6



From:                                H <hrodl7@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                                Wednesday, June 23, 2010 11:30 AM
To:                                  'Russorv@state.gov'
Subject:                             Fw: Dear Madam Secretary, Thank you



Pls do letter of congrats, ty etc.

    Original Message
From: David Helfenbein <
To: H
Sent: Tue Jun 15 10:29:11 2010
Subject: Dear Madam Secretary, Thank you

Madam Secretary:

If you don't know my personal news yet (and I assume that you might through either Huma or Philippe), then here it is: I




Let me say first and foremost: I hope you don't see this as me leaving you or your team. I have asked the question many
times to Philippe and Huma about how you would take this news and the answer has always been the same - that you
would be happy for me - and I truly do hope that this is the case. The truth is that I applied while working in PA/PL and
was eventually wait listed and usually when wait listed you are not given the option to defer. That is neither here nor
there, but Philippe and Huma have both been incredible mentors to me throughout this entire decision-making process,
and for this, I am most grateful to them both.

The decision was not an easy one. First, Madam Secretary, you know when we first met: Believe it or not, it has been
over ten years now,                                                       You have not only been a role model and a
mentor for me throughout the years, but I have watched you behind closed doors; out in public; and quite frankly, I have
watched you both win and lose. And whether winning or losing, you are courageous: no matter what, you are
determined and inspirational.

I have seen many people join your team, leave your team, some work for a few years, others for many - and everyone
says they will still be "part of the family." Some seem to remain in touch; others don't. I see myself as a little different;
maybe you don't. Both you and President Clinton have watched me grow since I was young. More than anything, I truly
hope to remain a "part of the family."

Sometimes people ask me why I have been dedicated to working for you for so many years. It is not for fame or glory.
The truth is, I have worked for you                          because I have always believed in you. You are one of a kind -
there is no other one like you, and there never will be. I truly believe that the world needs you in whatever capacity that
you are in. And more than anything, I am most appreciative and thankful for all that you have offered me: Not only the
mentorship and guidance but the continuous opportunities to learn. On my own path of public service, I can truly say
that I was able to learn time and time again from the very best.

Parting from your team is thus not an easy task for me, especially leaving Philippe's direct team, where I really enjoy
what I am doing. But I also feel that I want to take another next step forward/a different one in my own life. And I am
hopeful that this is not a permanent goodbye in any way. I hope that you and I can remain in touch via email, and I
promise not to email too often, as I know how busy you are.


      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777063 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777063 Date: 08/31/2015




But I must reiterate one comment that I made: I have worked for you for so long for a reason: Not for my resume. Not
for myself, But because of you. I am confident enough to say that I know you well enough to tell others that I have
worked for the most brilliant mind and strongest leader I will ever see in my lifetime. And I am incredibly proud of that.

With eternal thanks and appreciation, of which cannot be summed up in words, let alone in an email,

My best, always,
David H.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777063 Date: 08/31/2015
