      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767257 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                           RELEASE IN FULL




From:                          Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivaral@state.gov>
Sent:                          Thursday, February 18, 2010 11:18 AM
To:
Subject                        FW: U.N. Rejects 'Militarization of Afghan Aid (NYT, Nordland)



FYI

       Original Message

From: Simon, Jessica L

Sent: Thursday, February 18, 2010 8:27 AM

To: SSRAP_Expanded; Deutsch, Christopher M

Cc: Cooper, Kurtis A; Pelofsky, Eric J

Subject: U.N. Rejects 'Militarization' of Afghan Aid (NYT, Nordland)

By ROD NORDLAND

Published: February 18, 2010 KABUL, Afghanistan -Senior United Nations officials
in Afghanistan on Wednesday criticized NATO forces for what one referred to as
"the militarization of humanitarian aid," and said United Nations agencies would
not participate in the military's reconstruction strategy in Marja as part of its
current offensive there. "We are not part of that process, we do not want to be
part of it," said Robert Watkins, the deputy special representative of the
secretary general, at a news conference attended by other officials to announce
the United Nations' Humanitarian Action Plan for 2010. "We will not be part of
that military strategy." The American commander in Afghanistan, Gen. Stanley A.
McChrystal, has made the rapid delivery of governmental services, including
education, health care and job programs, a central part of his strategy in Marja,
referring to plans to rapidly deploy what he has referred to as "a government in
a box" once Marja is pacified. Mr. Watkins did not specifically criticize the
Marja offensive, saying, "It is not the military that will be delivering the
services, they will be clearing the area so the government can deliver those
services." However, the United Nations would not be participating, he said. Wael
Haj-Ibrahim, head of the United Nations' Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs here, said the military should not be involved in providing
health care or schools. "If that aid is being delivered as part of a military
strategy, the counterstrategy is to destroy that aid," Mr. Haj-Ibrahim said.
"Allowing the military to do it is not the best use of resources." Instead, he
said, the military should confine itself to clearing an area of security threats
and providing security for humanitarian organizations to deliver services. "The
distribution of aid by the military gives a very difficult impression to the
communities and puts the lives of humanitarian workers at risk," Mr. Watkins
said. Last month, eight leading humanitarian organizations working in
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767257 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767257 Date: 08/31/2015




Afghanistan, including Oxfam and ActionAid, issued a joint report that was highly
critical of the International Security Assistance Force, as the American-led NATO
force is known, because of "the international militaries' use of aid as a
'nonlethal' weapon of war." They maintained that this violated an agreement
between international forces and the United Nations that the military's primary
role should be to provide security and, only when there is no other alternative,
to provide limited developmental and humanitarian assistance. The agencies
maintain they are able to work in conflict areas of Afghanistan when local
residents see them as independent and not connected with the military, and this
approach puts that at risk. "Military-led humanitarian and development activities
are driven by donors' political interests and short-term security objectives and
are often ineffective, wasteful and potentially harmful to Afghans," a statement
by Oxfam said. The United Nations officials expressed the same concern, though
more diplomatically, and one official, who did not want to be quoted by name
because of the political sensitivity of the issue, said the United Nations had
repeatedly raised those concerns with the international forces without success.
The American military refers to its strategy, first enunciated in Iraq in 2006,
as "clear, hold and build." Previously there were insufficient foreign and Afghan
troops in Afghanistan to pursue that strategy systematically because they were
unable to hold large areas for long periods of time. The offensive in Marja is
intended as a showcase where the strategy can work, and the coalition says it has
adequate forces now to do that. "Clear, hold and build, it's short-sighted for
two reasons," the United Nations official said. "Territory changes hands in a
conflict, and if the services are associated with a particular group, it will be
destroyed." That has happened often with projects like schools and clinics around
the country. The officials were particularly critical of NATO's planned "civilian
surge," bringing in more government-financed aid workers involved in projects
like the country's provincial reconstruction teams, which are located in each
province and designed to provide fast-track development and aid services in their
areas. These reconstruction teams are NATO groups run by various allied
countries, including Canada in Kandahar, and Britain in Lashkar Gah, and they
primarily disburse development and aid money locally in each province.Many of the
reconstruction teams, the official said, see their role as providing services in
exchange for intelligence-gathering and political activity directed against the
insurgents. He declined to identify any that operate under that premise, although
he added that not all did so. In many parts of the country, only nongovernmental
organizations are able to operate safely because of the security situation, and
they fill the gap in governmental services. Because the reconstruction teams are
run by foreigners and are associated with their countries' militaries, they need
to go out with heavy security, and aid groups worry that locals begin to
associate all aid workers with the military. Oxfam said the military "was going
way beyond its remit" in Afghanistan, citing an American Army counterinsurgency
manual that defines humanitarian aid as a "nonlethal weapon."A statement issued
Wednesday by the international forces emphasized the military's new, population-
centered approach to fighting the insurgents. "The conduct of Operation Moshtarak
is visibly demonstrating that the force has changed the way it operates and that
it is working with and for the people of Afghanistan," the statement said,
referring to the Marja offensive. It also suggested the military phase of the
operation could be protracted. "The insurgents are tactically adept, have
resilience and are cunning, so continued tactical patience on the part of the
combined force is important. Mining is significant in areas, and the combined
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767257 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767257 Date: 08/31/2015




force must be very deliberate in its movement in order to minimize local Afghan
and combined force casualties." The United Nations' Humanitarian Action Plan has
a proposed budget of $870.5 million, a substantial increase over previous years,
because the increased level of NATO military activity has led to increased needs
for services in many parts of the country, according the United Nations.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767257 Date: 08/31/2015
