      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767396 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.goy>
Sent:                              Wednesday, February 24, 2010 1:46 PM
To:                                Bond, Michele T
Cc:                                Kennedy, Patrick F; Lew, Jacob J; Jacobs, Janice L
Subject:                           RE: Thanks from Senator Klobuchar



So nice - congrats to you and thanks for all the work you are doing.

cdm

    Original Message
From: Bond, Michele T
Sent: Wednesday, February 24, 2010 8:21 AM
To: 'Klobuchar, Amy (Klobuchar)'
Subject: RE: Thanks from Senator Klobuchar

Dear Sen. Klobuchar,

Thank you for taking the time to send this message; you can be sure it will be read by many people. We know that we
touch lives in the course of our work, sometimes during moments of unimaginable anguish, nearly always at a time of
tremendous stress and worry. It is a privilege to be in a position to help. We never forget that the spirit and heart with
which we respond to citizens in trouble matter as much as the actions we take.

We are all celebrating the safe travel to the U.S. of these six little children, and the hundreds of others we've been able
to assist under the orphan humanitarian parole program. Thank you very much for your great work and for the valuable
information you kept sending us throughout the past few days.

Sincerely, Michele Bond

    Original Message
From: Klobuchar, Amy (Klobuchar) [mailto:AJK60@klobuchar.senate.gov]
Sent: Wednesday, February 24, 2010 7:45 AM
To: Bond, Michele T
Subject: Thanks from Senator Klobuchar

Ambassador, Counsel General Moore, Deputy Secretary Bond and embassy staff

Thanks again for all your great work on allowing the six adopted kids to leave haiti to go to their adopting families.
Please forward this to all involved. I was very impressed by how all of you handled such a difficult situation. I got a little
sense of what you were facing as the moms would call me on the hour! I know these six children are such a small part
of the challenges everyone working in haiti faces each day, but the fact that people cared so much to help gives me such
faith in our efforts and State Department staff. I will write all of this in a letter to Secretary Clinton, but please know
that there are six little children that may never meet all of you who helped, who may be too young to remeber your
work as they grow up in our country, but it is your good work that has given them their new lives. Thank you.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767396 Date: 08/31/2015
