       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766606 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                    RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                              Saturday, January 30, 2010 10:09 AM
To:
Subject:                           NI



Here's the update, pieced together from various sources:

Starting at around 3 pm Friday, Adams and McGuinness returned to Hillsborogh to meet with Robinson and Arlene
Foster. The four talked privately for several hours and then asked for the draft papers to review. The discussion
continued until around 1 am when the parties left Hillsborough. (Foster's presence is apparently very helpful. Her
relationship with the SF leaders is much more positive and direct, treating them as equal colleagues.)

Woodward and Irish FM Martin will meet with Adams and Robinson separately this afternoon to assess where the talks
are. The talks last night/early morning ended more positively and if that is still the case there may be a decision to push
on today to see if agreement can be reached. It is equally possible that the two ministers and DUP/SF will decide to
wind up today and resume on Monday.

Brown and Cowen have spoken this morning and will speak again late this afternoon.

The issue is still parades. Robinson needs some certainity of change on parades. It is important for him politically within
the DUP, but also externally since this has become a symbol of whether he has achieved something or compromised too
much. Adams and SF have moved very far from their original positions on parades, adding that Robinson has also
moved.

The DUP linkage of the timeframes for devolution and parades is not Robinson's goal but DUP deputy party leader Nigal
Dodds. Logistically, such a linkage would be impossible without delaying devolution given that the parades framework
requires consultation, legislation, and implementation.

The role of Justice Minister and his/her relationship to the Executive has been agreed. Other issues, such as Irish
language act, N-S bodies, etc, while symbolic and emotive for SF and the nationalists community can be dealt with.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766606 Date: 08/31/2015
