       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769254 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                       RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Sent:                              Tuesday, May 4, 2010 1:12 PM
To:
Subject                            FW: (Reuters) Pakistan makes arrests connected to NYC bomb attempt




From: Packer, Adam D
Sent: Tuesday, May 04, 2010 1:10 PM
To: NEWS-Mahogany; NEWS-SCA; NEWS-Pakistan; NEWS-SCT
Cc: SES-O_Shift-II
Subject: (Reuters) Pakistan makes arrests connected to NYC bomb attempt

ISLAMABAD (Reuters) - Pakistan on May 4 made several arrests in connection with the failed Times Square car bomb
attack in New York, security sources said.

"We have picked up a few family members" related to Faisal Shahzad, the chief suspect in the attempted attack, a
security official in Karachi said. A friend of Shahzad was also arrested.

Shahzad, a 30-year-old Pakistani-American, was arrested late on May 3 at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New
York after being removed from a plane as it was about take off for Dubai, American officials said.

Another intelligence official in Pakistan said Shahzad received militant training in northwest Pakistan near the garrison
town of Kohat. The area around Kohat is a stronghold of Tariq Afridi, the main Pakistani Taliban commander in the
region.

Pakistan, which could come under renewed U.S. pressure to crack down harder on militants after the Times Square
incident, vowed to help the United States bring Shahzad to justice

Shahzad will appear in Manhattan federal court to face charges "for allegedly driving a car bomb into Times Square on
the evening of May 1", according to a statement by U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara, FBI agent George Venizelos and New
York City Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly.

"We will cooperate with the United States in identifying this individual and bringing him to justice," Interior Minister
Rehman Malik told Reuters.

U.S. Ambassador to Pakistan Anne W. Patterson met Pakistani Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi and Malik and
talked about the issue, Pakistani government officials and the U.S. Embassy said.

"We have an ongoing cooperation with the United States on anti-terrorism efforts. If required by the United States, we
will extend full cooperation to them in this regard," Pakistani Foreign Ministry spokesman Abdul Basit said.

Adam Packer
Watch Officer
State Department Operations Center
(202) 647-1512




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769254 Date: 08/31/2015
