        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767727 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                       B6



From:                              sbwhoeop
Sent:                              Saturday, February 27, 2010 11:12 PM
To:
Subject:                           H: Bingo. Sid




    •     oClose Window




    •     Print this page

From The Sunday Times
February 28, 2010


Gordon Brown on course to win election
David Smith and Jonathan Oliver
GORDON BROWN is on course to remain prime minister after the general election as a new Sunday Times poll reveals
that Labour is now just two points behind the Tories.
The YouGov survey places David Cameron's Conservatives on 37%, as against 35% for Labour — the closest gap
between the parties in more than two years.
It means Labour is heading for a total of 317 seats, nine short of an overall majority, with the Tories languishing on a total
of just 263 MPs. Such an outcome would mean Brown could stay in office and deny Cameron the keys to No 10.
The poll result presents the Conservative leader with one of the greatest challenges of his leadership today as he makes
the keynote speech to his party's spring forum.
In an interview with The Sunday Times, Cameron defied his right-wing critics who believe the party's modernisation has
gone too far. He said: "Some people say to me, 'Play things safe; try to win by default — the government is in a mess.' I
say, 'No. This is the Conservative party that is offering radical change. I'm doubling up on change'."
With the expected May 6 election now just over two months away, Cameron will seek to reconnect with voters through a
series of pledges, including a plan to restore discipline in schools. In an echo of the speech that won him the Tory
leadership in 2005, he will address the Brighton conference without notes.
"This is very, very clear," he said. "I've made my choice. There is no going back. This election is about change and we will
be offering change."
Cameron insisted he was unconcerned about the collapse in Tory support. "The polls move around a lot," he said. "The
voters tell us that they want change. They want to know the Conservative party itself has changed."
The narrowing of the Conservative lead has been dramatic and rapid. Until January the Tories held close to a 10-point
 lead. But a week ago a Sunday Times YouGov poll put the gap at six points, suggesting a hung parliament, with the
 Tories still on course to become the largest party.
In the last election, in 2005, support for the parties generally held steady in the run-up to polling day. YouGov polling for
 The Sunday Times showed Labour leads of between two and five points from January through to the June election.
 Labour's margin of victory was three points.
 In today's poll, Labour has risen two points on the previous week, from 33%, while the Conservatives have dropped two
 from 39%. The Liberal Democrats are unchanged on 17%.
 The collapse in the Tory poll lead will put pressure on the pound in financial markets tomorrow by adding to fears that a
 hung parliament will mean insufficient action is taken to cut Britain's budget deficit.
 The last time the gap between the two main parties came this close and the Tory support was so low was in autumn 2007.
 That was before Brown's honeymoon ended with his failure to call a snap general election. The Conservatives went on to
 peak in May 2008 with a 26-point lead.
 Today's poll suggests recent claims about Brown's tantrums and his intimidation of staff may have actually helped him.
 Just 28% of people believe the prime minister is a bully and 50% agree he has a "strong sense of right and wrong".
 The survey disclosed growing concerns about Cameron's elite background and lack of empathy with ordinary families.
  Just 25% think that Cameron understands problems faced by "people like me", compared with 35% for Brown.

        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767727 Date: 08/31/2015
