      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773123 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                                  RELEASE IN FULL



From:                                 Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                                 Tuesday, October 19, 2010 12:37 PM
To:
Subject:                              FW: Very cool article about S tech/empowerment for women


See below

From: Ross, Alec 1
Sent: Tuesday, October 19, 2010 9:27 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Stock, Ann; Dowd, Katie W; Reines, Philippe I; Chitre, Nanda S; Crowley, Philip.]; Sullivan, Jacob 3
Subject: RE: Very cool article about S tech/empowerment for women

Yes, Sarah Granger blogging on Blogher which is the largest community of women who blog, 23+ million unique visitors
per month according to their site

From: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Tuesday, October 19, 2010 9:24 AM
To: Ross, Alec 3; Stock, Ann; Dowd, Katie W; Reines, Philippe I; Chitre, Nanda S; Crowley, Philip 3; Sullivan, Jacob 3
Subject: RE: Very cool article about S tech/empowerment for women

Where is this from? A blogger

From: Ross, Alec 3
Sent: Tuesday, October 19, 2010 9:19 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Stock, Ann; Dowd, Katie W; Reines, Philippe I; Chitre, Nanda S; Crowley, Philip 3; Sullivan, Jacob 3
Subject: Very cool article about S tech/empowerment for women

Very, very cool article.


http://www.blodher.com/hillarv-clinton-calls-techwomen-and-dreen-ciirls

Hillary Clinton Calls on TechWomen and Green Girls for Global Change


Friday night, I waited at the San Francisco Marriott Marquis, surrounded by Bomb Squad vehicles and black bulletproof SUVS, for

Hillary Clinton to speak to an audience of 1,400, only her third appearance in the United States since she took office as Secretary of

State in early 2009. Upon entering the room, she grinned widely and received a standing ovation, welcomed with open arms by the

loyal crowd. After a brief introduction, she cut straight to the point. The government needs innovation to solve our problems and the

world's problems. And she meant it.


I live tweeted much of the event, including a lengthy Q&A that brought up issues all over the world, starting with Afghanistan, leading to

our neighbors, Canada and Mexico. E.B. Boyd of FastCompany described the call for tech innovators quite well in her article, and the

full transcript of the event was published on the State.gov website. So while I could regurgitate many quotes from the two hour

Commonwealth Club event again here, I won't. Instead, I'll focus on the fine points affecting women, girls and bloggers -- our

community here at BlogHer.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773123 Date: 08/31/2015
         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773123 Date: 08/31/2015




The world is broken in so many ways. We're reminded of it every day with photos of flooded villages, exploding cities, and starving

children. Rather than taking the "glass half empty" approach and leaving it for other people to deal with, Secretary Clinton holds onto

optimism. Slowly, over generations, she believes we can solve these problems through collaboration across governments and cultures,

paired with innovative thinking and an entrepreneurial spirit. Included in this, not just as an afterthought, comes the role of women and

girls.


It's no secret Clinton is an advocate for women's rights, but she has also become a champion of global education for all, based not only

on her personal conviction but on numerous data sources showing how educating girls can change entire communities. The State

Department understands that this is a complex undertaking. But these communities also need protection. In order to help them, Clinton

explains, we must equip their governments and their people with the knowhow and a multitude of resources and tools to continue

developing on their own. Afghanistan is only one example of this, and the mWomen global initiative puts cell phones directly in the

hands of women who need them for basic communications and commerce.


Meanwhile, in more developed regions, we can provide mentorship opportunities. That's where State's new TechWomen initiative

comes in. Implemented by the Institute of International Education and the Anita Borg Institute for Women and Technology, TechWomen

will bring 38 women from Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, the West Bank and Gaza for five weeks of mentorship by leaders

in Silicon Valley companies, including Google, Twitter, HP Labs, Facebook, Symantec along with Bay Area based Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory and Sandia National Laboratories.


TechWomen provides just one way of opening up dialogues between women on how to innovate to solve global problems. It's part of

her view on "21st Century Statecraft." The State Department has also, over the past 20 months, taken extraordinary leaps in terms of

new media, for those who haven't noticed. Just look at their website now vs. two years ago (courtesy Archive.org), view their Twitter
feed, or observe their Facebook page. They're not just giving the Gov 2.0 movement lip service; they're full partners.


Which brings me back to girls. The final question from the Q&A on Friday night was from a young girl. She asked, "I am 10 years old

and I'm worried about my future environment. What can people do to help?" Clinton's soft spot couldn't have been more obvious. She

beamed at the young girl and told her "there is a lot that you can do."


Clinton continued to explain that in her experience, "young people are much more environmentally conscious and committed to

protecting the world you're growing up in than some of us older people are." (Earlier in the Q&A, she emphasized her extreme

displeasure at the lack of strong environmental legislation coming out of the Senate.) She then provided a disclaimer that she can't

comment on politics as Secretary of State, but noted, "speaking as a private citizen, I think people running for office should be asked to

explain their positions on what they're going to do." In other words, improve transparency about what candidates plan to do for the

environment and other important issues when they're elected, and hold them accountable.


After another standing ovation, Clinton stepped off the ballroom stage and departed the hotel, along with the Secret Service, Bomb

Squad trucks and darkened motorcade. But she left behind a room full of proactive thinkers, dreamers and doers, the majority of whom

were women, who will take her words to heart and make them happen. I implore the BlogHer community to join in this worthy endeavor.


Sarah Granger blogs here and there. She is curating BlogHer's political content through Election 2010.




         UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05773123 Date: 08/31/2015
