     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770567 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                       B6



From:                               sbwhoeop
Sent:                               Sunday, May 16, 2010 11:59 PM
To:
Subject:                            H: Must read when you can. Sid


H: I'm sure you are preoccupied with the adventures of Lula, et al. Nonetheless, the article below, just posted by the NY
Review, soon to be published, is a breakthrough piece that will have a large impact. It's worth reading, not least for Frank
Luntz's poll numbers. The hysterical tone of much of the Israeli leadership and US Jewish community is partly rooted in
this long-term and profound development. Sid


http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2010/jun/10/failure-american-jewish-establishment/


The Failure of the American Jewish Establishment
June 10, 2010

by Peter Beinart
E-mail Single Page Share More by Peter Beinart

a   njamin Netanyahu; drawing by John Springs
In 2003, several prominent Jewish philanthropists hired Republican pollster Frank Luntz to explain why American Jewish
 college students were not more vigorously rebutting campus criticism of Israel. In response, he unwittingly produced the
 most damning indictment of the organized American Jewish community that I have ever seen.
 The philanthropists wanted to know what Jewish students thought about Israel. Luntz found that they mostly didn't. "Six
 times we have brought Jewish youth together as a group to talk about their Jewishness and connection to Israel," he
 reported. "Six times the topic of Israel did not come up until it was prompted. Six times these Jewish youth used the word
'they' rather than 'us` to describe the situation."
 That Luntz encountered indifference was not surprising. In recent years, several studies have revealed, in the words of
 Steven Cohen of Hebrew Union College and An Kelman of the University of California at Davis, that "non-Orthodox
 younger Jews, on the whole, feel much less attached to Israel than their elders," with many professing "a near-total
 absence of positive feelings." In 2008, the student senate at Brandeis, the only nonsectarian Jewish-sponsored university
 in America, rejected a resolution commemorating the sixtieth anniversary of the Jewish state.
 Luntz's task was to figure out what had gone wrong. When he probed the students' views of Israel, he hit up against some
 firm beliefs. First, "they reserve the right to question the Israeli position." These young Jews, Luntz explained, "resist
 anything they see as 'group think." They want an "open and frank" discussion of Israel and its flaws. Second, "young
 Jews desperately want peace." When Luntz showed them a series of ads, one of the most popular was entitled "Proof that
 Israel Wants Peace," and listed offers by various Israeli governments to withdraw from conquered land. Third, "some
 empathize with the plight of the Palestinians." When Luntz displayed ads depicting Palestinians as violent and hateful,
 several focus group participants criticized them as stereotypical and unfair, citing their own Muslim friends.
 Most of the students, in other words, were liberals, broadly defined. They had imbibed some of the defining values of
 American Jewish political culture: a belief in open debate, a skepticism about military force, a commitment to human
 rights. And in their innocence, they did not realize that they were supposed to shed those values when it came to Israel.
  The only kind of Zionism they found attractive was a Zionism that recognized Palestinians as deserving of dignity and
  capable of peace, and they were quite willing to condemn an Israeli government that did not share those beliefs. Luntz did
  not grasp the irony. The only kind of Zionism they found attractive was the kind that the American Jewish establishment
  has been working against for most of their lives.
  Among American Jews today, there are a great many Zionists, especially in the Orthodox world, people deeply devoted to
  the State of Israel. And there are a great many liberals, especially in the secular Jewish world, people deeply devoted to
  human rights for all people, Palestinians included. But the two groups are increasingly distinct. Particularly in the younger
  generations, fewer and fewer American Jewish liberals are Zionists; fewer and fewer American Jewish Zionists are liberal.
  One reason is that the leading institutions of American Jewry have refused to foster—indeed, have actively opposed—a
  Zionism that challenges Israel's behavior in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and toward its own Arab citizens. For several

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770567 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770567 Date: 08/31/2015



decades, the Jewish establishment has asked American Jews to check their liberalism at Zionism's door, and now, to their
horror, they are finding that many young Jews have checked their Zionism instead.
Morally, American Zionism is in a downward spiral. If the leaders of groups like AIPAC and the Conference of Presidents
of Major American Jewish Organizations do not change course, they will wake up one day to find a younger, Orthodox-
dominated, Zionist leadership whose naked hostility to Arabs and Palestinians scares even them, and a mass of secular
American Jews who range from apathetic to appalled. Saving liberal Zionism in the United States—so that American Jews
can help save liberal Zionism in Israel—is the great American Jewish challenge of our age. And it starts where Luntz's
students wanted it to start: by talking frankly about Israel's current government, by no longer averting our eyes.
Since the 1990s, journalists and scholars have been describing a bifurcation in Israeli society. In the words of Hebrew
University political scientist Yaron Ezrahi, "After decades of what came to be called a national consensus, the Zionist
narrative of liberation [has] dissolved into openly contesting versions." One version, "founded on a long memory of
persecution, genocide, and a bitter struggle for survival, is pessimistic, distrustful of non-Jews, and believing only in
Jewish power and solidarity." Another, "nourished by secularized Versions of messianism as well as the Enlightenment
idea of progress," articulates "a deep sense of the limits of military force, and a commitment to liberal-democratic values."
Every country manifests some kind of ideological divide. But in contemporary Israel, the gulf is among the widest on earth.
As Ezrahi and others have noted, this latter, liberal-democratic Zionism has grown alongside a new individualism,
particularly among secular Israelis, a greater demand for free expression, and a greater skepticism of coercive authority.
You can see this spirit in "new historians" like Tom Segev who have fearlessly excavated the darker corners of the Zionist
past and in jurists like former Supreme Court President Aharon Barak who have overturned Knesset laws that violate the
human rights guarantees in Israel's "Basic Laws." You can also see it in former Prime Minister Ehud Barak's apparent
willingness to relinquish much of the West Bank in 2000 and early 2001.
But in Israel today, this humane, universalistic Zionism does not wield power. To the contrary, it is gasping for air. To
understand how deeply antithetical its values are to those of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's government, it's worth
considering the case of Effi Eitam. Eitam, a charismatic ex–cabinet minister and war hero, has proposed ethnically
cleansing Palestinians from the West Bank. "We'll have to expel the overwhelming majority of West Bank Arabs from here
and remove Israeli Arabs from [the] political system," he declared in 2006. In 2008, Eitam merged his small Ahi Party into
Netanyahu's Likud. And for the 2009-2010 academic year, he is Netanyahu's special emissary for overseas "campus
engagement." In that capacity, he visited a dozen American high schools and colleges last fall on the Israeli government's
behalf. The group that organized his tour was called "Caravan for Democracy."
Israeli Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman once shared Eitam's views. In his youth, he briefly joined Meir Kahane's now
banned Kach Party, which also advocated the expulsion of Arabs from Israeli soil. Now Lieberman's position might be
called "pre-expulsion." He wants to revoke the citizenship of Israeli Arabs who won't swear a loyalty oath to the Jewish
state. He tried to prevent two Arab parties that opposed Israel's 2008-2009 Gaza war from running candidates for the
Knesset. He said Arab Knesset members who met with representatives of Hamas should be executed. He wants to jail
Arabs who publicly mourn on Israeli Independence Day, and he hopes to permanently deny citizenship to Arabs from
other countries who marry Arab citizens of Israel.
You don't have to be paranoid to see the connection between Lieberman's current views and his former ones. The more
you strip Israeli Arabs of legal protection, and the more you accuse them of treason, the more thinkable a policy of
expulsion becomes. Lieberman's American defenders often note that in theory he supports a Palestinian state. What they
usually fail to mention is that for him, a two-state solution means redrawing Israel's border so that a large chunk of Israeli
Arabs find themselves exiled to another country, without their consent.
Lieberman served as chief of staff during Netanyahu's first term as prime minister. And when it comes to the West Bank,
Netanyahu's own record is in its way even more extreme than his protégé's. In his 1993 book, A Place among the
Nations, Netanyahu not only rejects the idea of a Palestinian state, he denies that there is such a thing as a Palestinian. In
fact, he repeatedly equates the Palestinian bid for statehood with Nazism. An Israel that withdraws from the West Bank,
he has declared, would be a "ghetto-state" with "Auschwitz borders." And the effort "to gouge Judea and Samaria [the
West Bank] out of Israel" resembles Hitler's bid to wrench the German-speaking "Sudeten district" from Czechoslovakia in
1938. It is unfair, Netanyahu insists, to ask Israel to concede more territory since it has already made vast, gut-wrenching
concessions. What kind of concessions? It has abandoned its claim to Jordan, which by rights should be part of the
 Jewish state.
On the left of Netanyahu's coalition sits Ehud Barak's emasculated Labor Party, but whatever moderating potential it may
have is counterbalanced by what is, in some ways, the most illiberal coalition partner of all, Shas, the ultra-Orthodox party
representing Jews of North African and Middle Eastern descent. At one point, Shas—like some of its Ashkenazi ultra-
Orthodox counterparts—was open to dismantling settlements. In recent years, however, ultra-Orthodox Israelis, anxious
 to find housing for their large families, have increasingly moved to the West Bank, where thanks to government subsidies
 it is far cheaper to live. Not coincidentally, their political parties have swung hard against territorial compromise. And they
 have done so with a virulence that reflects ultra-Orthodox Judaism's profound hostility to liberal values. Rabbi Ovadia
 Yosef, Shas's immensely powerful spiritual leader, has called Arabs "vipers," "snakes," and "ants." In 2005, after Prime
 Minister Ariel Sharon proposed dismantling settlements in the Gaza Strip, Yosef urged that "God strike him down." The
 official Shas newspaper recently called President Obama "an Islamic extremist."
 Hebrew University Professor Ze'ev Sternhell is an expert on fascism and a winner of the prestigious Israel Prize.
 Commenting on Lieberman and the leaders of Shas in a recent Op-Ed in Haaretz, he wrote, "The last time politicians

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770567 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770567 Date: 08/31/2015



holding views similar to theirs were in power in post–World War II Western Europe was in Franco's Spain." With their
blessing, "a crude and multifaceted campaign is being waged against the foundations of the democratic and liberal order."
Sternhell should know. In September 2008, he was injured when a settler set off a pipe bomb at his house.
Israeli governments come and go, but the Netanyahu coalition is the product of frightening, long-term trends in Israeli
society: an ultra-Orthodox population that is increasing dramatically, a settler movement that is growing more radical and
more entrenched in the Israeli bureaucracy and army, and a Russian immigrant community that is particularly prone to
anti-Arab racism. In 2009, a poll by the Israel Democracy Institute found that 53 percent of Jewish Israelis (and 77 percent
of recent immigrants from the former USSR) support encouraging Arabs to leave the country. Attitudes are worst among
Israel's young. When Israeli high schools held mock elections last year, Lieberman won. This March, a poll found that 56
percent of Jewish Israeli high school students—and more than 80 percent of religious Jewish high school students—
would deny Israeli Arabs the right to be elected to the Knesset. An education ministry official called the survey "a huge
warning signal in light of the strengthening trends of extremist views among the youth."
You might think that such trends, and the sympathy for them expressed by some in Israel's government, would occasion
substantial public concern—even outrage—among the leaders of organized American Jewry. You would be wrong. In
Israel itself, voices from the left, and even center, warn in increasingly urgent tones about threats to Israeli democracy.
(Former Prime Ministers Ehud Olmert and Ehud Barak have both said that Israel risks becoming an "apartheid state" if it
continues to hold the West Bank. This April, when settlers forced a large Israeli bookstore to stop selling a book critical of
the occupation, Shulamit Aloni, former head of the dovish Meretz Party, declared that "Israel has not been democratic for
some time now.") But in the United States, groups like AIPAC and the Presidents' Conference patrol public discourse,
scolding people who contradict their vision of Israel as a state in which all leaders cherish democracy and yearn
for peace.
The result is a terrible irony. In theory, mainstream American Jewish organizations still hew to a liberal vision of Zionism.
On its website, AIPAC celebrates Israel's commitment to "free speech and minority rights." The Conference of Presidents
declares that "Israel and the United States share political, moral and intellectual values including democracy, freedom,
security and peace." These groups would never say, as do some in Netanyahu's coalition, that Israeli Arabs don't deserve
full citizenship and West Bank Palestinians don't deserve human rights. But in practice, by defending virtually anything
any Israeli government does, they make themselves intellectual bodyguards for Israeli leaders who threaten the very
liberal values they profess to admire.
After Israel's elections last February, for instance, Malcolm Hoenlein, executive vice-chairman of the Presidents'
Conference, explained that Avigdor Lieberman's agenda was "far more moderate than the media has presented it."
Insisting that Lieberman bears no general animus toward Israeli Arabs, Abraham Foxman, national director of the Anti-
Defamation League, told the Jewish Telegraphic Agency that "He's not saying expel them. He's not saying punish them."
(Permanently denying citizenship to their Arab spouses or jailing them if they publicly mourn on Israeli Independence Day
evidently does not qualify as punishment.) The ADL has criticized anti-Arab bigotry in the past, and the American Jewish
Committee, to its credit, warned that Lieberman's proposed loyalty oath would "chill Israel's democratic political debate."
But the Forward summed up the overall response of America's communal Jewish leadership in its headline "Jewish
Leaders Largely Silent on Lieberman's Role in Government."
Not only does the organized American Jewish community mostly avoid public criticism of the Israeli government, it tries to
prevent others from leveling such criticism as well. In recent years, American Jewish organizations have waged a
campaign to discredit the world's most respected international human rights groups. In 2006, Foxman called an Amnesty
International report on Israeli killing of Lebanese civilians "bigoted, biased, and borderline anti-Semitic." The Conference
of Presidents has announced that "biased NGOs include Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, Christian Aid, [and]
Save the Children." Last summer, an AIPAC spokesman declared that Human Rights Watch "has repeatedly
demonstrated its anti-Israel bias." When the Obama administration awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom to Mary
Robinson, former UN high commissioner for human rights, the ADL and AIPAC both protested, citing the fact that she had
presided over the 2001 World Conference Against Racism in Durban, South Africa. (Early drafts of the conference report
implicitly accused Israel of racism. Robinson helped expunge that defamatory charge, angering Syria and Iran.)
Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International are not infallible. But when groups like AIPAC and the Presidents'
 Conference avoid virtually all public criticism of Israeli actions—directing their outrage solely at Israel's neighbors—they
leave themselves in a poor position to charge bias. Moreover, while American Jewish groups claim that they are simply
 defending Israel from its foes, they are actually taking sides in a struggle within Israel between radically different Zionist
 visions. At the very moment the Anti-Defamation League claimed that Robinson harbored an "animus toward Israel," an
alliance of seven Israeli human rights groups publicly congratulated her on her award. Many of those groups, like
 B'Tselem, which monitors Israeli actions in the Occupied Territories, and the Israeli branch of Physicians for Human
 Rights, have been at least as critical of Israel's actions in Lebanon, Gaza, and the West Bank as have Amnesty
International and Human Rights Watch.
 All of which raises an uncomfortable question. If American Jewish groups claim that Israel's overseas human rights critics
 are motivated by anti- Israeli, if not anti-Semitic, bias, what does that say about Israel's domestic human rights critics?
 The implication is clear: they must be guilty of self-hatred, if not treason. American Jewish leaders don't generally say
 that, of course, but their allies in the Netanyahu government do. Last summer, Israel's vice prime minister, Moshe Ya'alon,
 called the anti-occupation group Peace Now a "virus." This January, a right-wing group called Im Tirtzu accused Israeli
 human rights organizations of having fed information to the Goldstone Commission that investigated Israel's Gaza war. A

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770567 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770567 Date: 08/31/2015



Knesset member from Netanyahu's Likud promptly charged Naomi Chazan, head of the New Israel Fund, which supports
some of those human rights groups, with treason, and a member of Lieberman's party launched an investigation aimed at
curbing foreign funding of Israeli NG0s.
To their credit, Foxman and other American Jewish leaders opposed the move, which might have impaired their own
work. But they are reaping what they sowed. If you suggest that mainstream human rights criticism of Israel's government
is motivated by animus toward the state, or toward Jews in general, you give aid and comfort to those in Israel who make
the same charges against the human rights critics in their midst.
In the American Jewish establishment today, the language of liberal Zionism—with its idioms of human rights, equal
citizenship, and territorial compromise—has been drained of meaning. It remains the lingua franca in part for generational
reasons, because many older American Zionists still see themselves as liberals of a sort. They vote Democratic; they are
unmoved by biblical claims to the West Bank; they see average Palestinians as decent people betrayed by bad leaders;
and they are secular. They don't want Jewish organizations to criticize Israel from the left, but neither do they want them
to be agents of the Israeli right.
These American Zionists are largely the product of a particular era. Many were shaped by the terrifying days leading up to
the Six-Day War, when it appeared that Israel might be overrun, and by the bitter aftermath of the Yom Kippur War, when
much of the world seemed to turn against the Jewish state. In that crucible, Israel became their Jewish identity, often in
conjunction with the Holocaust, which the 1967 and 1973 wars helped make central to American Jewish life. These Jews
embraced Zionism before the settler movement became a major force in Israeli politics, before the 1982 Lebanon war,
before the first intifada. They fell in love with an Israel that was more secular, less divided, and less shaped by the culture,
politics, and theology of occupation. And by downplaying the significance of Avigdor Lieberman, the settlers, and Shas,
American Jewish groups allow these older Zionists to continue to identify with that more internally cohesive, more
innocent Israel of their youth, an Israel that now only exists in their memories.
But these secular Zionists aren't reproducing themselves. Their children have no memory of Arab armies massed on
Israel's border and of Israel surviving in part thanks to urgent military assistance from the United States. Instead, they
have grown up viewing Israel as a regional hegemon and an occupying power. As a result, they are more conscious than
their parents of the degree to which Israeli behavior violates liberal ideals, and less willing to grant Israel an exemption
because its survival seems in peril. Because they have inherited their parents' liberalism, they cannot embrace their
uncritical Zionism. Because their liberalism is real, they can see that the liberalism of the American Jewish establishment
is fake.
To sustain their uncritical brand of Zionism, therefore, America's Jewish organizations will need to look elsewhere to
replenish their ranks. They will need to find young American. Jews who have come of age during the West Bank
occupation but are not troubled by it. And those young American Jews will come disproportionately from the
Orthodox world.
Because they marry earlier, intermarry less, and have more children, Orthodox Jews are growing rapidly as a share of the
American Jewish population. According to a 2006 American Jewish Committee (AJC) survey, while Orthodox Jews make
up only 12 percent of American Jewry over the age of sixty, they constitute 34 percent between the ages of eighteen and
twenty-four. For America's Zionist organizations, these Orthodox youngsters are a potential bonanza. In their yeshivas
they learn devotion to Israel from an early age; they generally spend a year of religious study there after high school, and
often know friends or relatives who have immigrated to Israel. The same AJC study found that while only 16 percent of
non-Orthodox adult Jews under the age of forty feel "very close to Israel," among the Orthodox the figure is 79 percent. As
secular Jews drift away from America's Zionist institutions, their Orthodox counterparts will likely step into the breach. The
Orthodox "are still interested in parochial Jewish concerns," explains Samuel Heilman, a sociologist at the City University
of New York. "They are among the last ones who stayed in the Jewish house, so they now control the lights."
 But it is this very parochialism—a deep commitment to Jewish concerns, which often outweighs more universal ones—
that gives Orthodox Jewish Zionism a distinctly illiberal cast. The 2006 AJC poll found that while 60 percent of non-
 Orthodox American Jews under the age of forty support a Palestinian state, that figure drops to 25 percent among the
 Orthodox. In 2009, when Brandeis University's Theodore Sasson asked American Jewish focus groups about Israel, he
 found Orthodox participants much less supportive of dismantling settlements as part of a peace deal. Even more tellingly,
 Reform, Conservative, and unaffiliated Jews tended to believe that average Palestinians wanted peace, but had been ill-
 served by their leaders. Orthodox Jews, by contrast, were more likely to see the Palestinian people as the enemy, and to
 deny that ordinary Palestinians shared any common interests or values with ordinary Israelis or Jews.
 Orthodox Judaism has great virtues, including a communal warmth and a commitment to Jewish learning unmatched in
 the American Jewish world. (I'm biased, since my family attends an Orthodox synagogue.) But if current trends continue,
 the growing influence of Orthodox Jews in America's Jewish communal institutions will erode even the liberal-democratic
 veneer that today covers American Zionism. In 2002, America's major Jewish organizations sponsored a large Israel
 solidarity rally on the Washington Mall. Up and down the east coast, yeshivas shut down for the day, swelling the
 estimated Orthodox share of the crowd to close to 70 percent. When the then Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul
 Wolfowitz told the rally that "innocent Palestinians are suffering and dying as well," he was booed.
 America's Jewish leaders should think hard about that rally. Unless they change course, it portends the future: an
 American Zionist movement that does not even feign concern for Palestinian dignity and a broader American Jewish
 population that does not even feign concern for Israel. My own children, given their upbringing, could as easily end up
 among the booers as among Luntz's focus group. Either prospect fills me with dread.

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770567 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770567 Date: 08/31/2015




 In 2004, in an effort to prevent weapons smuggling from Egypt, Israeli tanks and bulldozers demolished hundreds of
 houses in the Rafah refugee camp in the southern Gaza Strip. Watching television, a veteran Israeli commentator and
 politician named Tommy Lapid saw an elderly Palestinian woman crouched on all fours looking for her medicines amid the
 ruins of her home. He said she reminded him of his grandmother.
 In that moment, Lapid captured the spirit that is suffocating within organized American Jewish life. To begin with, he
 watched. In my experience, there is an epidemic of not watching among American Zionists today. A Red Cross study on
 malnutrition in the Gaza Strip, a bill in the Knesset to allow Jewish neighborhoods to bar entry to Israeli Arabs, an Israeli
 human rights report on settlers burning Palestinian olive groves, three more Palestinian teenagers shot—it's unpleasant.
 Rationalizing and minimizing Palestinian suffering has become a kind of game. In a more recent report on how to foster
 Zionism among America's young, Luntz urges American Jewish groups to use the word "Arabs, not Palestinians," since
 "the term `Palestinians' evokes images of refugee camps, victims and oppression," while "Arab' says wealth, oil
 and Islam."
 Of course, Israel—like the United States—must sometimes take morally difficult actions in its own defense. But they are
 morally difficult only if you allow yourself some human connection to the other side. Otherwise, security justifies
 everything. The heads of AIPAC and the Presidents' Conference should ask themselves what Israel's leaders would have
 to do or say to make them scream "no." After all, Lieberman is foreign minister; Effi Eitam is touring American universities;
 settlements are growing at triple the rate of the Israeli population; half of Israeli Jewish high school students want Arabs
 barred from the Knesset. If the line has not yet been crossed, where is the line?
 What infuriated critics about Lapid's comment was that his grandmother died at Auschwitz. How dare he defile the
 memory of the Holocaust? Of course, the Holocaust is immeasurably worse than anything Israel has done or ever will do.
•But at least Lapid used Jewish suffering to connect to the suffering of others. In the world of AIPAC, the Holocaust
 analogies never stop, and their message is always the same: Jews are licensed by their victimhood to worry only about
 themselves. Many of Israel's founders believed that with statehood, Jews would rightly be judged on the way they treated
 the non-Jews living under their dominion. "For the first time we shall be the majority living with a minority," Knesset
 member Pinchas Lavon declared in 1948, "and we shall be called upon to provide an example and prove how Jews live
 with a minority."
 But the message of the American Jewish establishment and its allies in the Netanyahu government is exactly the
 opposite: since Jews are history's permanent victims, always on the knife-edge of extinction, moral responsibility is a
 luxury Israel does not have. Its only responsibility is to survive. As former Knesset speaker Avraham Burg writes in his
 remarkable 2008 book, The Holocaust Is Over; We Must Rise From Its Ashes, "Victimhood sets you free."
 This obsession with victimhood lies at the heart of why Zionism is dying among America's secular Jewish young. It simply
 bears no relationship to their lived experience, or what they have seen of Israel's. Yes, Israel faces threats from Hezbollah
 and Hamas. Yes, Israelis understandably worry about a nuclear Iran. But the dilemmas you face when you possess
 dozens or hundreds of nuclear weapons, and your adversary, however despicable, may acquire one, are not the
 dilemmas of the Warsaw Ghetto. The year 2010 is not, as Benjamin Netanyahu has claimed, 1938. The drama of Jewish
 victimhood—a drama that feels natural to many Jews who lived through 1938, 1948, or even 1967—strikes most of
 today's young American Jews as farce.
 But there is a different Zionist calling, which has never been more desperately relevant. It has its roots in Israel's
 Independence Proclamation, which promised that the Jewish state "will be based on the precepts of liberty, justice and
 peace taught by the Hebrew prophets," and in the December 1948 letter from Albert Einstein, Hannah Arendt, and others
 to The New York Times, protesting right-wing Zionist leader Menachem Begin's visit to the United States after his party's
 militias massacred Arab civilians in the village of Deir Yassin. It is a call to recognize that in a world in which Jewish
 fortunes have radically changed, the best way to memorialize the history of Jewish suffering is through the ethical use of
  Jewish power.
 For several months now, a group of Israeli students has been traveling every Friday to the East Jerusalem neighborhood
 of Sheikh Jarrah, where a Palestinian family named the Ghawis lives on the street outside their home of fifty-three years,
  from which they were evicted to make room for Jewish settlers. Although repeatedly arrested for protesting without a
  permit, and called traitors and self-haters by the Israeli right, the students keep coming, their numbers now swelling into
  the thousands. What if American Jewish organizations brought these young people to speak at Hillel? What if this was the
  face of Zionism shown to America's Jewish young? What if the students in Luntz's focus group had been told that their
  generation faces a challenge as momentous as any in Jewish history: to save liberal democracy in the only Jewish state
  on earth?
  "Too many years I lived in the warm embrace of institutionalized elusiveness and was a part of it," writes Avraham Burg. "I
  was very comfortable there." I know; I was comfortable there too. But comfortable Zionism has become a moral
  abdication. Let's hope that Luntz's students, in solidarity with their counterparts at Sheikh Jarrah, can foster an
  uncomfortable Zionism, a Zionism angry at what Israel risks becoming, and in love with what it still could be. Let's hope
  they care enough to try.
  —May 12, 2010 .
  Peter Beinart is Associate Professor of Journalism and Political Science at the City University of New York, a Senior
  Fellow at the New America Foundation, and Senior Political Writer for The Daily Beast. His new book, The Icarus
  Syndrome: A History of American Hubris, will be published in June.


     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770567 Date: 08/31/2015
