   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774885 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              H <hrod17@clintonemail.com >
Sent:                              Tuesday, June 1, 2010 5:05 AM
To:                                'abedinh@state.gov'
Subject:                           Re: Fyi



Are you meeting me at shuttle?

    Original Message
From: Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
To: H
Sent: Tue Jun 01 05:01:58 2010
Subject: Fyi

SECURITY COUNCIL PRESIDENTIAL STATEMENT ON THE RECENT INCIDENT IN THE EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN

The Security Council deeply regrets the loss of life and injuries resulting from the use of force during the Israeli military
operation in international waters against the convoy sailing to Gaza. The Council, in this context, condemns those acts
which resulted in the loss of at least ten civilians and many wounded, and expresses its condolences to their
families. The Security Council requests the immediate release of the ships as well as the civilians held by Israel. The
Council urges Israel to permit full consular access, to allow the countries concerned to retrieve their deceased and
wounded immediately, and to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance from the convoy to its destination. The
Security Council takes note of the statement of the UN Secretary—General on the need to have a full investigation into
the matter and it calls for a prompt, impartial, credible and transparent investigation conforminglo international
standards. The Security Council stresses that the situation in Gaza is not sustainable. The Council re-emphasizes the
importance of the full implementation of Resolutions 1850 and 1860. In that context, it reiterates its grave concern at
the humanitarian situation in Gaza and stresses the need for sustained and regular flow of goods and people to Gaza as
well as unimpeded provision and distribution of humanitarian assistance throughout Gaza. The Security Council
underscores that the only viable solution to Israeli-Palestinian conflict is an agreement negotiated between the parties
and re-emphasizes that only a two-State solution, with an independent and viable Palestinian State living side by side in
peace and security with Israel and its other neighbours, could bring peace to the region. The Security Council expresses
support for the proximity talks and voices concern that this incident took place while the proximity talks are underway
and urges the parties to act with restraint, avoiding any unilateral and provocative actions, and all international partners
to promote an atmosphere of cooperation between the parties and throughout the region.




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05774885 Date: 08/31/2015
