      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777514 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                RELEASE IN FULL




From:                            Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                            Sunday, December 5, 2010 9:52 PM
To:
Subject:                         Fw: Amb. Khalilzad on This Week with Christiane Amanpour



Fyi



From: Zhu, Ningchuan
To: Ruggiero, Frank); Feldman, Daniel F; Singh, Vikram 3; Pauli, Rosemarie; Bommer, Ashley F; Sullivan, Jacob );
S_SpecialAssistants; SSRAP StaffAssistants
Cc: LaVine, Christopher M
Sent: Sun Dec 05 12:24:41 2010
Subject: Amb. KhallIzad on This Week with Christiane Amanpour

From today's roundtable on Afghanistan with Amb. Khalilzad, George Will, and Zbigniew Brzezinski:

ZB: ... We haven't had a better alternative than Karzai, and yet some of our officials have
made a sport of maligning him. This business of corruption doesn't take into account
cultural differences. And last but not least, who are we here in Washington to be moaning
and groaning about corruption?

CA: Let me ask you then, should Ambassador Eikenberry leave? I mean, has he done a good job,
do you think, for the diplomacy, George?

GW: Well he has a hopeless job to do, so it's hard to say whether he's done it well. If he
should leave because of what was said in the -

CA: What he has written in the cables?

GW: Well, who's going to be left in the government, starting with the Secretary of State?

ZK: I think he has been damaged very badly by the leaks that have taken place here in
Washington, before WikiLeaks and afterwards. And a trusting relationship, if that is the
objective, and I believe it ought to be, would require I think changes to the personnel that
are responsible on a day-to-day basis in dealing with President Karzai.

... [exchange about corruption and about Iran]

CA: Do you think, I asked George, Ambassador Eikenberry is doing a good job and should he
stay in his position?
ZK: Well I think he's doing a good job, but I think he's no longer an effective interlocutor
due to the leaks.

CA: Which means?

ZK: Which means that if we want to deal with the issue of partnership with the government of
Afghanistan, if we want to deal with the issue of domestic politics effectively, catalyzing
cooperation, we would need to have a new team to be able to do that.




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05777514 Date: 08/31/2015
