     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771950 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                       RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                       B5,B6


From:                              Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov >
Sent:                              Monday, November 29, 2010 7:37 AM
To:
Subject:                           Fw: (AP) Israel says Arabs agree on Iran threat




From: Jackson, Christine P
To: NEWS-Wikleaks; NEWS-NEA; NEWS-Mahogany
Cc: SES-O_Shift-II; SES-O_OS
Sent: Mon Nov 29 07:30:22 2010
Subject: (AP) Israel says Arabs agree on Iran threat

TEL AVIV (AP) - Israel's prime minister says newly leaked U.S. diplomatic cables provide clear proof that the Arab world
agrees with his country's assessment that Iran is the chief danger to the Middle East. Benjamin Netanyahu said on
November 29 "that the greatest threat to peace in the region, if not in the world, has been revealed." According to the
cables released November 28 by Wikileaks, various Arab countries including Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and other Gulf
states, have used terms like "evil" and "existential threat" to describe Iran. Some urged U.S. airstrikes on Iranian nuclear
facilities. Netanyahu said that if Arab leaders would say in public what they say privately "there might be a
breakthrough."




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771950 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771950 Date: 08/31/2015




From:                               Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sent:                               Monday, November 29, 2010 8:06 AM
To:
Subject:                            Fw: Turkish Media Reaction - Wikileaks, November 29, 2010




From: Gordon, Philip H
To: Sullivan, Jacob); Abedin, Huma; Burns, William 3
Sent: Mon Nov 29 08:02:57 2010
Subject: FW: Turkish Media Reaction - Wikileaks, November 29, 2010

Here is first cut from Turkish media.


This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




From: Guido, Deborah L
Sent: Mon Nov 29 05:35:04 2010
Subject: Turkish Media Reaction - Wikileaks, November 29, 2010

Media Highlights: Revelations by WikiLeaks — Turkey is the Epicenter

US Embassy Ankara — Turkey Media Reaction — November 29, 2010 as prepared by the Public Affairs Information
Office

How the US is Playing/Related News

Ankara Is WikiLeaks Epicenter (Hurriyet)
Turkish media is awash in Wikileaks revelations, with most focused on the 7,918 cables - the largest number for any one
country - emanating from the US Embassy in Ankara. All news channels NW and CNN Turk reported that PM Erdogan,
as he departed for Libya on 11/29, told reporters "let the Wikileaks show what it has and, then, ...we can learn how serious
or unserious these reports are because the credibility of Wikileaks is in question. So, currently we are waiting for them to
print what they have. Then we can make an evaluation and necessary statement." Pro-government Sabah columnist
Mehmet Barlas asks "Are Wikileaks Docs More Striking than Reality?" and opines "It's hard to understand why the State
Department has panicked this much. After all, this information is gathered from the facts, media, and different
sources. What could remain secret in an information age?" Ashi Aydintasbas in Miffiyet Over the past year, the AK Party
government had a volatile relationship with the Obama Administration. The documents show that Americans do not see
the government in Ankara as a real ally, and that they have concerns. Unlike the style used in bilateral meetings, a much
tougher language is used backstage. The fact that the Turkish foreign minister knows his interlocutors characterize him as
'dangerous' at a time he's in Washington will stiffen the distrustfulness between the two capitals." In "Ankara WikiLeaks
Epicenter," mainstream Hurriyefs front page headline report mirrors most Turkish media reports in saying that the
documents show that the US Embassy in Ankara views Turkey "as a country with divisions in leadership" and that "Turkey
cannot be trusted because it was not likely to join the EU and was heading to an Islamist future." Hurriyet spotlights reports
that purportedly say Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan had "incompetent" advisors and was pursuing a secret, Islamist agenda
and that describe him as "stubborn, workaholic and perfectionist," but "not a tyrant." Hurriyet concludes that reports indicated
that that the US views Turkish Foreign Minister Davutoglu as an "exceptionally dangerous" figure and that "America had
been alarmed by his aspirations to reassert the influence the Ottoman Empire used to exert on the region." In "9/11 of
Diplomacy: WikiLeaks Releases 'Secret State Documents," Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that Ankara believes [the high
number of cables from the US Embassy in Ankara] proves Turkey's importance and its diplomatic effectiveness." In "The
WikiLeaks Bomb," pro-government, Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports the WikiLeaks releases contain "shocking details"

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771950 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771950 Date: 08/31/2015



such as the chief of Mossad, Meir Dagan, telling an American official Islam was on the rise in Turkey, and "asking for how
long the military, the defender of the secular identity, would remain silent." Other media cover the story as follows:

In its two-page spread, Zaman chronicles details of a FM Davutoglu —A/S Gordon meeting from November 12, 2009 in
which the US side asks Turkey to take a tougher position against Iran if Tehran disregards international pressure, as well
as a February 18, 2010 meeting between U/S of State William Burns and Turkish Foreign Ministry U/S Feridun Sinirlioglu
on Iraq.

In "Hell Breaks Loose," mainstream Vatan focuses on the detailed US reports about Prime Minister Erdogan and AK
Party. The paper notes on its centerfold piece that Ergenekon was closely watched by the US and that US officials were
holding talks with Turkish generals. Both the Turkish government and the Turkish army were under close US
surveillance, notes Vatan.

Pro-government Sabah in "Turkey Mark in WikiLeaks Documents," says the State Department has been waiting for the
Wikileaks release with "curiosity and fear." Iran, Azerbaijan and the EU stand on the forefront in documents related to
Turkey, says the paper.

Leftist Taraf in its front page banner headline, "They Monitored Even Erdogan's Son-in-Law," notes "in the documents,
business connections of PM Erdogan's son-in-law were closely watched by the US. It's claimed that Erdogan rules
Turkey with a group of incapable plotters."

Mainstream Aksam in "9/11 of Diplomacy," mentions American diplomats find Davutoglu very dangerous and add that
"Turkey, with its axis shifting to East, is heading to an Islamist state."

Liberal Radikal and most media including the CNN-Turk headline "9/11 of Diplomacy." Radikal highlights "there was a
struggle to prevent Wikileaks from releasing the secret documents but that "the documents that could put the relations
with the US in trouble have been released anyway."

In "Hell Breaks Loose," mainstream Vatan focuses on the detailed US reports about Prime Minister Erdogan and AK
Party. The paper notes on its centerfold piece that Ergenekon was closely watched by the US and that US officials were
holding talks with Turkish generals. Both the Turkish government and the Turkish army were under close US
surveillance, notes Vatan.

Commentary In Full: "WikiLeaks Crypto will Cause Crisis in Washington" (Milliyet)
Ash i Aydintasbas in Miffiyet: "Three elements might cause damage between Ankara and Washington in the WikiLeaks
revelations related to Turkey. First comes the claim that Turkey has helped al-Qaeda. A high level official believes this
claim will not be convincing, because Ankara has proven itself in fighting against al-Qaeda. We recently see a flurry of
news relating Turkey to al-Qaeda. All Turkish officials I have spoken with believe that such reports had been a campaign
against Turkey which was launched right after the Mavi Marmara crisis. The second claim is the US is helping the
PKK. If the WikiLeaks documents reveal a concrete tie between the US and the PKK, it will rock the two countries, further
damaging the image of the US in Turkey. From time to time, the US has allowed Turkey to launch military operations into
northern Iraq, but actually never really fought against the PKK. As a high level official put it, the US never supported the
PKK but it also did not let the organization be destroyed, and kept it as an element of balance. The sources I have talked
to said the leaks could contain information about the contacts of American officers or intelligence members with the PKK
on security or other issues. Another possibility is contacts between Americans and the PKK's Iran wing, PJAK, but it's a
remote possibility that this issue would be mentioned in diplomatic cables rather than intelligence reports. The third claim
is the expressions used in the US State Department cables to define Turkish leaders. Over the past year, the AK Party
government had a volatile relationship with the Obama Administration. The documents show that Americans do not see
the government in Ankara as a real ally, and that they have concerns. Unlike the style used in bilateral meetings, a much
tougher language is used backstage. The fact that the Turkish foreign minister knows his interlocutors characterize him
as 'dangerous' at a time he's in Washington will stiffen the distrustfulness between the two capitals."



 This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




 Deborah L Guido
 Spokesperson

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771950 Date: 08/31/2015
        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771950 Date: 08/31/2015




U.S. Embassy Ankara
Office: 90-312-457-7312
Cell:
        guidodl@state.gev
U..S..Embassy Web Page
Visit.us_on .Facebook




This email is UNCLASSIFIED.




        UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771950 Date: 08/31/2015
