    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769710 Date: 08/31/2015

                                                                                 RELEASE IN FULL




From:                       Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sent:                       Monday, February 8, 2010 3:54 PM
To:
Subject                     NI



Just saw the email from Sid - was working on the below report. Shaun apparently had a much
more pessimistic view of what Cameron would do than all of our Parliament watchers, who felt
confident from the get-go that he would support the deal.

PM Brown praised all parties involved; stressed the need to adhere to the dates laid out in
the agreement several times; welcomed the supportive Westminster interventions during the Q
and A of SDLP Mark Durkan and DUP Peter Robinson and Nigel Dods, but pointedly expressed hope
that other parties (read UUP, whose MP was either not present or simply didn't speak) would
express their support as soon as possible.

As expected, David Cameron praised the agreement and all parties; raised the desire that all
parties (read SDLP and UUP) be given time to review the document; and pointedly asked the PM
what issues that were not expressly mentioned in the agreement would be addressed by the
Working Group -- to which Brown responded, "all the issues outstanding from St Andrew's."

Cameron and Brown praised the U.S. role, singling you out. Brown also twice referred to your
offer to host an investment conference.

Overall, nothing concerning from the Tories...on the contrary, full support, a request that
the minority parties have a chance to review and some questions on outstanding issues.

UUP MLAs meet tonight to review.

Note: DUP interventions were balanced.. .Dods raised parades and decommissioning as reminder
of outstanding issues, but stressed desire of all parties "not to go back" to the bad old
days. Minor dig at previous Sinn Fein "threats." Robinson stressed cooperation in the
negotiations. Struck a statesmanlike tone.




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769710 Date: 08/31/2015
