UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769375 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                              RELEASE IN FULL


 SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED                                      January 22, 2010

 NOTE FOR THE SECRETARY

 FROM:          G/TIP — Luis CdeBaca

 SUBJECT: Child Trafficking in Haiti

    G/TIP is gravely concerned about the potential for human trafficking (TIP) in
 the wake of the earthquake, both as a result of the displacement of the population
 and the influx of troops and aid workers. Even before the earthquake, there were
 in Haiti up to 300,000 restaveks (children given away or sold by their parents and
 enslaved as domestic servants), as well as reports that members of MINUSTAH
 used trafficked women in prostitution. In the 2009 TIP Report Haiti was classified
 as a Special Case country with governance so dysfunctional it could not be ranked.

    The initial disaster response is focusing on immediate needs of food, shelter,
 and medical care, but has thus far not addressed TIP prevention and protection
 issues. While attention is being paid to the problems of orphans and adoptees, TIP
 was not adequately addressed in the UN's initial flash appeal, so it is unclear which
 agency in the international system has the lead on the ground. UNICEF has the
 child protection lead, UNFPA leads prevention of sexual and gender-based
 violence, and IOM is tasked with shelter and camp management. We will work to
 remedy, in a subsequent appeal, the omission of TIP from the operational plan.

     We are moving to redirect $1 million of program funds that G/TIP has on
 Hispaniola and to reprogram an additional $550,000; we will work with PRM to
 identify other funding possibilities. Working through existing grantees and other
 experienced NG0s, it is our intention to help resuscitate police child protection
 brigades that already exist in Haiti, to rebuild capacity of Haitian organizations that
 protect restaveks, to prevent traffickers in the Dominican Republic from enslaving
 displaced Haitians on farms and in prostitution, and to educate Haitian parents of
 the risks of giving their children away in this time of crisis. We will consult with
 partner agencies to ensure that the U.S. presence does not contribute to trafficking.
 It will be important for the Department's messaging to convey our commitment to
 fighting human trafficking in both the immediate and long term.


                             SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05769375 Date: 08/31/2015
