       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771229 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                      RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                      B6


From:                              PIR <preines
Sent:                              Thursday, September 2, 2010 6:33 PM
To:                                H
Cc:                                CDM; Huma Abedin; Lona Valmoro; Jake Sullivan
Subject:                           Joint Interview



MS —

Jake just relayed yoLir desire to cancel tomorrow's interview. But I want to make sure you are aware of a few things that
he was not in a position to share:

1) The Israeli & Palestinian interviewers and their teams skipped returning home today with their principals at great
cost and energy in order to stay the extra day to you. One skipped traveling onward with Abbas.
2) Both the Israeli & Palestinian media outlets involved immediately announced their joint interview and are hyping its
unprecedented nature
3) Because of #2, U.S. media is fully aware that this interview is scheduled for tomorrow morning.



So three points:

1) There is an incredibly high expectation for this interview occurring and canceling, no matter the reason cited, will be
taken to mean something negative2) The point of this interview was to shape the narrative coming out of today, and
canceling will only contribute to a negative narrative in that we will be canceling on the most important figure in Israeli
media, and I do not see Channel 2 taking that well3) As positive as the symbolism of this interview was meant to be,
we run the risk of the negative symbolism by canceling.

Typically when you want to cancel something I roll with it. But I want to strenuously object to doing so in this case. I
understand you told the participants they should refrain from public comment, but first, that doesn't mean you have to
and second, you know they won't really refrain. And I am certain they will appreciate the effusive things you have to say
about them during this interview. Not to mention that the reason for canceling is something we ourselves could have
foreseen before going so far down the road, and should have - which I don't think is fair or reflects well on you.

Lastly, on a much more practical note: to get you out of this I am going to have to bribe Channel 2 with a significant and
exclusive interview when we are in Jerusalem in two weeks, and I guarantee you that will be far more painful than
tomorrow's relative short and peaceful format.

If you'd like to discuss I'm at my desk and available or can call you through Ops.




       UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771229 Date: 08/31/2015
