    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771607 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL




From:                            Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                            Wednesday, November 3, 2010 9:43 PM
To:
Subject:                         Fw: Inside W.H., calls for shake-up




From: Toiv, Nora F
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Sent: Wed Nov 03 16:32:33 2010
Subject: Inside W.H., calls for shake-up


POLITICO
Inside W.H., calls for shake-up
By: Glenn Thrush
November 3, 2010 10:30 AM EDT
 Some of the calls for a White House shake-up are now coming from inside the building.

 Frustrated current and former West Wing staffers, speaking on condition of anonymity,
 told POLITICO they hoped Tuesday night's humbling losses would persuade President
 Barack Obama to pursue a much more sweeping fix than just the "natural" post-election
 churn of personnel his administration has insisted will take place.

Many of those changes are already being seriously considered, among them: replacing
Political Director Patrick Gaspard with a former top aide to Rahm Emanuel; replacing
deputy chief of staff Jim Messina, who is expected to move to Obama's 2012 campaign,
with Legislative Affairs Director Phil Schiliro; and possibly giving White House energy czar
Carol Browner expanded policy responsibilities.

 But if Obama's critics are focusing on his agenda and messaging, many on his team are
 urging him to address what they see as a major organizational flaw: an amorphous, ill-
 defined chain of command in the West Wing that concentrates too much power in too few
 hands, hampering efficiency, accountability and communication.

 "If there's still only five, 10 people making decisions, then we haven't learned our lesson
 from Tuesday," said one aide, who believes the problem starts with Obama's insistence
 on giving his senior advisers, Valerie Jarrett and David Axelrod, broadly sketched
 responsibilities.

 But the issue isn't confined to the upper levels. Several Obama insiders pointed to a
 surplus of West Wingers who spin out ideas by the bushel — and a shortage of seasoned
 middle managers to execute and sell them.

 "They've been here for two years; they need a more grown-up system," one former
 administration official said. "They've gone too horizontal."

    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771607 Date: 08/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771607 Date: 08/31/2015




Key Obama aides — including interim chief of staff Pete Rouse, who has been tasked with
creating a new organizational plan, and press secretary Robert Gibbs, who is seeking to
carve out a role beyond briefing reporters — have reportedly made that point directly to
the president.

But it's not clear whether Obama, who ordered Rouse to conduct an institutional review of
the West Wing, is ready to scrap a loose, comfortable system that allowed him to respond
quickly to multiple crises for a more conventional executive organization.

No one expects Obama to immediately heed calls to conduct a major housecleaning — or
inject fresh blood into the West Wing by bringing in outsiders or even a Republican or two,
as former Sen. Tom Daschle, an Obama ally, has counseled.

White House officials maintain they will make gradual changes — and hope that the arrival
of Obama's organization-building 2008 campaign manager, David Plouffe, sometime in
early 2011 will provide the West Wing with more focus.

But Ken Duberstein, former chief of staff to President Ronald Reagan, said the White
House needs to move much more quickly. "There's a window of six to nine months where
serious governing can take place before people start looking at the [2012] primaries," he
said

Mike McCurry, President Bill Clinton's former press secretary, said Tuesday's results will
usher in changes to Obama's day-to-day operations, whether he likes them or not.

"President Clinton had to submit to a lot more discipline and structure in his daily
schedule," said McCurry, who was an aide to then-Secretary of State Warren Christopher
during the Democrats' devastating two-house loss in the 1994 midterms.

We had "little calendars that had color codes on how [Clinton] was spending his time. ...
Enjoying the solitude of the office is probably over [for Obama]," he added.

Obama has had weeks to brace for the worst, unlike Clinton, who was blindsided by the
'94 results. But some of Obama's allies fear he will take Tuesday's results too much in
stride. That perception was fueled by Axelrod, who told a gathering of Democrats earlier
this week that he didn't interpret Tuesday's expected debacle as a rejection of the
president.

"I'm not sure [Obama] gets it yet," said one person close to the president.

But Rouse apparently does. In recent weeks, he has solicited advice and detailed memos
from key administration players and allies outside the White House, especially former
White House Communications Director Anita Dunn.

The results, gleaned from insiders, are a range of plans to restructure Obama's policy,
political, legislative affairs and communications operations.

No final decisions have been made. But Rouse — a quiet, meticulous organizer who
inherited a chaotic system designed on the fly by Emanuel after Emanuel left the White
House to run for mayor of Chicago — is determined to clarify lines of authority and wants

   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771607 Date: 08/31/2015
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771607 Date: 08/31/2015




to assign more specific job descriptions to senior staff.

There are no plans to embark on a wholesale purge: The structural changes, if Obama
signs off on them, are intended to dovetail with the anticipated departure of some
personnel and reshuffling of a relatively small cast of Obama insiders.

"It's a combination of two things: natural attrition and changes that want to be made,"
another aide said. But "some people have done all they can here."

And many of the biggest West Wing moves were preloaded before Nov. 2, in part to avoid
the appearance of a mass exodus — including the departures of Emanuel, Office of
Management and Budget Chief Peter Orszag (himself a critic of the White House
management structure), Council of Economic Advisers Chairwoman Christina Romer and
National Economic Council Chairman Larry Summers.

Among the first post-election moves, according to people familiar with the planning, will be
to move Gaspard, who has fallen out of favor, to another administration job or a position
outside the White House.

The top candidate to replace him is said to be veteran House Democratic staffer Sean
Sweeney, who served as Emanuel's chief of staff.

Messina, an Obama favorite who is said to be headed to Chicago next year with Axelrod
to work on Obama's reelection effort, is likely to be replaced by Schiliro, though Schiliro
won't inherit Messina's wide-ranging political portfolio.

The legislative affairs office — a pre-midterm powerhouse that pushed through the
stimulus, regulatory reform and health care bills — will most likely be downsized to reflect
Obama's curtailed agenda on the Hill.

But Schiliro, a former aide to Rep. Henry Waxman (D-Calif.), will pick 'up a crucial new
assignment: In conjunction with White House counsel Bob Bauer, he's expected to defend
Obama against an anticipated wave of GOP hearings and investigations spearheaded by
the feared new chairman of the House Oversight Committee, California Rep. Darrell lssa.

Less clear is what Rouse and Obama have in store for the policy team — a group that
becomes much more important now that any meaningful legislative action is shut down by
House Republicans and a shrunken Senate majority.

In a flashback to the Clinton years, the administration will now be forced to rely on creative
rule writing and new regulatory strategies to counter Republican obstruction on the Hill.

Several people familiar with the situation said that Browner, one of the few Clinton
administration veterans to earn the president's trust — is being considered for a newly
envisioned policy job.

Browner, known for her aggressive rule making when she was Environmental Protection
Agency administrator, would supplant deputy chief of staff Mona Sutphen, who is
expected to leave the administration sometime in 2011.

Melody Barnes, director of Obama's Domestic Policy Council, is also expected to take on
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771607 Date: 08/31/2015
  UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771607 Date: 08/31/2015




a greater role.

In the meantime, Rouse has quietly sought to change the culture inside the West Wing by
enfranchising a wider circle of advisers than did Emanuel, who was prone to making spur-
of-the-moment decisions consulting only a handful of trusted aides.

The changes are small but significant. Emanuel made many of his decisions at his
signature 7:30 a.m. meeting in the chief of staffs office — and often used a larger 8:30
a.m. sit-down simply to issue marching orders.

Rouse, by contrast, seems to put more weight on the later meeting because it gives more
junior staff an opportunity to take part in decision making, insiders say.

Arnie Perms and Abby Phillip contributed to this report.
                                                                                 R. I I) ES
                                                                                I 71■ :,.11N4.
C 2010 Capitol News Company, LLC




  UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771607 Date: 08/31/2015
