      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767562 Date: 08/31/2015



                                                                                                     RELEASE IN FULL




From:                              Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                              Thursday, January 7, 2010 9:58 AM
To:
Subject                            FW: Big support from Lugar on 21st Century Statecraft



fyi


From: Ross, Alec 3
Sent: Thursday, January 07, 2010 9:49 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Steinberg, James B; Sullivan, Jacob J; Slaughter, Anne-Marie; Abedin, Huma; Verma, Richard R;
Crowley, Philip J
Subject: Big support from Lugar on 21st Century Statecraft

Very cool/interesting/humbling. I've never met Lugar before and didn't know he was doing this. Basically a recitation of
what we're doing with the appropriate attribution to the Secretary: "Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has championed the
use of communications technology in diplomacy and development." He basically cuts and pastes from our public
comments.

http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2010/01/06/twitter vs terror



Twitter vs. Terror
How the U.S. State Department should enable and encourage social-networking sites in the global fight for
freedom.

BY U.S. SEN. RICHARD G. LUGAR I JANUARY 6, 2010



During the turmoil that followed Iran's disputed 2009 presidential election, thousands of opposition supporters and

other protesters communicated and organized through Twitter. So important was this social networking site to
supporting the pro-democracy "green movement" that the U.S. State Department contacted corporate
representatives of Twitter to ask them to delay a routine maintenance shutdown of the microblogging site.


In the strife-torn Democratic Republic of the Congo, U.S. officials are working with radio and cell-phone operators
to reach isolated militia fighters with messages from former combatants now urging them to put down their arms
and return to civilian life.


In Pakistan, the State Department paid for 24 million text messages as a way to help support a new mobile-phone-
based social network, Humani Awaz, or "Our Voice." The gesture helps increase U.S. government engagement with
the Pakistani people, strengthens communities, and can assist small businesses in gaining better market
information.


These are just some of the latest examples of what is being called "21st-century statecraft," using the capabilities of
modern communications and social networking technologies to win hearts and minds and improve the American
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767562 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767562 Date: 08/31/2015




image abroad. It represents an important leap forward from traditional U.S. outreach efforts, such as Voice of
America and Radio Free Europe.


The adroit use of social networking sites, such as Twitter, Facebook, and others, coupled with text messages and
increasingly widespread mobile-phone technology, can help lend support to existing grassroots movements for
freedom and civil rights, connect people to information, and help those in closed societies communicate with the
outside world. It also promises to give a strong economic boost to small entrepreneurs and the rural poor. The World
Bank estimates that for every 10 percent increase in the number of mobile-phone users in a developing country,
there is nearly a 1 percent increase in its economic output.


Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has championed the use of communications technology in diplomacy and
development. In November in Morocco, she announced the "Civil Society 2.0" initiative, which will offer training
and advice to local nongovernmental organizations around the world on how to use the Internet and other digital
media to organize, communicate, and be more effective.


She has also appointed a special advisor for innovation, Alec Ross, to examine ways to employ communications
technology to enhance traditional diplomatic and development activities. In a recent speech, he said that the State
Department is using "these new connection technologies to engage and empower our interlocutors in new and
different ways that are consistent with our foreign policy goals."


The applications vary widely. In Mexico, for instance, where drug-related crime and violence is at crisis level, the
United States is helping set up a mobile-phone-based system so citizens can report crimes and tips anonymously. In
Afghanistan, the State Department and the Pentagon are working with the private sector to expand mobile-phone
banking, an innovation that has been successful in Africa. The hope is to improve the finances of people in rural
conflict areas. When violence displaced up to 2 million people from Pakistan's Swat Valley, the State Department
quickly set up a mobile texting system so concerned Americans could make $5 donations for refugee relief with just
a few keystrokes.


Technology offers new ways to perform the traditional task of spreading the American message. During President
Barack Obama's major Africa speech in Ghana last year, for instance, the government offered SMS texts of his
remarks in English and French to cell-phone users across Africa and enabled them to post questions and comments.


But social networking technologies are more often used to enable individuals across a country, or across the globe, to
interact, engage, and become empowered. Although this means that our government will not be able to control the
message as well as it might with conventional public diplomacy tools, I believe it is a risk worth taking. Terrorists
and other anti-American propagandists have for some time been using the Internet and other techniques to

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767562 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767562 Date: 08/31/2015




communicate and recruit. America needs to beat them at their own game, especially since we invented most of the
technology.


I would encourage the administration and our diplomats to be nimble, flexible, and innovative as they pursue a wide
range of foreign-policy initiatives that use these new communication and connection techniques. Diplomacy and
development are our best means of winning the global war of ideas, and we must come to the battle armed with the
most modern tools at our disposal.



Alec Ross
Senior Advisor for Innovation
Office of the Secretary of State
(202) 647-6315
RossAJ@State.gov




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05767562 Date: 08/31/2015
