      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770568 Date: 08/31/2015


                                                                                                   RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                   B6


From:                                sbwhoeop
Sent:                                Monday, May 17, 2010 12:14 AM
To:
Subject:                             H: also... Sid


You may have been alerted to this incident: the barring of Noam Chomsky from Israel. His political views may be
ridiculous or objectionable, though he is the greatest linguistic scholar in the world, but barring him for his political opinions
has created a needless PR disaster, not least for the US, as he is, after all, a US citizen, and a very prominent one
internationally. It is unfortunate on every level. And the US should not be a passive onlooker. He is a US citizen barred for
his political views, after all. This story is splashed across the European press this morning. Not what anyone needs, yes,
yes, like a hole in the head, and bone stupid, but the US effort on his behalf to gain entry should be part of the story. This
incident can be profitable if Israel understands it should not be doing this to US or European critics in the future. This is a
downward slope, bad news for everyone involved. S




14 16, 2010, 11:01 pm


Chomsky Barred From West Bank by Israel
By ROBERT MACKEY


Noam Chomsky, an American linguist and political thinker who has been critical of Israel, was denied entry into the West
Bank on Sunday by Israeli immigration officials when he tried to cross into the Palestinian territory from Jordan to deliver a
lecture.
Amira Hass of the Israeli newspaper Haaretz reported:
No reason was initially given for the decision, but the Interior Ministry later said immigration officials at the Allenby Bridge
border crossing from Jordan had misunderstood Chomsky's intentions thinking initially he was also due to visit Israel.
Chomsky, who is on a speaking tour in the region, was scheduled to speak at Bir Zeit University in the West Bank on
Monday.
A spokeswoman for Israel's interior ministry also told Reuters that there had been a misunderstanding and "officials were
trying to get clearance from the Israeli military, which controls access to the West Bank to allow Chomsky to enter."
In a television interview from Amman, Jordan, after he was rebuffed, Mr. Chomsky told Al Jazeera English, "the facts were
completely clear to everyone; there was no basis for a misunderstanding." He explained that he was interrogated for
several hours before being told that he would not be allowed to cross into the occupied Palestinian territory. The 81-year-
old scholar added:
I can only say what was conveyed to me in the discussion with the official who was carrying out the interrogation — he
was receiving instructions from the [Israeli] ministry of interior and relaying them. There were two basic points. One was
that the government of Israel does not like the kinds of things I say — which puts them into the category of I suppose
every other government in the world. The second was that they seemed upset about the fact that I was just taking an
invitation from Bir Zeit and I had no plans to go on to speak in Israeli universities, as I have done many times in the past
but not this time.
Mr. Chomsky had been invited to speak about American foreign and domestic policy by the philosophy department at the
Palestinian university in Ramallah.
The renowned linguist was outspoken in his opposition to the Israeli offensive in Gaza, which ended in January 2009 and
has criticized Israel's occupation of Palestinian territory many times.
In an interview with Deborah Solomon of The New York Times Magazine in 2003, Mr. Chomsky said, "I objected to the
founding of Israel as a Jewish state. I don't think a Jewish or Christian or Islamic state is a proper concept. I would object
to the United States as a Christian state." When Ms. Solomon pressed Mr. Chomsky on his opposition to Israel, saying,
"Your father was a respected Hebraic scholar, and sometimes you sound like a self-hating Jew," he replied:
It is a shame that critics of Israeli policies are seen as either anti-Semites or self-hating Jews. It's grotesque. If an Italian
criticized Italian policies, would he be seen as a self-hating Italian?

      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770568 Date: 08/31/2015
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770568 Date: 08/31/2015



•     Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
•     Privacy Policy
•     NYTimes.com 620 Eighth Avenue New York, NY 10018




    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770568 Date: 08/31/2015
