     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771700 Date: 08/31/2015




                                                                                                           RELEASE IN PART
                                                                                                           B5


From:                               Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Sent:                               Tuesday, November 23, 2010 11:52 PM
To:
Cc:                                 Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
Subject:                            Chet Crocker, Scott Lasensky, and Sam Lewis OPED on MEP
Attachments:                        Crocker Lasensky Lewis OPED.doc



I'm abusing my privileges and sending you two emails in one evening,                                            it hasn't been
published yet.




                                                                             November 2010
Declaring America's Stand on Middle East Peace

By Chester A. Crocker, Scott B. Lasensky and Samuel W. Lewis

Faltering Middle East peace talks need a jolt. Washington has a powerful option for moving the process forward: taking
a firm stand on how to end the conflict.

An American declaration of principles—carefully crafted and properly marketed--could spark a debate and thereby
change the political calculus for leaders. As a mediator and a world power, one of America's strongest assets is the
ability to legitimize ideas and then rally others in support. A central role for the U.S. in this conflict must be to define the
zone of negotiability.

This does not mean imposing peace. Rather, it would be a statement of the basic principles the U.S. believes can guide
the parties toward a negotiated solution. America has long declared its support for "two states," but must now say more
about what that means in practice.

Even if the current talks resume, without American ideas the parties are unlikely to agree on the broad trade-offs
necessary to reach a peace deal. A quick deal on "borders and security," as many have proposed, is itself unlikely
without Washington addressing the end-game. Otherwise, both sides would be too exposed on issues set for later
discussion, like Jerusalem and refugees. Opinion polling has consistently showed that support for peace is strongest
when all the core issues are addressed.

An American statement of principles would mobilize regional support. It would provide, for the first time, a public
framework for engaging sponsors of the Arab Peace Initiative. It would also strengthen our ability to reassert the
importance of a regional support structure for the bilateral negotiations, especially by reviving multilateral contacts and
meetings involving Israelis and their neighbors from throughout the region. Moreover, greater regional engagement on
the peace process can carry powerful benefits for regional challenges like the Iranian nuclear program.

A clearer U.S. declaration is also the surest way to protect prospects for a two-state solution from an unrelenting
onslaught on the ground that pushes the parties away from a peace deal. An American set of ideas would anchor
present-day demands on issues like Jerusalem, security and settlements in a clear vision of the future.

Perhaps most urgently, it would broaden the debate from the narrow confines of the settlements question.

At a minimum, the American declaration should be based on the 1967 lines, with agreed territorial swaps; support a
compromise on Jerusalem that allows for two capitals for two states; include provisions about security limitations and

     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771700 Date: 08/31/2015
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771700 Date: 08/31/2015



guarantees; reiterate America's support for an agreed solution to the refugee problem; and reaffirm our long-standing
commitment to the State of Israel. But American principles should also include some caveat, given that our ultimate
interest is in an agreed, viable solution—not in any particular formula.

What would it take for American ideas to succeed? Unlike some past efforts, Washington should not try to 'pre-cook'
this declaration with one or more parties or to choreograph their reactions. In fact, the U.S. statement of principles
would be explicitly described as what our own country believes in and can support; and by implication cannot support.
Thus, the U.S. statement would not be designed to achieve immediate approval or adoption by the parties. Its purpose
would be to clarify where America stands, how we define our interests and what we can work for. It would aim at
influencing the climate of thinking in the region, sobering up those with illusions and encouraging those who need our
support.

Timing and context are of course key considerations. Assuming the current gridlock in negotiations persists, some time
must elapse until our election results have been digested, here and abroad, and before public attention can be
redirected toward the foreboding and increasingly dangerous Arab-Israel stalemate.

A presidential speech will then be essential to dramatize the seriousness of our purpose and to lay out the principles. It
should be immediately followed by a major, high level diplomatic effort to persuade key Middle East leaders and our
Quartet and UN allies of our genuine desire to regionalize the peacemaking effort. To maximize support from key
members of Congress, the speech should occur before Congress adjourns. No further consultation with the stalemated
parties beyond the routine should precede the speech, and leaks of its contents must be kept to an absolute minimum if
our purpose is not to be undermined.

The speech could usefully also remove some of the veil of silence that shrouds breakthroughs in past negotiations; for
example, progress in the Annapolis process.

As for the substance, in its endorsement of a two-state solution and comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace, the Obama
Administration has hinted that a Palestinian settlement should also accompany normalized relations between Israel and
the Arab states, putting a broader framing around what has traditionally been defined as a conflict between Israel and
its immediate neighbors. The normalization piece of the puzzle should be more fully articulated as part of a new strategy
based on presenting American ideas to the parties. It is a way to entice skeptical Israelis, but it also leads back to a long
overdue need for Washington to engage on the Arab Peace Initiative.

If the U.S. puts forward its own peace principles, American leadership can ensure that any diplomatic process is defined
by as clear a picture as possible of what the parties can expect to gain through a negotiated settlement, and of what
they will never gain without one.

Skeptics say it is too risky to present American ideas to the parties, that it would pull the rug out from under current
leaders, exposing them to withering domestic criticism. Others argue that it will galvanize obstructionists, not those who
support compromise, and could very well precipitate a crisis on the ground. Others simply worry about the cost to
American prestige should any of the key players react negatively. But the risks are overstated, and a complete collapse
of the process would be far more dangerous, particularly as the strategic environment shifts in favor of regional forces
that seek to undermine, rather than promote peace.

America can and must do more than limit itself to managing a conflict that has all too often upended our shared
interests in peace and stability.



END




      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771700 Date: 08/31/2015
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771700 Date: 08/31/2015




Chester A. Crocker is Professor of Strategic Studies at the Georgetown University School of Foreign Service; Scott
Lasensky is Senior Research Associate at the U.S. Institute of Peace; Samuel W. Lewis is a retired diplomat and former
U.S. Ambassador to Israel. These views are their own.




     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05771700 Date: 08/31/2015
